O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation of the text:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in a vision that I must complete this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and has been entirely lost everywhere, so the knowledge is perished and decayed, and nothing remains except for small descriptions in old books that have been moved by hand.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and vanity, and are closed the intentions, and is estranged the knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I will bring it back to life by organizing this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abridgement; and I will come together with the forms of instruments for cautery and other tools of work, accompanied by the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the justice of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and tendons and the number of vertebrae, and the behavior and moving and resting muscles, and from the source of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Hippocrates says that a name with a name is much, and with work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before, should beware lest he fall into error and kill people; thus I have wanted many times to warn those who undertake this science but abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut open an abscess on the neck of a woman and cut the arteries of the neck; therefore so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead between his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the patient's condition and the great size of the stone, and knew that he would die if it was not removed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another surgeon who took on the treatment of a duke from our land who had his leg broken and with the break was wounded; and the ignorant surgeon held the break over the wound by strong force, not leaving the wound even an inch of space, and left it in this state until the leg became completely inflamed and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to arrive to set the leg free; and when I had loosened it so he was at ease and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But in all ways the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another surgeon who opened up an inflamed abscess and then inflamed it even more through the wickedness of his procedure.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when a chancre is pure of melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that everything that is corrupt can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear son, you must needs know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in multiple conditions; and I will show each place in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore it is necessary that you take care to keep yourself safe, so that the foolish surgeon cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	So take your instruments in hand, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave the terrifying diseases of grievous sickness; and put away your instruments from those things that make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not take care of any bad disease unless you are called a foolish surgeon."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicine cauterizations, and it is the chapter organized from head to feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about poultices and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter organized with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it is organized from head to feet, and with the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, in order that we remember our work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of aid and harm of each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest and most subtle speech and secret answer; and many wise men have spoken about this and agreed with it; and I am not satisfied with their words, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization aids universally in every temperament where there is matter, except for two temperaments: namely, hot temperament with dry matter and dry temperament with dry matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry temperament together with matter, some have disagreed and said that cauterization is great aid; and others said the opposite: that cauterization is not worth anything for a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated with heat or dryness for a hot disease; and that person who said the opposite says that cauterization makes great aid in hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true some time through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, do not meddle with it unless you are one who has tried it and knows through long use the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of temperaments of men, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the chances and risks of the time; as for other temperaments, we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians gathered together and agreed on cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cauterization together with fire is a secret of cures, and of greater good than burning cauterization.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come to another member unless it is burned, and does no harm to any other member if one does not name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines come from one member to another, and bring harm to the afflicted member with grievous suffering; and by chance kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire because of its excellence and the goodness of its substance does not do this unless there is excessiveness.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this in experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was based on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for it does not please me to deprive you of the secret which is bound up with fire, and the quality of the work, how it repels diseases from bodies, as philosophers say in demonstrating; so receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when cauterizations should be done and chose precedents.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the ensuing harm is put under by the aid of cauterization; and likewise if cauterizations are for necessary pains that cannot be delayed until greater evil comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think so, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauterizations are not just medicine that changes the complexion, and dries out the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine in terms of its speed of action, and virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is a possibility that the disease comes according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and superfluous things are gathered in him through the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at the right time or place where there is excess and moisture, such as cauterizations for denseness due to pain, and similar things, and that kind of pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterizations are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cure in some disease and they do not work, then we administer the cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterizations with gold instruments are more potent than those of iron, and they did not say this for anything other than the quality of gold and its excellence in substance; and they said that the place where the cauterization is done does not do harm, but this is not true because I have tried it, and found that it is true in some people; and gold cauterizations are worth more than iron ones, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it becomes quickly cooled down; and if you heat it too much, they melt in the fire; and thus there are enough obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use burning cauterization because we have found it to be advantageous to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the way may be more easy to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauterizations are worth for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two ways to do this because of a disease that is called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and due to multitude of dreams and pain in the dens and pain in the throat, and likewise for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sode, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is that the patient be purged by soluble medicine, moistening the head three or four times, according to what the virtues, age, and habit of the patient can bear; and then make the patient's head redden.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit with his arms crossed between your hands, and put his hands on your weight; after that place the root of your palm on the root of his neck between his two eyes; and let it come to your two middle fingers, so that it bleeds a little then apply the cauterization which is called "olivare", whose form this is:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make it go down and out by moving your hand slowly and gradually to the side; then lift your hand suddenly, and repair the spot if you see the bone one small step; and if you don't see it, repeat the cauterization until you see the bone as I told you; after that take a piece of silk, and put it in a soft and fluffy cotton pad, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; after that apply a moist cloth to butter; and leave it on until the scab is removed; after that cure the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmacy" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that when a wound remains open for longer, it purges more; and therefore it is helpful.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of them said that one should cauterize so much that part of the bone is burned, and then take off what has been burned from the bone, and be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should cauterize so much above, and push it in so hard that the bone is as wide as a thread that women put into their purses for this reason that the humors may flow out; and one should leave the wound open long enough; after that one should heal and soothe.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good in every way, except in some people where there is a lack of courage; and it seems to me that I should leave them alone; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we observe in other members; and likewise when the patient's head is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salubrious and moistening for me, and from this use I work for the salvation of my body.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of ancient pain from the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain comes from the head and lasts long, the patient should use year's pills and powders called "cochie", and purgatives for the head and oils and plasters; and if one makes the cautery that we have spoken of before, it is not worth it.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's head is of strong constitution, and not too cold; then cauterize below that previous cautery a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After that, make a cautery on each horn of the head right up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery at the place called "vasselz"; and there is one place where you put poultices; and keep your hand so steady that you don't see right up to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those used for the middle part of the head, and that's the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the head's cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes from one part of the head and spreads to the eye, and the patient's head is purged by mundane medicines, and all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases are done, and none of it helps: then he makes cauterizations according to two methods, namely by hot medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterizations by hot medicine are such that you take a dose of aloes, remove the bark and regrind it into a small amount to be used for two eyes; then make an incision on the temple where the pain is located in such a way that you can put the aloes under the skin; and when it has been put under the skin, tie and tighten it well and leave it thus for 12 hours; then release it and let the aloes juice flow out for 2 or 3 days; then apply a poultice of butter so that it starts to ooze.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the poultice treatment, as long as it is healed; and if you see that this method does not work, then do what some burning medicines that I have written or treatise on burning medicines prescribe.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The cauterization by fire is such according to this method. Heat the cauterizing iron in the following form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or a small bowl, and it has a slight curvature; and one puts it on the painful place, and holds one's hand and turns the iron slightly until the half of the spoon-shaped part of the key is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and stop the abundant bleeding.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After that, put cotton on the wound and leave it for 3 days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", do it all at once, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine that is not ancient.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the previous cauterizations by hot medicine and fire do not work, then it is necessary that you heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and then sign on the painful place a line half a digit long, and lift your hand once, and strain yourself so that you don't cut the artery and don't touch right up to the bone; and be careful of the jaw that moves when eating, and the nerves have regard only for the movement and that spasms do not come to the patient, and be careful of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or if there is great fear and especially for one who does not know how and is not an expert; and leave the work in my hands; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations do not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the opposite side of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from the ear due to cold, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other treatments as we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat up this cauterizing iron called "poins" in the following form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, prick all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is on both sides, and remove it a little above the root of the ear once you have marked the place to be treated; and make 10 pricks around each ear; then treat the wound until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torment which must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that are caused by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cauterizations for similar things that come from scorched nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this likeness of torment that is caused by phlegm and idleness, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, another a little behind the temple, and the third at the juncture of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery right above the ear on top of the horn-shaped part of the head, and another in the temple just as long as a finger's breadth; and leave the cautery there until half of the key is burned; and this is the form of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the likeness of the "cultellare" that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knives be a little bigger; after that, treat the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	To this illness it is fitting to give the patient great and many pills for the brain; afterwards, wash the chief of the patient thoroughly, and place on the occiput a poultice made of mustard as written in the treatise on poultices; and that is the manner of cauterization: if you do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is cleansed thus, it is good; and if not, make three cauterizations around the head from top to neck, with a space of two fingers between each cauterization, and treat him as the others, and if you see anything swollen or inflamed, make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and treat until he is cleansed; and that cauterization which is called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is fitting that the head be cleansed of years and of what we have said before; afterwards, wash the chief of the patient, then make a cauterization on the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it so that as much of the gallbladder as is burned, and lift your hand; afterwards, treat until he is cleansed, and it is the cauterization which is called "olivare" that we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cauterization except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is fitting to first cleanse the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the section when the patient is great and suffering from severe medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, make gargarism and mastication cleansing the brain often with good meat; afterwards, wash the chief in the middle, and make one cauterization as we have said before, and one on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is severe and suffering, make cauterizations as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and it is the olivier cauterization according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make one subtle cauterization according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to the cause of melancholy, the superfluities or moists are corrupted and thick phlegm is produced, then make those cauterizations as we have said to one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to the cause of melancholy, the superfluities decline into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which his brain may be cleansed, according to what is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After wash the head of the patient; after make one linen tourniquet well made, like a circle, and put it on the head; and the patient's head be crossed, and be well held from all sides; afterwards present the liniment, and mix well with butter of ancient herbs; and heat it temperately so that the thread can bear being dipped in it; after empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week for one treatment, with good governance, until he is cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you see that the cauterization is causing points in many places all over the cauterization. This manner of cauterization moistens the brain sufficiently; and then put on a wet cotton cloth with butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the inflammation of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When inflammation comes first to the eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink cleansing the head, and keep him from all moistures, and make him sweat or bathe several times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After command him to wet his head, and make a cauterization on the head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples if the descending of inflammation is to both eyes together, or to one; and stop all the veins and arteries that are under the gallbladder, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stanch it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision how to stanch it; and never make a cauterization or haterel under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the tears of the heart
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or below the arteries that appear on the forehead outside; and one sees that it is from cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of inflammation descending to the eyes: one cauterization on the head, and two cauterizations on the temples, and two cauterizations or haterel under the two bones; and if there is need for more, then cauterize slowly above the eyebrow at each small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the tears of the heart within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient three raw eggs; afterwards wash his head, and make a cauterization on the middle of the olivary cauterization; and make two cauterizations of the "clavilis" cauterization on the eyebrows, a little below the hairline; and beware of not cutting off the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And that is the form of the cauterization which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this "olivare" cauterization. This is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you make two cauterizations on the eyebrows as long as the eyebrow is; and do not leave your hand off until one third of the paper has been burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that points at the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never happens that the hair of the eyelids is converted to the inside, and points at the oil, and it makes one cauterization according to two manners: that is to say, by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or the cauterization by fire commands the patient to leave the hair as long and equal as it is; and if they point at their birthplace, then bind the eyes so that they do not move until they are born.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are equal, then the patient places it in his own sound; afterwards signs above the paper of eyes a figure that is as much like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be below the hairs; then he puts damp cotton on egg white and muscillaige of persilium on the eye, then heat the cautery where there is the form.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have signed bit by bit many times, until the scars are burned away in that place; and the sign of health from the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put damp cotton on butter until the scarring is removed; afterwards anoint with ointment until he is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come and the paper is softened, then start again the cautery on the same place, just as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, so cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural height, and be equal, and do not prick the hairs into the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fire cauterization of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment form of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live coal, each a third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it over the form that you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of eyes; and if the disease is held in one eye only, one must work in one, and if in both alike; and put damp cotton under the eye in egg white; and the patient's head should be in his own sound and place your two fingers showing over the medicine, and press a little bit and move it all the times that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he feels the burning as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then take away the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the burning is past, then lift up the lid of earth, and see if you see the paper lifted as if it had been lifted by the constriction of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well. If not, then put on more medicine on the place or where the medicine has no effect, until your works are equal, and your eyes are in order; then put on damp cotton on butter until the scars are gone, afterwards heal the wound with ointment which is called "dyafenis" and other, until he is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you must take great care of your work so that the medicine does not damage the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs prick in the eye, then start again the medicine on that place which is softened by the proper paper, just as you did before; afterwards heal until he is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this is your constriction; and do not be surprised if the right path is not shown to him who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	This seems to be a heading or title for a section on the treatment of fistulas using cauterization.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you make a cauterization according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your hand; and take the messenger's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or leave its head; afterwards put damp cotton on egg white or juice of persilium on the eye; afterwards heat the cautery which is like this: and shape the chief as if it were the shape of a vulture's feather, together with the cautery; if you see, so be pointed from one head to the other, and if you see, so be like a tent; but nonetheless, this one that is shaped is good for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Afterwards press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and draw out the bowel; afterwards put hot cautery firmly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nerve above the eye, so that your hands do not make foolishness; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you start the cautery just to the bone, it would be well. If not, then restart the cautery once more, and another time if necessary, and leave it for three days; afterwards put on damp cotton on butter, and the cure of drying ointment until he is healed, and if forty days pass without being healed, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and let him rest according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a manner of cauterization for fistulas that none of the ancients said. Understand by fistula, and cut open the place; afterwards put into the opening one subtle caustic of the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it to the quantity of one third of a bean; and hold your hand or caustic firmly, and do not move the patient's head until the melted wax does not run into his eye; and it is necessary that you put on the eye of the patient damp cotton in egg white or in earth: the wax so opens up the place of fistula, and cures by marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a poultice to the nerve, and bring back the fistula to its proper place in the body according to what is fitting.
des crevaices en levres	This seems to be a heading or title for a section on cracks in lips.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times occur cracks in lips that are called "piles", and indeed in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing tool according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it in those cracks quickly, until it comes out clean; afterwards heal the wound with ointment until he is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	This seems to be a heading or title for a section on abscesses of the throat.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula, palate, or at the roots of the teeth; and it has become putrid and rotten and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not help: then it is necessary that you have a cauterization according to the size of the fistula; afterwards fill up or plug the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron cools down to the fontanelle, and at the back; and do so once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in cures, until he is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the wound and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	Movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't work, then place the patient's head on your shoulder; afterwards, apply the cautery in this manner as if you were putting a cord around the tooth; and put hot hastiness inside the cautery, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards, lift your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let it stay for an hour and richly flowing fever.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the teeth that were moving are now confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of the teeth comes from coldness, either there is cold or warmth, and medicines do not work, then it is necessary to apply a cautery in two manners: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end of it into a iron or earthen spoon; afterwards, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and soak it in hot butter, and put it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; and thus do many times until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put a hot iron there until the fire comes to the crown of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The cauterization with fire is such that you take a piece of iron or earthenware, and make it thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; afterwards, heat the cauterizer, until the form comes out, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer cools down; do this many times, for the pain will be removed on that very day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good butter in the pressing of that cauterizer, and then richly flowing fever; and this is the form of the cauterizer:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cauterizer in whatever shape you want, and according to what you can do; and this is the form of the cord:
des scrophules	Of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofulas are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then apply the cauterizer with a handle of which the form comes after, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from one side; and put the hot cauterizer on the abscess once or twice if necessary, until it reaches the fontanelle of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; and put a moistened cotton cloth in butter until the soreness is removed; afterwards, cure the wound with ointments and tents until it is healed.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moisture overcomes the channels of the thorax, and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with soluble medicines; afterwards, apply a cauterizer to the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, nor burn the flesh but just a little. Afterwards, apply another cauterizer to the jointure of the neck at the top of the spine, and it is the cauterizer that is called "clavicle" which we have the form before; and cure the wound as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	Of the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and every disease of the thorax is of cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or heat, and it is an old illness, then apply two cauterizers on the breast in the armpits; and another cauterizer inside the chest between the breasts; and it is the cauterizer that is called "clavicle" according to the form that was said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, apply a cauterizer to the whole area that is called "points" according to the form that was said before in the disease of the ears; and be the points up to 30, or around it. Afterwards, cure the wound according to what was said before, and the cauterizers should be at three rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because of that the cauterizer is lighter, because you make three in one go.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, place the patient on their back and on their side; afterwards, lift the skin that is inside the titillite with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inwardly, then apply the cauterizer which has two handles like this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the skin until it is perforated up to the side, and the figure of the cauterization comes out with three cauterizers; and because of that, the cauterization is done with the cauterizer that has three handles, for which the figure of cauterization are six cauterizers; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cauterizer that has three handles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is applied on one nerve, for which there are eight cauterizers.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After that, put the cauterizer on and sprinkle it with powder; afterwards, let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, little or nothing happens, then make a cauterizer on the thick part of the clavicle cauterizer, or many cauterizers in piercing. For the joint is refilled, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Of the cauterization of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make cauterizations of aristologe roots for pleurisy, and in this manner: take a long aristologe root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and long as your arm; and soak it in oil, and burn it with fire, and apply one cauterizer between the breastbone and the neck, and two small cauterizers just below that in the part that is beneath the beard; and two cauterizers between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little; and one cauterizer inside the chest, and one above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the chest after the cauterizer that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand hard, but rather apply it openly just as in perfuming.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And it is said by an old one that some man uses a fire cautery similar to a razor's edge, and heats it up and puts it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess; and soon after the pain stops, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now or a fistula appears which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of cures, and it does not help, then there are three manners of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One of which manners is that you make three or four cauterizations in a line, according to the length of the mouse, following the figure of the liver's cauterization as we have said before; and do not press your hand against all the cauterization, and let the patient be mindful on his back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another manner of cauterization is that you heat the cauterizer which has two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the key which is near the mouse, or where the patient's flank comes towards the left side, and be mindful of the elevations when you lift the key according to the key, according to the length of the body, and let the cauterization be according to the breadth of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After you put the two handles in flames until the key is perceived from the other side, and then take out the cauterizer, and thus there will be four. And if you see, then cauterize all the cauterizer with three handles. After the cure when it has produced purulence after a long time, and this method is more effective than the others of the cures mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is not good for dropsy, except by the manner which is called "asclytes". When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not help, then it is necessary that you make three cauterizations around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in front of the breast; and let the cauterizers be well pressed against the key.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After that, leave the cauterizer open to gather purulence for a long time, and do not cease the cure of the patient after the cauterization; and salvation would hasten, and both intentions would be together with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cauterizer for the belly is the same as the one we have shown before; and that one for the back is olive-shaped, according to what was put here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellow moisture, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and index finger; and lift your hand with the cauterizer so as not to turn. And do not enter too deeply by force, lest the yellow moisture flows forth, and let the cauterizers be according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the index finger; and let the cauterizers be of length, one under the kneecap in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauterizers open for a long time without curing, until the moisture subsides; after that, do the cures of the other cures we have said.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the menses come from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and having great vitality, then make one large cauterization on the stomach according to what was said before about the cauterization of the stomach, at the circulatory cauterizer; and three cauterizations around the belly fine as each single cauterizer is fine, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then make cauterization on the armpit, and one cauterization on each side, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, or one or several, and are ancient and consist of thick, cold, and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, but it does not help, then make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely behind beneath Almecdate pace by pace in triangulating, and one cauterization under the belly. Two musts;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think that the stomach is chilled, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swelling, then make one large cauterization on the stomach, as said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse for all the cauterizer is fine; and leave the cauterizer open for a long time. After that, cure the patient until he is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the scrofula which is called "Thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the Thelul, heat the cauterizer which seems like a razor, and then put it entirely ablaze on that Thelul coping; and I leave your hand until the cauterizers come to the birth of the vein, so that the blood flows forth; do this once or twice, and if there is much Thelul, then cauterize each one as we have said; after that, cure with ointments which are profitable until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cauterizer on the Alchatim, it will have greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of an ill-cured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes this disease which cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a fistula comes to anyone, and is inflamed and discharges pus and corrupted moisture, you should prove the entire wound to be very fine, and take care that you know exactly how deep it is. After that, heat the cauterizer which seems like a razor, and put it into the fistula according to the amount of depth that the wound has entered, and continue the cauterization until the corrupt flesh and pus are burned away, once, twice, or three times, depending on the need; and beware not to burn the nerves that are nearby, nor the large veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestines, take care of these places, and do not make a fire except in a charred place, and think that it is not perilous; after that, cure the patient until he is healed, and if the wound is sealed and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the wound is entirely healed; but if the matter is not removed, know that the wound is torn and corrupted the bone to the font; and thus as one of those who we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Of the sickness of kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and from great windiness, and does not take the shape of a woman, then it is necessary that you make a fire cautery on the kidneys from one side and another at the cauterized clavicle that we have said before; and if we catarize in medium, there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will do more great help.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a fire cautery on the outside of the part where the pubic hair begins, one to the right and one to the left, each one as long as a finger's breadth; and make one cauterization behind the back, if you need two; and let the cauterized clavicle be according to the form said before.
de la marris	Of the womb
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not cease to conceive because of it, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that one makes three cauterizations around the belly, as we have said in the fire cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterized clavicle be as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the groin
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the groin of the crotch, and because of this the patient moves out of its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the lump of the departure vein is found, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the groin of the crotch at one cauterization similar to a circle, and sign before the lump around the groin as it turns, so that the groin be inside the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those from which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizations are not present, then make three large cauterizations of the olivaire, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all the quarters; and care for it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the groin
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the groin of the crotch, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient has been cured of what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-smelling pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	Then make a cauterization; and the manner of the cauterization is according to two manners: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many manners, one of which is this: that you cauterize three triangular cauterizations on the groin of the crotch, according to this form, making good depth and great, and leaving between each cauterization a space the width of a thumb, and let it be an olivaire; sometimes one makes a cauterization in middle on the top of the groin, so that there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cauterization is in the shape of a circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the groin; but make it in this manner that the circles contain all the groin, and all the spaces of the quarter be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And that is the manner in which one makes a cauterization in sciatica, when the pain stays in the groin and does not reach as far as the hip or leg. And if it comes to the hip and leg, then make two cauterizations on either side where the patient says the pain is felt, and one cauterization above the ankle three fingerbreadths from the left; and let the cauterization be cutellaire, and let the spaces of the quarter be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or almost there, then make a cauterization where he feels the pain three points or four at the "point" cauterization.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary to do more; and if he knows that the pain is below the kneecap towards the hip, then make a cauterization at the cutellaire or circular cauterization, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave too much of the burning nor burn the main arteries, and that you do not cause more great nuisance and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who have made a cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and they left it burning so that the leg was all inflamed, and the feet also, and it was pierced and corrupted through all the feet. After a purging of the belly which caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cauterization in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et soit eschaufez tant qu'il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, and be scalded until it is completely red and gives off a burning sensation,
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use little of this fire treatment due to fear of its regard, and if we see few who use it; and yet it is one of the good cauterizations, which can be endured, and where it is applied.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain from the back.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from excessive bloodletting, or from similar cold matter spread out, none of these similarities are worth cauterization, unless it comes from an infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient be voided of fetid pills or similar things, which are placed on the back, where the pain is located, three lines marked out by inches, and in each line five or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauterization should be done according to the "poins" cautery; and if you see fit, do three or four cauterizations at the nail-like middle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow space when they arise, and fear; and you will find it in the last vertebra of the back and in our appearance which comes on top of other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you wish to cure it, then cauterize it at the "celcle" cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	And the cauterization will penetrate each part of the vertebra equally. And if you wish, then cauterize around the vertebra at the piercing cautery two or three lines, and let the points be close to one another. After curing, leave it in place until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply a cauterization in the area of the spine which is in spasm from nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain of the joints.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which apothecaries properly call "podagre", and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner: make many cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizations be olive-like according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cauterization at all the points which one claims to be "point". And if pains come up to the knees and to other joints, and this happens many times, then make a cauterization on each knee three or four times from each part, in all olive-like; and if you have need of more, then do more, but do not keep your hand farther away than when the sparks of fire are burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cauterization that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines; and if there remains pain in the arms, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the shoulders or to the armpits, then cauterize each part, and do good governance with the patient and administer medicines. For if you govern him well and purge phlegm, he will be healed by the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the itching of the scalp.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When itching comes in angers, and the boils descend to the groin and this is newly, then it is necessary that when you see it to be cured, he does not eat at all that day; and that he uses things which loosen the bowels, so that the phlegm descends from his belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the boils are healed, and then reposition them at your fingers, and mark out under the itching on the bone of the elbow, and in all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then cauterize as this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	until it is white and he begins to sense something. Then reposition the boils in their place; and command him to hold his hand so that they do not return backwards; and work well on the patient's hips, and put one cushion and one servant under them, and another above the breast which holds his hands; then place the cauterization on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again as many times as you wish to reach the bone; and be mindful subtly that the boil does not burst when you make the cauterization; that you do not burn him; and that through this the patient will not die or suffer other evils.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cauterization, your efforts are worthless. And it is necessary that the cauterizations of children be subtle according to their measure, and of great people also great according to theirs; after three days, cure the wound of butter as long as the scabbing is removed; after cure other ointments until he is healed, and make the patient lie down on his back for 40 days until the wound is well sewn; and it is necessary that his nourishments be exhausted long enough so that the boil does not burst when he gets up to go to chambers.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after 40 days, when he wishes to rise up, have him given a well-made poultice, and apply it for 40 other days; and let him have good rest, so that he does not work too much and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and loud shouting; and when he has learned this lesson, he is healed entirely. And I will say afterwards in its chapter the cure of cutting.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the itching of the belly.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When itches come to other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make one cauterization of the cauterizations again according to its quantity, and let the third part of the fire be burned; after cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but first mark the place of inches and make one line along the width above the itch, and another below, and move your hand through all the olive-like cauterization. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more subtle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of old pain in some member.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to some member, whether from falling or striking, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine does not help, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with the cauterization called "points", and the cauterizations should be done according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, virtue, and location of twisting and of pain. If he is healed from the first cauterization, well; if not, start another one on top of that one, because it is a custom that it must change to the member that is closest to it, therefore you should make the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Surgeonship
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The mesels are helped sometimes by fire treatment with great help, and even the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not let it descend or remain, and you doubt whether corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make five cauterizations on the head: one inside the head to nine fingers' breadth, and another towards the forehead to the end of the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the skin comes out so that the vapors of the thick humors can issue forth; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the surgeonship is spread everywhere; and it is manifestly failing, then it is necessary that you cauterize those cauterizations we have said on the head, and one cauterization inside the nose, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large one on the crupper and another below, and two on each of the shoulders; and two on the sides, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the fossae of the hands; and take care of the nerves that are behind the calcant, lest you burn them; and sometimes make a cauterization on the bone of the elbow, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more I do of cauterizing, the more it brings aid and profit; and know that the patients do not feel any pain from the cauterizing, just as healthy people do, because their body is already completely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauterizations be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron. Afterward, cure the wound with a poultice made of flour, honey, and other remedies until it is healed.
de enfleure	of inflammation
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When inflammation comes to any member and is cured by medicines and ointments and poultices, and it is not yet healed, then one makes cauterizations on the member according to the size and smallness of the member; and let the cauteries be a little entering into the flesh of the knee; then cure with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes one makes a cauterization at the hand, foot, and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if the inflammation is removed; but otherwise no one meddles in it unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	of ulcers
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "ulcers" is inflamed, and the skill of medicine is worth nothing, then one cauterizes it with a cauterization, somewhat deep, according to the thickness of the knee flesh, until the white discharge is removed, and its color changes; then cure with a poultice made of flour, lentils, and rose oil, and leaves of plantain, and blood of hen and blood of almond, each part separately; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the wound until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cure for chancre by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When chancre comes at the beginning, and you see it arresting, then cauterize it with a cauterization that looks like a circle, all around the tour of the chancre. And yet wise men say that one should make a cauterization also in the middle of the chancre; and yet this does not seem to me good, for I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen once; and more rightly is it that it should be cauterized around, with the cauterization called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of inflammation that cannot be killed
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it takes too long to die or because of the abundance that it produces or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, very old) and he has little blood or due to time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it all around with many small cauterizations in quick succession; afterward let it be thus. For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it bursting forth at all the cauterization, then heat the cauterization where there is the shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has pierced the knee, and be such cauterizations that the patient feels them outside in just this way that the course of the corruption is alleviated. Afterward, cure until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cure of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way disease occurs which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a corruption of the member, for it corrupts the members just as fire corrupts dry ropes. If you see this disease in a place that can suffer cauterization together with fire, then heat the cauterizations very small and great, according to what is needed at the place or where the disease is; afterward, cauterize all around until you remove all the corruption, so that nothing remains but everything that was corrupted is removed. And then leave it three days, and apply on the burnt places a poultice with oil so that the eschars of fire are removed, and all the corruption. Afterward, cure with ointments engendering flesh. If you see after three days that healthy flesh does not arise, it's good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted places. And this corruption has sometimes been cured by medicine in place of fire cauterization; but nonetheless fire cauterization is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of the medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of boils that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times it happens that on the feet outside comes a disease called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large, foul-smelling thing that wounds the foot. And the cauterization of this disease is done in two ways: fire cauterization and hot water cauterization. Fire cauterization is when you heat one cauterization as if it were a comb made of vulture's feathers, and make it of good iron to fit the size of the boil and have subtle edges; after which you put everything hot on the boil, and turn your hand all around the boil until it reaches the bottom of the boil; and then leave it thus for three days until it begins to give off pus. Then apply a poultice made of wild marjoram leaves with oil, and let the poultice sit on the entire night, and the boil will fall out and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the area with ointments engendering flesh until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Et s'il sont convertit par defors le corps, et maintes fois avient et en mains et empiecz, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d'aigue chaude;
li cure dou trembler	The treatment of shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people shake from chilliness or numbness, or quartan fever, or another, it is necessary that you make him .iiii. cauteries or .iv. on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the weight, and one on the belly at the olive cautery; if he stops shaking, and his health will hasten from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	the smelly boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Sometimes boils or smelly boils appear on the body bathed, which come from corrupt matter. So it is necessary when they appear to make a cautery on each head of the boil: a fine cautery of myrtle bark, by which the point will be taken up in fire, or of long aristologe root, or a lenticular cautery. And sometimes one should cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further ahead, but are broken open the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often great hemorrhages of blood occur from the artery that is cut in the wound that comes to the surface, or from the incision of an abscess, or from the cautery of a member, and similar things; and it is very grievous to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet, when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to place your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and strain mightily until the blood is calmed beneath your fingers, and no more drips out; then put at the fire the olive cauteries, large and small, as many as are red; then take one, either great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and place the cautery on that vein which you hold with your two fingers, and hold the cautery until the blood is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it spouts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cautery has stopped, then take hastily another one of the cauteries that are at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is staunched; and be mindful that you do not burn the nerve that is below, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, one cannot well stop it without great harm, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of the three ways we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by a strong binding with thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to staunch blood; and let it be bound and restrained accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will cause stanching of blood will bind it tightly with cloths or put hot things on it, or other similar things, unless it does not benefit.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he does not have medicine present, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein just as we have said, and strain well until it is staunched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water frequently while it is very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and staunched; and make an inquiry ahead to get what he needs of cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and the reasons and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter at the head just as far as this, and I will go on in this chapter by the same way so that what one seeks may be found more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, dear friend, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore it is necessary to exercise greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in extracting arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come to cures. Some come with such a bad condition that they will die quickly due to the ferocity of their disease, and the greatness of their evil; and one should have fear of these things.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these there are some who will give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is spiteful. It is not necessary that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly, but wisely about what you are certain of and can take and hold; and use prophesy and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear friend, may Our Lord give you good understanding and rightness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy spirit of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have finished this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauterization, which I have divided from the beginning just as far as this, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease often occurs in children at birth, and when the midwife strains too strongly on the child's head; and sometimes it comes from a reason that is unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease occur except in children, and all those that I have seen have hastened to death; and therefore it seems to me that it is not worth the trouble to work on such cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the skull was growing thicker each day to the point where it could no longer be sustained; and so moistened that he would have died, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the sphenoid, between the key and the bone; and the treatment is such when the moisture is between the key and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and it should be as long as two of our fingers, as long as the moisture flows; and behold the shape of the sphenoid:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs you see are the corners of the head split open from each part, and the fluid jumps far when you press it with your hand from inside, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions into the head in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision extract all the moisture. Then close the incisions with cloths and powders, and put wine and oil, and leave it like this for five days; then loosen it and care for the wound by tents and ointments, and let the head be drained equally, and then allow the patient to eat dry food without moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at where the aposteme opens up, and the gathering of the fluid; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes to the right; and sometimes to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then at the place where the aposteme opens up, and the gathering of the fluid, and cut according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and if there is a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of relapse
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to anyone that has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the liver, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help, then the final cure is the fire cautery with which you will cauterize the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then it is necessary, when you see them about to be cauterized, that the patient bends back their head; after which they strike the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then take the patient's neck and tie it tight with one cloth; then look where the vein bites, and the leeches of both are afterwards behind the ears, and they are not responsive; then mark the leeches with enchie, then cauterize one and the other with a sharp spatula in two parts, so that the cut comes up to the bone, and this is by the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the spatula below the artery and cut above, cutting in the same way as two do across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, then blood springs forth continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to the feeling, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space with three fingers, then mark with enchie and cut up to the bone; and what is necessary for the blood to flow forth is .vi. cubits, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point of the syphac, then cut so that apostemes do not come there, then drain the wound and bind, and care with ointments until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migraine comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moistures of tears and the heats in temples and old foreheads and similar things, and it is treated by manners of medical cures and all that does not help him, then we cut open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient bends back their hair from their temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is not responsive except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responsive, then the patient tightens their neck with some cloths, then strikes the place with a rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which there is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then raise it up with pincers, and part it well from the tunics that are under each part; and if the artery is subtle, then turn it at the point of the uncina, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two hairs. For if it is not cut, then blood does not flow out entirely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And take the blood of .vi. cubits up to .iii.; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it with two loops of a strong double-threaded silk thread, so that there is no bleeding before the wound heals, and there is no loss of blood; then cut off the excess that is between the two ties at the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize the area with a cauterizing spatula up to the bone until the hairs are cut; and this is the main work, if the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterization is help to finish the moisture: for this reason it is of greater help with the moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts on well-made tents; and when one loosens them, take care of dry medicines that bring forth flesh and tents, until he is healed; and if without a pause from the artery as long as you work, then hasten to cauterize by fire, or use vitriol to stop the bleeding; and if you do not have these present, place your cloth on the place so that the bleeding ceases, and raise the place with cold water until the bleeding stops, and be strained as is necessary; and what is main and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire-cutting spatula, but the cutting should be well spaced to withstand the heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the cuttings are too dense, they hold their heat less.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two cutlets one large space of width, and then when you have marked with enchie the two loops, and you heat the iron hot on top until it comes up to the bone, and cut off the vein in two loops; and let them be separated between the two hairs because they are not sealed by this cautery entirely; and that is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are flowing from the veins that are above the forehead of the chief of the head, and it does not benefit at all from the medicine done there, and you see the face of the patient redden, and feel or front perspiration like trembling; and so the skin is tender and moist as if the hairs of paper were fallen, and the papers are scalded by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	Et l'apelerent li ancien "cure contuse", et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu'il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l'une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusqu'à neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l'incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au travers joins;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and prepare a piece of sponge and many cloths to absorb the blood, then put the spatula in two parts where there is the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is near the temple up to the second incision; and scrape out all the kernel that is between the two notches right up to the sphenoid bone that is above the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	and put the instrument called "culterelle" in the first notch, and it is very well cutting on one side, and not cutting at all on the other side, and that's its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put the curved edge facing towards the flesh and the blunt edge facing the bone, and push it as far as it reaches the middle notch. And cut off all the vessels that flow down from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to what appears from the kernel; then make another cut in the middle notch up to the other notch; and then extract the blood equally, and express the place where the blood has been taken; then put a cloth of old cotton into each notch, and cover with moist cloths soaked in wine, oil, and vinegar, and guard so that no apostemes arise; on the third day, loosen the bond, and administer great relief with lukewarm water, then apply basilicum ointment with rose oil, and other remedies for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When anyone comes with a long-standing cataract and you see the eyes tense and small, and weakening the sight, and the papillae burned; and the hair falls out, and the head is in great pain above, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these accidents that those matters and the cataract do not come from one vein alone, but from many veins, and the mother vein which is there, so it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you instruct the patient to recline his forehead, then make a great incision in the forehead, and another one of medium width. One inch. And begin from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone; and remove your hand from the temples that move at mealtime; and when the bone is exposed, let all the blood flow into an esponge, then desecrate between the two lips of the incision and put in a piece of old cotton and linen; then cover with moist cloths soaked in wine and oil, and take care not to form apostemes; when it is done, you should rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then apply remedies that cause flesh to appear.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In the same manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and administer it to these wounds in order to bring forth flesh everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the removal of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that comes out of the ears is one of the three things: either grains, or bestial matter, or stone-like substance similar to iron; or seed, such as jaundice, lentils, peas; or flowing substances, such as water and oil, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it comes out of the ear a stone or other thing that does not belong to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, then put the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, let some violet oil or sesame oil drip into it, then administer extraction; and make the patient sneeze with condiments, and block their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and lift up the ear above. Many times it has come out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then administer extraction with fine tweezers, where there is the shape:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the tweezers, that's good; if not, then administer extraction with the fine pincer of a small pair of forceps; and if it does not come out through this, then make a wire chain and put the head of the chain or perforation of the ear very tight, and block what is around the chain with soft wax so that the blood cannot enter with the chain; then treat it firmly, for many times it has come out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, then take glue from which birds are taken, and put some instrument on point to do this, and put a small piece of cotton around; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and treat it further.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out through all the things we have said, then hasten to cut open the ear before an aposteme arises and spasms; and the manner of the incision is that you first make the patient's head bleed from the cephalic vein, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then sit the patient down between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear in the fat or flesh dependent; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it as far as you can, and suck on it hastily to your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains that are inside and they swell, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then apply a fine, thin spatula according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and administer an incision to that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with fine tweezers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is easy.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In water then that comes out of the ear, it is good for the patient to use condiment-induced sneezing first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let it be covered with another piece of cloth or a cloth on top of it where the water is. If it jumps out through this, that's good. If not, then take many stones according to their length and thickness, and heat them slightly over fire; and put one into the patient's ear, and push another stone from the other side, and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this stone after stone until all the water comes out, and thus it jumps out completely. And if you see, then take a reed, and put one end of it into the ear, and burn the other end over fire until most of the reed is burned; then do the same with other reeds until the water comes out entirely, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the bestial matter, if it is small in size, like a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, then administer extraction with fine tweezers; and that is the easiest thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting the vermin from ears, as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then you must look at the ear to the sun: if there are any worms, treat them with fine tweezers; if none appear, take a thread of the kind that has the shape:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it is narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle thread into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then succeed in pulling out the entire thread; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they don't obey to come out, stop around the thread with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they don't emerge like we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proved in the removal of worms, and you will find it in the treatment of distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, according to the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is narrow below and wide above made of silver or tin, with small holes to distill; and for pressing within the distillation using a well-made tin instrument, and if you see, take a scraper and wrap it around the point with a cotton cloth; then pour your oil or juice into it, and as much of your medicine as you can into the thread, and have the thread in the ear; then put it into the scraper with all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or trickles from the ear; and if the patient feels within, and the distillation is in a small pot warmed by fire so that one can distill it in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From the stoppering of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by stoppering a wound or new growth inside the ear, and these stoppers sometimes come very far into the ear so that one cannot see them; and sometimes there is only a small hole and it can be seen clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes very far in, if one cannot see it, is from a grievous inflammation or multiple dispositions, and that which can be seen requires that you put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opacity apparent, then work with all this spatium as it has the shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be rough and scraping in front and back all along, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the opacity is from new flesh or the body of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers and gently scrape it away until all the flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the opacity is very far in the ear, then take a subtle scraper and warm it slightly over the fire, then put it on the body of the ear. If you sense the opacity that the patient feels grief at hearing, gently pierce and beware not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten with Egyptian mastic.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder on vitriol broth; and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and put another moistened tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then cure until it is sound.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the bleeding stops, then take an sponge and dip it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the bleeding which are in the treatment of distillations.
de la char des papieres	of paper skin
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This crust that comes on the paper skin of the eyelids when they are moist and dry, then it is necessary that you stretch them with tenacula and tweezers, and scrape off a spatium from its roots; then put on the surface vitriol broth.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they peel off without leaving any skin, then the cataract of fine lenticular cautery and the cauterized area after incision is worth nothing; and many times they are repainted, as long as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned away and do not return.
de la gresle	of the hare
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times come on the paper skin of the eyelids things that seem like hare's fur in shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of thick moisture on the paper above and below; the works are such: beware if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make the cut along the edge, then scrape each part gently, then take with tweezers and scrape. If you can't scrape without piercing the paper slightly, don't harm the patient; and if the tear is large, assemble it with a suture, and cure until it is healed; and if it's small, don't do anything strong, for the ointments will restore it soon and remove the flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then turn over the paper and extract the grandine with fine tweezers, and scrape and press from one side to the other; and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it doesn't harm anything; and when the grandine is scraped off, pour vinegar water into the ear and cure the part that removed flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a fat that is accumulated in the membranes of the paper skin above, and this happens more often with children than with adults, and it causes great pain to their eyes; and they come with a discharge in the mornings, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie on their faces all day, and sleep on top, and are their paper skin below moistened by the swelling and appearance that has been covered with exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the part between your fingers and feel the exinach inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the treatment is that the patient places their head in your lap; and then take one cloth made of linen, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach from each part, then put it on them; and press with your fingers from one side and the other, so that the exinach is assembled inside the circle; then make a small incision in the middle of the moist area, not more than the size of the wound that you would make for a vine; and make the skin smooth as far as you see the exinach; and in multiple dispositions, the exinach comes out of the incision, in the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take then a whole piece of rough cloth between your knees at the back, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and beware that you do not put anything in the slit, lest you bruise all the way to the eye, lest you bleed.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the skin does not open at the beginning of the slit, then widen the slit slightly until it opens; then take it as we have said, then moisten cloths in oil and water, and place them on the wound, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such men who boil and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then cure it until it is healed. And if the wound becomes inflamed, then cure it with poultices soothing it until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs of paper grow, they become tangled with something other than their natural state, and are inflamed, which harms the eyes, and brings about manners of illnesses such as tearfulness and softening of the papers and opacity, until it is a cause of destruction of the eyes; and there is the cure according to three ways: either by fire cautery together, or by medicinal poultice according to what is written in this chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the patient's head in your hand, then turn the paper from oil to your left hand; if it is converted, that is good; if not, then insert an awl into one thread above; and let this be on the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow near these hairs, and guide one thread above all the paper, and turn it at the razor's edge; then make in the part below the paper, below the tangled hairs, all the way to the great tear canal to the small; then pull out one thread, and put a small tent of cotton and cloth underneath the paper, then sign on the paper a figure like the leaf of myrtle, and yet it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see increasing the paper which is divided all around.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if there is one who needs to cut off a great quantity of the paper according to what the paper has softened; then make all the way along the tear canal above the two lines that you have signed, and start from the great tear canal down to small; and let it be one of the incisions near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the two angles of the key, then scrape off all; then assemble the two lips with a stitching made by an awl on one thread of fine wool, and stop the bleeding, and make the surplus threads stick to the two small circles above any glued things, if you see fit to do so; and if not, then don't bother, and leave the stitching and threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitching or constraining things, because the paper revives at the moment of the wound's healing and assembly with it, but the stitching is corrupt (as the ancients said), and that is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have told, at three separate stitches according to the shape that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut off what rises above the small forces equally according to the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you have no power to hold the forceps and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread at the great tear canal, and the second thread at the small one, and assemble between your knees the threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above what you have signed, as we have told, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: if necessary, use what we have said about incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of cauterization is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and make a hole in it according to what I have said, and then make two cauterizations by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the tear canal; and cut off at the two ends of both parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on top of what rises from the paper of oil, and strain the two cauterizations into two parts form; and let it be thus for some days, and the skin which is strained will die, wither, and fall off, until it falls away by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes too long, then cut off the forces that rise, and cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, and the paper has been lifted, and the hairs will no longer grow; and this is the form of the two cauterizations that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you take a fine needle, and insert one thread of silk soft and subtle; then assemble the threads and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be as long as a palm; then order in the chase another fine thread of silk briefly, and tie the head of the thread; then put the patient's head in your hand; and let it be under the sun so that the work is declared, for this is a subtle and small work, then insert the needle into all the chase at the root of the tangled hair, and make it pierce through the paper hastily as you draw it up to the natural hair; then pull out the hair until it comes forth all over the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull out the chase from below to all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase comes forth from the pores above and you can see it by the vision of the eye; then pull out the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it be for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the skin becomes smooth; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural beard, and lift it up with that one, so that it is stretched out and then lifted.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the pouring of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease called "aleacrati" or the pouring comes to the eye, if there are two kinds: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from wound, or cut, or burn, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the manner of treatment for this is that you cut open the wound, and separate the lips, and put linseed tents inside it, and tie it until it is healed; and it is not necessary to use in its cure things that dry up and constrict. For if you do so, the disease will come back worse than before; but it is better to work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or alum water, and flaxseed, be cooked, and oil of dragon's blood melted in some oil, and wrap a tent around it, and cure it with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care to make sure it does not harden again in the same form as it was before; and these treatments we have mentioned are nothing other than remedies for this disease, so that it may come back in the same form as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that is underneath and is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and gash and burn and similar things; and the way of treatment for it is that you take a needle, which has one double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce through the left eyelid as far as the right, so that the thread will come out in two pieces of the flesh; then remove the flesh above to the entire needle, and cut at one broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper comes back as it should, that is good; but if not, then take one raser and place it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or cuts inside the paper; and let the holes of the two incisions be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and so that when they are assembled, the shape will be like the shape of a letter whose name is "one Greek"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity of its edges below, from what follows the paper; then join the two separated parts, and sew them with one thread of linen; then perform the cure with the softening medicines and tents, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from gash or cut or burn, then it is necessary that you make a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what is said before; then separate between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the treatment in accordance with the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an instrument for every possibility that they can make the figure return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this swelling occurs in many people in the same way that the paper above is bound with white of egg, and cannot move or do its natural works, then it is necessary that you insert the point of a raser under the paper, lift it up; and let it be held by pincers, until you cut what is suitable for the thin spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot suffer if the spatula is too sharp or bleeds the eye; and your incision, from which you remove that assembled part, should be light, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and the whole assembly is healed, and sometimes in the eye, salted water is used, and a sweet broth, and vinegar; then put between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye damp wool in abundance of egg; and after three days use the vinegar and similar things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the swelling of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the swelling is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard boil on the skin, and another which is not nervous but resembles white moisture congealed, which when one touches it with iron and cools it with pincers, it cannot be removed; and both of these appearances begin near the great eyelid, and grows little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head in your hand, then works the eyes; and lift up the paper with one hand, then coil the swelling with pincers of small doubleure, and extend it above; then take a needle, and put one hair from a horse, or ox, or cow, and a strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and insert it into the swelling, and pierce it to the entire needle, and tie the swelling with one thread and extend it above, and cut off at all the root of the hair that follows the prune and the silk to the hair just up to the head; then cut off what remains in the root of the eyelid to the entire thin spatula and small forces, and leave the natural flesh or eyelid so that through incision the body does not produce tears habitually; and sometimes the swelling is tied only with an onyx stone, and a thread, as we have said; then one cuts off all the soft spatula of which this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And take care that the spatula does not touch the fatty flesh and break it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision, pour a little bit of boiled silk into the eye, and make a broth with lard, and let it be until the next day; then perform the cure as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the swelling is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the onyches cannot enter, many times this appearance of swelling is cured with medicines; and it grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it growing, then work on the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lightly, a little bit sharp, according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the swelling above subtly, and if you see that it is not decreasing and the reason approaches, then distill from your mouth into the eye a broth made of lard and red vinegar and boiled silk, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other treatment according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, as if it were a boil, then pour milk, and first cure the hot apostema until it is healed, then begin again the treatment as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the skin of the wound impedes sight by great harm, then suspend it with an onion, and cut out a part but not all, so that there may not be a flow of tears; then distill into the eye a red collyrium which is made from latakia.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of the flesh that grows on the pupil.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Some men's eyes sometimes grow red flesh, and cover the pupil and restrain above the papillae and turn it away from the face; and it seems like a pomegranate rose; and the work is such that the patient puts his head in a certain direction, then opens the eyelids, and cools all that flesh with suitable onions, and sustains it with force; then cuts the first layer of flesh, and continues cutting to the end, and takes care not to harm the eye during the operation; and let the incision of the sputum be as we have said in the incision of the udder and for small forces by which one removes the scab, just as the form after this chapter demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then pour oil of silex or distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines into it; place a piece of cotton on top with an egg white to secure the aposteme hot; and if there is nothing left and the blood chokes you, and you fear hot aposteme, then leave the eye and cure the aposteme with soothing things for hot aposteme; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do all the flesh that has been removed from the eye by this process.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you speed up the cure of each weak eye in a natural way; and by accident, work with iron; and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that these members are suffering from that operation.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes.
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Scabs are red veins that are covered on the eye, and tolerate the vision's operation and weaken the eye forever. It is necessary then to first look at whether the eye has scabs, if there is only one disease besides the scab; then coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head in a certain direction, then suspend those veins with all the onions according to his wisdom, and let the onions be subtle doubles according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two onions by degree in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then coil the forces of those veins subtly, and extract the blood hour after hour, until you see removing those veins from the eye; and take care not to harm the eye at all with the sputum, and do this operation at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut off more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is left of the scab.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to coil all that in one hour, then make a poultice on the eye with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and let it stay some days until the pains are soothed and you are assured of hot aposteme, then resume according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the abscess of the eye.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The doctor is called "arissati" abscess: when you cure it with cautery and hot medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a sign in it that you must cut into the aposteme, where it should die, and drain out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, then return all the instruments of which there is this form; and it is called "aspre chief", and be made of iron to a new head, and be pointed like a file as in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this some times, then restore the surface with medicinal caustics.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is sewn up, and flesh grows, and the body of the bowstring is sewn up, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostemed, and bad things happen, know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other remedy than to bring back the abscess to the navel of the rain according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron, and with hot medicines, and when it is uncovered take one force according to this form, and let the iron be at three angles, and let the fistula be reduced to its chief as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the eyelid, and withdraw your hand from the eye a little, then turn the force all around until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what the veins do if they hold their hand on their navel; and then restore the surface with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the bone, the matter will go to the navel; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the exit of the eye.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully opened and there is no blockage or constriction in the navel, nor diminishment, then it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal him, then apply poultices or hirudines to suck without hurting, then place on the eye a bandage made of aloe, encens, and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with bandages and drapery; and the manner of the drapery is that you take soft drapery enough, and fold each one into four, and then put one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes need; then strain it above a durable binding, and repeat the poultices to suck without hurting; then remove the poultices and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the bandage loosens, then it is necessary that you tighten it much; then remove the bandage after the day and the night, and if you see the eye repairing itself, this is good; if not, then repeat the plastering and the drapery and the bandage and the poultices until he is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the rupture of the vitreous humor.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come to the vitreous humor, and it bursts forth like a grain of resin, and it is quite astonishing to see; then if you see it bursting forth, the operation is such that you insert an awl into the root of the part below, just up to the surface above, and then insert another awl where there is a double thread from the eyelid; and make it pierce through, and leave the first awl as it is; then cut the place where the double thread is and tie one part of the vitreous humor around, and tighten it well, then extract the awl and apply a moist linen cloth to the eye with plenty of egg white; and let it be like that until the threads have chosen the vitreous humor, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the vitreous humor in each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the eyes show great appearance, then pierce with a subtle spatula that comes near to the fontanelle of the eye, and drain the moisture, albogined, down into the eyes, and let it enter as soon.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the bottom of the eye.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This illness which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but the swelling that forms in the eye, resembling a liquid descending, and it's not actually liquid; and the manner of its appearance is that you make the patient sit on one prepared and straight seat, then take their head between your hands from two parts, and gently move them until you see the swelling come up to your eyes; then it will be fixed, and do not descend and be dislodged, so that the light is seen, and the patient sees things as they used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it's liquid, and if the descent of the swelling is not prepared as we have said. Then make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and make a small incision on the corneal tissue .i. drop by continuing along the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and the crown, until the swelling comes out; and when it is out, then distill in the eye hot water mixed with honey or liquid fenugreek boiled with honey, and be cured of another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	From the waters of the eye.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the resemblance of the waters in division, and what is needed to pierce; then work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light because of the sun, and the good eye being healthy and strained very tightly; then put the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or on your right hand if the eyes are right-handed; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left-handed, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right-handed; then put the point of the instrument under the crown by the thickness of a nail in that corner of the eye to the part of the minor tear duct, then push the instrument called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand so much until it pierces into the corner of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of almagda be at the forefront of the measure of the span which is from the prune leaf to the end of the nourishment; and this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper by the brightness of the corneal tissue, and put the instrument just above or where the water is, then express below one path after another. If the water descends now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After resting for a little while, and if the water rises again on the second path, place the force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, then gently draw out almagda by rotating your hand a little at a time; and then put in the eye a small amount of pure gemstone, and leave it inside the oil. Then take by the way out the oil soaked or cloth moistened with rose oil and hen's egg whites, and bind with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, place on the common broth with an abundance of hen's eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too far in, but make one subtle incision, then put in almagda as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient a suitable bed with bedding, where he sleeps on his back in a dark room; and be vigilant about all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition just until the third day; then release him in that same dark room, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not necessary for you to do this immediately after the incision or during the treatment now, but it is necessary for you to wait a bit, because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If an abscess arises, then loosen the eye before the seventh day, and direct it towards what soothes the abscess; and when it is calmed, then loosen the sight and put on a cloth or bandage to cover for a few days, and be in that dark room. And then get out of the house little by little, and turn back into their condition; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from the land of Yrach, who told us that in their country they make almagda pierce, by which the water is drained, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read about it in old books; and by chance this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see them; and they are made of proper earth.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the ends of these are of the same subtlety, and the last one is in three sharp corners.
de la char sor le neis	From the skin on the nose.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Sometimes nose hairs are born or not, and there are some that resemble scorpions with many joints; and if such exist where the skin is enchanted with a flux of color, and if the skin is soft with a bone color. In that then of these skins which is soft, and not at all enchanted, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open their nostrils, and pour the onyx liquid onto those hairs, and treat them gently; then take what you can sustain with a subtle spatula from one side, until you know that that skin is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any part that cannot be cut off, then open it with one of the subtle instruments lightly, until nothing is left; and if without bothering you, or an abscess arises, then apply the cauterize as needed; and if it's malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize until the wound is stopped and all the hairs are removed, then pour on the nose a mixture of oil and water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the nose opens and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healed; and if the moistors does not pierce as needed, know that there is a hair born in the bone above, so the instruments do not come to cut: then it is necessary that you put one linen thread about the size of your thumb, and it should be oiled by hand, with some spacing between each node; and place the patient's head on the thread in their nose at their power, and treat in a fragrant manner until it comes inside the mouth through the nose; and many times they do this to children at school, and it is a light thing for someone who wants to do it; then hold one end of the thread that comes from the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes from the mouth in the other hand, and let them go as we are with the thread. Do this until you know that the night has corrupted that hair, then take out the thread, wash away the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the nose just like before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of the hair; and then put a lead bandage on the nose some days until it is healed, and if there is need for dry medicines, use them; and that is the form of the instrument to purify the head, through which they distill oils and medicines in the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	Et soit d'argent ou d'arain, semblant à une lampe ouverte, comme une caille, et le conduit aussi; et si tu voies, fais une caille close, et soient les estrumens pleins pour espurger le chef; et ait une mainche au chef pour le tenir quant on chaufre l'huile ou quelque liqueur.
de la char sor le neis	Of the flesh on the night.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times there is on the head at night a disease which is called "telul", and it grows and becomes great in time, so much that it is visible to behold; and therefore it is necessary that you cut it off at the beginning, and remove all fat, then put on the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays cutting it off until it is great, take heed if it is hard, of foul color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted abscess, for when one cuts it sometimes, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of gentle touch, not of foul color, and you see that it can be all cut off, then empty the patient and cut off the abscess without fear, and treat the wound with things soothing and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the night is cut off and washed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Know that when a solution of continuation comes to one of these cartilaginous works, little profit is gained, more so in some men. It is therefore necessary to consider this in each case, if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring together the two lips on a suture, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated from one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape off all the parts of their roughness as long as they seep, then bring together the two lips on a suture, and restrain it, and powder on top with blood of dragon, and incense powder; and put on the powders a piece of emplastry of strength or other emplastry suitable, and leave it until it cures by itself, then cure it with oil until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the suture is that you bring together the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or with thread, as I have made known.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many men have inside their lips abscesses hard, resembling grains of mustard seeds, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut on each notch, and take out as pincers and cut in each part; then apply a poultice to the wound after the incision with vinegar powder, until the blood is stopped; and then lift off the poultice easily, and cure the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times there is on the gums flesh accumulated, which the ancients call "albulus"; it is necessary that you support it with forceps, and cut off at its root, and let the blood or pus flow; then put on the wound vinegar powder, or other drying and constricting powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut it off again, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of ulcers
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and unpleasant scrapings; and sometimes the teeth are black and green and yellow, as far as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; it is necessary that you make the patient sit in your hands, and his teeth be in thy saint, and remove the teeth or the scrapings until there is nothing left; and thus do with the blackness and the greyness, and the yellowness and the other discolorations, as long as they are removed; and if one takes away what is at the first stage, it is good; but if not, one recommences to remove the second day and the third, until you have removed all; and know that teeth need diverse forms of instruments to remove, according to what the work demonstrates, because the scraper with which we remove the teeth has different forms than he with which we remove between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay drawing it out as long as you can, for this must not be done; for it is a very high substance just up to the point where one has no excuse for pulling.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Then when the patient is constrained to pull out the tooth, it is necessary that you be certain of the healthy tooth. Many times the pain had misled the patient, and he thought it was a holy tooth, and had the good tooth pulled out; and yet the pain did not depart from him because of this, until the bad extraction, for we have already decided to do so with these saints; and when you are well certain of the healthy tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on all sides with a strong spatula to protect the gum from all parts; then move it to your hands or to subtle forceps at the first pace and pace, until it is well extracted, then secure the forceps firmly; and be the patient's hand in thy saint between thy knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After pulling out the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump away, take one of these instruments and insert it into each part lightly, and move it as you did first. And if the teeth are perforated and bruised, it is necessary that you fill them with drapes, where the perforations are; and then restrain it subtly with forceps, so that it does not break when straining; and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take heed that you do not break it, and leave one part, and let the tooth return to the patient through the malice of the root, causing greater pains than the first. And take heed that you do not act as ignorant saints who, through their haste and boldness, sometimes break the chariot, and do not bring what we have told; but they often bring great diseases through the roots that remain, or through the chariot that breaks, just as we have so often seen; and when the tooth is pulled out, wash the wound with wine, vinegar, and seawater; and if blood comes from it, which often happens, apply a poultice made of vinegar powder; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments, with which one pulls out the teeth first, are those with long pointed tips and large handles, which do not double when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of great strength so that they do not bend at all to the pulling, and be well tempered as iron, and be toothed so that they may hold tightly.
de la racine des dens	Of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains at the pulling, it is necessary that you put a damp cloth of butter on the spot .i. one day or two days, until the flesh is softened, then insert the pincers called "algefri", by which the joint appears to be well-shaped; and should be made inside as if with a file and that is its form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out at all these pincers, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is known as a palisade, by which this is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the roots jump out because of this, it is good; if not, then help with all instruments, by which the forms come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument that has two handles, it is thus the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are before in relation to the teeth, and of this instrument which seems like great pincers, it is thus the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is this instrument strong so that it cannot break; and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and wise and skilled masters find by themselves their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease demonstrate, for there are such diseases where the old did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of cases and one does not break anything or another bone, or if it can be done, then one seeks instruments that are needed, as I have told you, and is aided by gestures; and this is its form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be strong and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but one can hold and remove; and then restore the spot with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then reset all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to their natural body shape, and the form is ugly, especially in young girls, it is necessary that you know whether the tooth is born after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot smooth or file it: then draw a line; and if it is uneven with the tooth, then take this instrument which has this form, and it resembles a small beak, and be made of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the copes are cut and cut in small pieces over several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others; and if it appears that one can file it, then file with a similar file like this is its form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth piece by piece over several days gently, so that it does not move until it chooses; then smooth out the end to any rasp, and if the teeth are too sharp and hurt the tongue, it is necessary to file the roughness until it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the front teeth loosen, either by percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot press on what they eat without crying, and you have treated them with restraining medicines, and this does not work; then one must restrain them with a gold thread, for silver threads become green and rotten, but gold never rots; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are misaligned, take the thread and insert it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the loose teeth in their place, one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the covering again up to the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and smoothly, until they do not move anymore; and let your finger be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut the thread with pincers and assemble the teeth, and reposition them between the healthy tooth and the loose one, so that it does not hurt the tongue; then leave it like this as tight as possible until it can remain, and if it loosens or the threads break, then restrain it with another thread; if it remains and serves thus for all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of aligning the two healthy teeth and the two loose ones, just as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, then put it back in its place, gradually and carefully, just as we have said; and do not intervene if you are not a wise and skilled person, and one time make the shape of an osseous dent from a whalebone, and put it at the location where there is a defect, and restrain it so that it does not escape, and remain and serve thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the link of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue or is natural, as one is born with it; or by accident of a wound that has healed; and the work is such that you work on the mouth of the patient, and have their head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament of the wide part, until the tongue is freed from its dwelling place, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it is due to a sudden wound, then put in an unguent and cut the wide part that ligament; and be sure that the opening is not too deep, for the artery that is underneath; and when you are finished, then lift the tongue with rose water and oil, or cold water, and place a linen tent under the tongue; and let the patient sleep each night, so that the wound cannot heal. And if bleeding comes, then put on vitriol powder over the wound; and if the blood flows, then cauterize it with a slow fire cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it to be of a foul color or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining into gangrene, and there is moisture, then throw away the unguent, and make a poultice with a subtle spatula, and deliver it from one part to another; and if the blood flows at your work, then put on vitriol powder until it is stained, then return to your work until you have finished all the treatment; then lift the tongue with oil and vinegar, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of throat apostemes
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», and les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, and quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, and elles ne sont sanees, if pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens and de fusse color, if ne lou touchier mie de fer. And if it is rouges and li racine est grosse, if ne lou touchier mie de fer, as well for the decorrement of sanc; but lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, and adonques tu lou partiras, or il rompirait par soi; and if it is de blainche color reont, and li racine est subtilz, if aies apareilliet l’estrument pour coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose and est apaisiez. Adonques fait seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, and ses chiés soit en ton sain, and li oevre la bouche and lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, and presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; and soit d’argent or d’arain subtil as well as uns coutelz:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue all over this instrument, and you see the aposteme, if take hold of it and push it into the amandres, and train it upwards as much as you can; and do nothing with the cloths, then cut to the instrument, so that it is in the form, which seems like some force; and yet the top are curved, and one side another, and are very sharp, and made of iron or andaine:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then cut with pincers, so that it is in the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be twisting on one side and the other; and when you have cut one of the amandres, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and warm and gentle, and if there is a flow of blood, gargle the patient with cold water, or cooked grated apples, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it so long as it is sound; and sometimes other apostemes are born in the throat besides the two amandres, so cut them then like the two amandres equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I cured a woman of an aposteme that was born inside her throat, to wit, one aposteme of little sense; and I had well closed all the throat, so that the woman could not exhale because the passage was blocked, nor eat nor drink, and she would have died if she had remained thus for one or two days. The apostemes were so high that they had been pushed up through two openings of the nose. I hastened then at once, and inserted an oncin into one, then pulled it out with force, and drew out a great portion of flesh; then refilled the other opening of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards I inserted the oncin into these apostemes, and cut off part of them, and only a little blood flowed forth; and thus was unblocked the passage of the throat of the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and ceased not to cut away that aposteme for a long time; and the apostemes recrossed and filled again the place I had emptied, so that it became very large; then I bound it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it did not grow further; and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened to them after me.
de l’uve	of the vein
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When swelling descends to the vein, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendiculaire"; and if it is below a lump and rounded, it is called "vein". When it is cured as we said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the apostemes are appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to cut it; and if it is rounded and assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of a reddish color or black, then it is necessary to avoid making an incision. For there is great peril for the patient. It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, to make the patient sit before the sun, and press their tongue to the instrument which we mentioned earlier; then insert the oncin into the vein, and pull it down, and cut at one of the two instruments that I said in the incision of the two amandres. And it is necessary not to cut more than the superfluity that is beyond natural term; for if you cut more, you will harm the voice, and the speech; and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two amandres, and cure it so long as it is sound. And if the patient has fear of cutting, then it is necessary to use a trick at the cauterization with no fear. And the manner of the cautery is hot water. And it is that the patient puts their head in your hand, and then presses their tongue to the instrument which we said in the chapter on cautery, and mixes with hot boiling water, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and employs the handle of this instrument, which is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has a beard or hair on their head, put the medicine in it as the hairs of a comb, and place the instrument all over the medicine on the vein; and have the patient sit up straight on their side, so that the saliva and mucous flow from their mouth into the medicine, so that it does not descend to the throat and wound. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the vein for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it numb and the medication's irritation is appeased; and if you see anything, take a cotton cloth and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument into the hollow cane above, until the cotton rises on the vein; and do this many times until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and wait for three or five days. And if you need to start again with the medicine's cautery, start again, and after the cautery wash around the vein with a cloth dipped in cold water, and cure by gargling as long as it is sound.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take camphor and yarrow and origan and rue and chamomile and vervain and similar herbs, and gather all or some of them in one pot, and put a little water, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with strong earth, and inside the pot have one instrument shaped according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	Et soit d'argent ou d'arain, and soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l'uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Maintes fois s'aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, or aucune chose;
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the top so that they can more easily enter the throat, and have the head lifted high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all come to harm, nor push the bone inside; and see that the patient inserts the instrument, for it is best if he knows what he is doing or if the thing is awkward; so he inserts it downwards, or pulls it far out of all the instruments equally, until it is far.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the snot from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	There is no medicine for snot from the throat, as I said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when it does not help, then look at the patient's throat by sunlight, after you press his tongue onto the instrument that I told you. And if you see the snot, pull it out slowly with a small hook or thin forceps that are suitable for this. And if this is not worth it, take a braided cord, and insert it into the patient's throat, then attach one hot iron to the end of the cord, and do this often. And if the patient has water all day, then take a full vial of cold water, and open his mouth, and spit out without swallowing, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the snot feels the water, it will fall.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not fall as we said, then suffumigate the patient with asefetide, using the instrument that I told you about in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will fall without trouble. And the manner of the fumigation is this: take a pot which has live coals, and let the pos be covered with a pierced cloth in the middle, and in that perforation be the key of the instrument; then throw your fumigation into it, and have the patient put the end of the cord into his mouth, and close his mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes just to the snot; and the snot will now fall, and if it does not fall, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary for it to come out through this management.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which you treat the snot is this: when you can see it, it resembles curved forceps for inserting into the throat; and it has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has a lime-like roughness, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and behold its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what is remembered in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which one is the same as itself, and because it holds moisture. And the second way is for those that are in the body. For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the jointed limb are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if abscesses are not to be pierced until the bowels are mature according to their completion; and there are some that need piercing when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like an abscess that is in a joint. For when an abscess comes from a joint, and one leaves it alone until it has burst outward, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint may be corrupted, which causes contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is on the main limb, and you delay perforation until it is mature, then harm will come to the main limb; or if it is at the foundation, then one should pierce it as soon as it is ripe; and it is not good to pierce a ripe abscess without digestion being complete, except for that which is at the foundation, lest it burst forth and become elongated inside, and becomes a fistula; and cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to its completion, and this is when the pain is abated, and the departures of fever, and the decrease in pain and redness, and of swelling and inflammation of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where it appears most dependent on the location of the abscess, and where it opens outward; and be the perforation long enough to reach into the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In those that are swollen, according to the shape of that member. And when abscesses are in jointed limbs, it is best to wait until they are confirmed in completed digestion, as we said. For if you pierce them before that, the body will be filled with a great deal of pus; and by chance, the lips and the underlying tissues will become hardened. And there are some abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member requires. And it is necessary to make small incisions for small abscesses, and large incisions for large abscesses, and many openings according to the appearance of the grandeur of the abscess; and there are some abscesses where one must cut the skin, and cover; when it has become as flaccid as a cloth, then do as is done with babies: and there are some that are split into three angles, and there are some that are covered like the leaf of myrtle, such as abscesses of the kidneys; and there are some where one makes a rounded cut, and other cuts and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those who do not have a head, such as a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it thoroughly. And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has accumulated a great deal of pus, and you pierce it, to not pull out all the pus at once, but rather take out some of it; then stop the abscess just until the next day, then pull out nothing more above; do this gradually over time, until all the pus comes out. Moreover, if the patient is weak in constitution, or a woman giving birth, or small children, or elderly men who are decrepit. For the hopes that sometimes fluctuate with the issue of the pus, so that by chance the patient dies, and you do not take precautions. Therefore, carefully read this treatise on great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, then dress the wound, and look to see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a plain cut, then apply tents made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that they come together; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or linen fluff without moisture, and tie it just until the third day; then remove it, and care for it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor leu decorrant par maintes fois.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	It is necessary to know universally in treating abscesses: and I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
des soros	of boils
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Wherever the boil comes from little abscesses, and they are ways of ours that are in nets, like a weaver of silk; and there is many similarities. There are some that are fat and such or have moisture as pustules; and if there are any that are hard and stony to cut into, and there is no doubt if the artery does not make it contrary. And the works of cutting so are that you try out every one. i. instrument which is called "entromissoire", from which the form comes here after, whatever thing it contains. For if it contains moisture, then let it dry above the long hair. And when the moisture is empty, then scrape off without leaving any skin that contains that moisture, for it will return again when you leave anything; then plunge cotton into Egyptian oil, if present; if not, in water and salt, and apply the dressing to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and then begin the cotton again, just as before, on the second day, and on the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the night; then cure the wound with ointment as necessary, until it is healed. And if the abscess holds one fat night, then cut into according to this form, above the long hair; and throw away all your lint, and scrape off from all sides, and put all your care in drawing out what is there; and if the artery makes it contrary, then do what I told you after. And likewise do with the abscess if it is stony, and of cutting and curing just as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the cutting above the stony and moist abscess is easier, because they are full of blood. And if there are some of these abscesses on the head or where there is no moisture, and one of them was an abscess that I cut open on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess just like a dry, rough, and white stone, and it could not be broken; and if anyone had done anything to it, they would have made as much a wound as from a stone. In other abscesses coming on the head, except for those that come to the heads of children and to the roots of ears, the opening should always be at its most dependent place, in order to let the pus issue; and cure them as it is necessary.
des scrophules	of scrofulae
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times these abscesses occur in the neck and under the armpits and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are many and are intertwined with one another. And each scrofula is properly contained within its own case, just like the boils and abscess of the head, as we have said; and the likenesses of these scrofulae are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malicious ones that will not obey health. Therefore, when you see one with a good disposition to be touched, and it has the appearance of the color of the body, and is mute on each side, and is not inflamed towards the neck or artery or conduit, and is not deeply seated; then it is necessary to cut it open above, and scrape off each part, and make the two lips of the boil as lint, if you need it, just as we have said in abscesses of the head; and take little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, nor let the spatula slip away, so that your hands may escape, and do not see too far ahead, lest you do not cut what you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you finish, then put vitriol or some powders that retain blood in the wound, and stop the bleeding; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. And when the blood has stopped flowing, then return to your work until you have completed it; then examine whether any small scrofulae remain, and cut them open and scrape them off. And if there is a great vein in the root of the scrofula, then it is not necessary that you cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread, and let it fall away without harm; then apply the wound to old cotton dipped in Egyptian oil, and cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then it is necessary that you gather up the two lips of the wound and sew them together now, since there is no longer any superfluity due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand how to cut at its root and draw it out, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulae that hold superfluity, perforate where it appears to be moist; and perforate it thus, dependent, then apply tentatives with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is remaining of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then cure it with ointment promoting flesh, until it is healed.
de squinance	of swelling
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who have swelling, it is necessary that the incision of the throat which is called "epiglote" be avoided; and one does not make use of these things for this reason, because all the veins and the plexus of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the plexus, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the peril that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary then, when we want to cut the epiglote, that we cut it below three circles or four small cuts across, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the syphac's cut, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and that it is suitable for the section of the epiglote so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to all the lint, then cuts the boil so that it comes to the channel; and avoids the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut open the syphac, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the flemmula of the channel which jumps forth through the broken ligament and by the loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour is passed from which one doubts strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with care, and sew it all up without cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until they are healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	I also said that one should not do this just until the throat is completely obstructed, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the fault is about to fail.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut off the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and therefore the ancients command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it is passed in three days or four.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal it, until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a maiden take one knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut off part of the channels of the privy parts.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to cure her, and found her just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and knew well that she had not cut the vein nor guided the flow except for the throat, and the blood was flowing out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and healed her until she was cured.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and it happened to the maiden that she recovered her voice, and returned to her normal condition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the thick throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the greenish-yellow color, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; or the natural one has no trickery.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental one is according to two manners, from which one is similar to fat in us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there should be fear, and it is not suitable to make fires except in the one who is small, and he tests and searches every intimate thing.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it just like a small lump of fat, and cannot be drained in any way, if you cut it, as one cuts flesh, and treat it with all its folds, if there is not.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search thoroughly, and heal it as is fitting, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	of the flesh.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many kinds of flesh that I will describe all their likenesses.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is fitting that I say the whole difference that is between flesh and pus.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that pus is warm and feverish, holding on until the ebullition has passed, and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the flesh there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains a sac which is its own pouch and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a yellowish color, and becomes big.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to two likenesses, either fatty or moist, and very much of color are as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the flesh, that you examine and inquire first through all the instruments that are called "intimate", according to what its form will be or according to the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring into the abscesses of flesh is that you take or more moist liquid than you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers in and out, as much as you know that the instruments have pierced the skin, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the instrument, and take heed in what it jumps forth.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moist discharge is clear, whatever its color may be, then treat it as I said for other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the instrument no moist discharge comes, know that it is fatty, then treat it thus: take pincers and gently scrape off each side and watch the spot where it lies, until you bring it to a healthy state with the flesh.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot bring it to a healthy state, then cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, the flesh will return many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if even a small piece remains and the blood grieves you, then apply a wound with some corrosive powders, and bind the wound, and put on soothing things for the hot abscess, and heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the flesh is large, then sew up the two lips of the wound, and heal it with those things that produce flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein beats against you or another thing is contrary, or if you are in a hurry and apply the liquid of vitriol, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound has purged, and the ebullition of blood subsides; then return to cutting what remains of the flesh.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Behold the forms of the intimate instruments, and they are of three kinds: great, middle, and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, to search for abscesses of fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles with which one sews sorcery, and they are made of citrine bronze, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are worth more, and are more proven to find black lead to search for abscesses of fistula.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and they are of three kinds: great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the probes are of many likenesses, as you see here: great, middle, and small; and there are probes that have two abscesses of three kinds also.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and there are probes that have three abscesses, and they are also of three kinds; and there are probes that have two abscesses, and single probes with one abscess only, and they are all of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The tip of these probes is cutting, and there are some that do not cut at all except from one side, which we use to scrape off the flesh, so that we do not cut the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and from these internal things are the swellings responded in bandages, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of abscesses;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of three kinds: great, small, and middle-sized, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one does not use more than a third part in a well-shaped limb, such as legs, arms, and breasts, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling the skins of figs, according to this shape, with which one stops blood;
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed sometimes in the place that heals by cutting open veins and arteries, and sometimes retorted according to this great form;
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like women's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, should observe according to this form of the above line up to g;
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicinal ointment, then join the two lips of the wound at the seam, and heal it until it is sound;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and if the breast inclines downward and is shriveled because of its size like it happens in women, then cut it into two panels above, by two similar incisions;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that the one is joined to the other at the end of each, so that the longer line contains the shorter according to this form, from this line b to line g;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and all that is necessary for the cure, until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the bleeding of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it be until the remaining and fat are softened, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	This abscess that comes from under the armpit is a type of hard scrofula or if it has nodules, and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and cure it with ointment suitable for this purpose, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like a scrofula, then cut it as we have said in incisions of scrofula, and if the wound yields pus, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above is swollen, then many times abscesses come, and it also happens with the vein that is inflated and abscessed;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows this when it is because of the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it in your hands, then you feel one lump; and when it is because of the vein, then there appears to be nothing going away from it;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is folly to cut this abscess, and especially when it is under the armpits and arms and neck and in many other places, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and also for that which is at the head, and in that which is inflated from an artery, make an incision above the long skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then perform the incision as one would for a tumor, and carefully separate the artery from its surrounding tissue, until it is fully exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then pass under it a needle, and make it pierce until the other side, and restrain the artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I have instructed you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then prick the place between the two ties with a trocar until the blood flows out that is in it, and be relieved of the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then apply the treatment that discharges pus, until the tie breaks.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure it with ointment suitable for this purpose, until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is due to the swelling of the vein, then it is necessary that you stain with your hand as much of the abscess as possible to all the skin.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then pass the needle under the place that you are holding with your hand, and make it pierce, and there will be a doubled thread, so that you can pull it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then tie the abscess, just as I have told you, or with the string of one part to two parts of the thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the threads will not come out far enough, then rebend another needle to all four threads under all of the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and bind the threads in three places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut the abscess until the excess flows out, then cut away the excess skin and leave what is tied.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nails
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just like abscesses come in the artery and vein when they are hardened or due to excessive effort, or similar things, so too do abscesses come at the nails when they are worn out or due to great labor, and similar causes.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often at the joints and in the hands and all places where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the flesh, and it occurs in many dispositions without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one strains strongly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not in the deepest part of the body, but just below the skin.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and it swells up from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor above or below, and that which is in the joints should not be cut with iron: perhaps there would be contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and that which is on the head or forehead, make the skin at the eyebrow.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, then hold it with a pair of forceps and cut it in its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is large, then suspend it on a hook, and flay, then bone and reassemble the wound to the seam, and maintain the care until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of great swellings hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Never happens in any part except the belly and not elsewhere at all, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by its resemblance to those, and has subtle roots, and a thick head; and there are small and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw one man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split open, and immediately began to emit moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6. The work of incision is such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the flesh is white and moist and of subtle root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if you cut into the spatula-like part large, and the fire cautery is in your presence. For when cutting comes often too great outflow of blood, and if the blood overflows, then hasten to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient fainting and fearful of the incision with iron, then take one well-made thread of linen, and bind the flesh as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain it, and do not cease to tighten the linen thread until the flesh is cut, and take great care by this means; and if the roots are large, then be afraid to cut further into the belly, but you can well cut half.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize it so that it does not relapse; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut into the flesh which is of a foul color and poor sensation and little regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an infected abscess, and I will come to the treatment of chancre later after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil is full
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the boil comes from a wound or incision in syphilis, and is on the belly and in some of the boils, as it happens in other routures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from inflammation;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is from the routure of syphilis and by the issue of pus, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with diverse issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press it at its mouth it swells up, and then returns, and by chance it becomes bound, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and through strong work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, nor does it resist; and if it is due to blood, then it opens by these signs, the abscess being large and hard, and fixed according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to inflammation, then it is sore when touched, and the work is such that you look to see if the appearance is from the blood of an artery, or vein, or inflammation.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the boil, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his breath, and be stretched out straight, then sign over the entire abscess.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then command him to sit quietly between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go around the place where you have signed all over the spatula-like part.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then cut off half of the abscess above the great incision.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it around with a strong thread or a firmly tied silk cord, and let the knot be securely tied.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then work on the half of the abscess that is extended above the tie, and put your finger index on it, and cut into the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it taken by the tie, then untie it, and push the intestine further out of the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the boil, then take hold of it with the hook, and cut off the excessiveness;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein is against you, then go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads on them, and insert the two needles through what you have done in a crosswise manner as if you were piercing.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then tighten the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see fit, remove the needles, and leave the place until it can heal, and take care of the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you cut it when it is subtle and can heal, then treat it as needed, and cover the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as needed, and sew it shut.
dou chancre	of the chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division, the likenesses of chancre, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid iron treatment; and we say that chancre breaks out in the armpits, and great caution is needed in its cure, and the ancient ones said that when chancre is in a place where it can be removed like the chancre that is in the armpits, and in the groin, and in similar places, one should completely remove it when it begins; and when it is large and old, then it is not necessary to approach it, for I have never seen anyone cured of it, nor has anyone been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place or can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient with some black bile; then make him well if he has manifest repletion, then prepare the patient for the operation; then give your hooks or chancre to the boil, and cover it from all sides, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow completely, and inspect the wound carefully with your hand or something, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein is contrary to you, then cauterize it so that the blood stops flowing; then treat him with another treatment until he is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have said in the division, the likenesses of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the treatment that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is only lit; and one should not touch iron in these two likenesses: namely, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you are treating this likeness of dropsy which is called "eclites" by medicines, and the treatment does not benefit, then look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease than dropsy, as in all cases, including solution of the bowels and similar things; so do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient with strong vigor, and he only has dropsy without other disease, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should work thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Have the patient sit straight on your hands, and the attendants press the belly out with water at the lowest part of the back, then take the spiculae spinous according to this form: It should be cut into two parts up to a point, yet not so sharp that it can reach the intestine when you insert it, and not cause harm.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: if so, it is necessary that you cut into them three fingers to the right below the navel; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel three fingers; and if it is due to the kidneys, then it will be on the right, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not flow to that weak place.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and insert it, and lift your hand to all the spiculae spinous between the skin and the sacral bone just as in shaving up to the length of a fingernail or slightly more; then pierce the sacral bone until the spiculae come to the seventh rib, and that is the place for water, then treat it further, and insert this instrument which is the form: And it resembles a subtle silver chain, and it is made of lead or lighter material, and has in the lower part one small pit; and on one side three pits, and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the keys are cut like a feather, and that is the form of the incision which writers call the pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top of it is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to the water, you should now pour what is above onto the instrument; empty then one third or two thirds, for if you empty more than is necessary at this hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he falls faint, or approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	But empty it according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now because the key that stops the pit on the sacral bone, which I spoke of, should be pierced in this manner; then begin again with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and treat the water with a small quantity.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do this every day, and take care not to leave more than a small amount of water. And if you doubt the patient and leave too much water, it will cause heat in the cure of the grave or sand, and by sweating or bathing and exposure to the sun, and he will become thirsty; and treat him with desiccative medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach, liver, and spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stoppage of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	There is no child born who does not have a pit in the penis, or the pit is small, or it is not in its place. If so, then it is necessary to pierce each spiculae spinous very subtly according to this form: then put one small plug of pitch into the pit and tie it up and hold it thus for three days or four; and when he needs to make urine, take out the plug and let him urinate, and then replace it; and by chance it is not necessary, because the urine that comes out does not allow the plug to remain closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those whose pit is small are treated with pitch plugs, as we have said, and it will expand. Those who do not have the pit in its place are wounded, because no one is born with the pit at the top of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis high; and they cannot evacuate because the matter cannot come out to the edge, and that is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way to do this is that the patient lies on his back, then lifts up the head of the penis and cuts it off like a pen nib, so that the pit opens in the middle as it should; and take care not to let blood come out which often happens, and if it does, stop it with what stops bleeding, and treat the wound until he is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of pustules on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these pustules come on the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; it is necessary that you take them to a subtle onion, cut them off and clean all, then apply wet cotton in Egyptian ointment; then treat with divine ointment until he is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pustule is malignant, with foul color and stench, it is necessary that you apply a cautery to it. When you have cut it off, and the pustule is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the pustule that is inside first; and when it is secured, then treat what is outside. Because if you treat them together, the head of the penis will not be assured that it will not be pierced, and corruption will come to its tip and to the groin; therefore it is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from the rind of green pears and vetches, then treat with other treatments until he is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if bleeding comes, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterization is good for two dispositions together: namely, for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert a plug of pitch into the urethra, and have the patient urinate through it; and when the skin has been softened at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or has been wounded or abscessed, then it is necessary to shave it with a sharp instrument, until the bonds are loosened, and the head of the penis be delivered from all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	and if it is a grievous thing to do this, then it is necessary that you shave with a spiculae spinous a small part of the head of the penis and skin; then remove well between two, and put a thin cloth of linen damp in cold water, so that it does not harden again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the removal of continuity like other wounds; although when we do this work of our own will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the most gentle for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient people did not circumcise their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around one inch, with great force, and with all a new instrument; so it was done when there were two skins, and by chance if one cuts above and leaves that below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the wound recovers, and there is double pain, and the purification of the skin around the inch is not secure at the tip of the member; and the purification of the ulcer by chance escapes the iron, and the work corrupts, and many times it happens thus that they do not need purification and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the purification which is done with force to all the thread of the bond I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, so it cuts equally in one whole stroke, but that the thread be well strained around the skin; and be the manner of the first work such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are not doing anything more than binding the thread around the penis only, and then let him relax in all ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then make it stay between your hands straight, and reposition the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and bring it up as far as the head of the penis is; then clean it well from the filth that is assembled there, then tie the signet with a double thread, then tie it below one piece to another string; and hold it at two strings by the second ligature to the pouch and to the thumb index, and cut between the two strings, then lift the cut above hastily and bring the head of the penis.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and top a drapery glued with an egg yolk cooked together with rose water, tempered with oil of good and fresh roses, and leave it like that until the next day, and cure him with another remedy until he is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces for purification is this: the two heads are held and cut, and they are equally great as the hands.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the purification is when the knife bleeds inside the incision; therefore it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the lump makes an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it takes three days, and that which is below the penis is swollen, then let it be so until the abscess is appeased, and lightly scrape off; then cut it as you can move, and take care of the part of the penis, for nothing will harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the limb with sudden wound powder, which we have said to treat about powders, and if you cut too much with the knife, and it goes above, then it will not harm; then cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	of the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to opilation of stone, or congealed blood, or bowel, or flesh tumor, or similar things, which we have said in the division;
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to stone which is lodged or caught at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent down on his knees; and his feet are placed on the back, and he stretches his belly from the part above the back, and constrains the patient's loins as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constrained to express the stone above, whereby the urine is released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", whereby there is this form: and it is made of subtle silver hair, like the feathers of a bird; and it has a handle one and a half palms long, and it is subtle at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie it at the head with a piece of wool or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the siringue; and cut off the surplus wool and insert it just up to the head of the siringue, then anoint the siringue with oil or butter and hen's egg, and make the patient sit on a stool, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and lukewarm water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then place the siringue lightly into the penis, as far as it comes to the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the buttocks; then insert the siringue forward just up to the bladder, and let the patient feel come as far as the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless the guide or conductor is twisted; then pull the thread all along the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and begin again with the siringue until the bladder is empty, and ease the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When ulcerations or blood comes into the bladder, or putridity is assembled, and you see it distilled in water and medicine, then make use of all the instruments called "clepsedre", and that is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed and has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the lips are shaped so that the medicine flows out such that it stops well at the end of the penis without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture and pour when needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you see your medicines going into the bladder, put the head of the syringe into the moisture, and draw out the liquid that is inside; then you will draw out the moisture through the syringe, and then push it hard back in; if the moistures go in, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and this is the form of the subtle syringe with which one catheterizes the bladder: thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or copper, and the key is higher up; and below that is one sheath or the strings fall; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you see catheterizing the bladder into it, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and warm one piece of that moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the syringe into the penis, then strain your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has been released, so that the patient feels that that moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	et if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly around; then insert one strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a tile, and put what you see of oil and moisture and water inside, and tie in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing by hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the ways of stone, and extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone that is engendered by rains, and all signs, and which stone one should work on with a chisel; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it to you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder happens more often in children, and it's a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it appears as hair, and makes the patient's penis hurt, and makes him pee many times, and then becomes inflamed; and often the foundations are broken; and is lighter the healing of children until they have four years, and is much more grievous in old men, and is for those who are middle-aged, between youth and old age; and is the cure easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders the seeking out of the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take hold of the patient by the feet, and lift him up and move him downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from above; then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands be below his hips, so that the bladder is entirely inclining down; then search for it and touch it inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in its place, then hasten now to cut above the stone. And if it does not fall at first touch, moisten your two fingers with oil from your left hand, if the patient is young, or with middle oil, if the patient is middle-aged; and insert them into its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your two fingers, then bring it to the neck of the bladder; then press above on your two fingers, and push it out at the back where you see cutting.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out his right hand above the stones, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the stones in the part where one makes the incision; then he should insert the spatula carefully, so that this is the shape.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make the incision between what is between the stones and the foundation, not in the middle but next to the left side of the naevus; and be straight above the stone, and your two fingers should be at the foundation, and the incision should be so that it is wide behind, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	by chance the press may be so that the stone which is in the foundation jumps forth with little effort; and know that there are stones which have angles, and margins: if it is difficult to get out; and those which are below, resembling a ball, and rounded, from which the issue is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	To that stone which has angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it doesn't jump out, you must strain above with the forceps that are like a file at the top, to slowly draw out the stone so that it won't escape; or you put below one instrument with a subtle curved point at the top; and if you can't manage it thus, then enlarge one small hole, and if the blood flows forth, then constrict it with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	and if there is more than one stone, then first bring out the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then draw it forth, and the small ones afterwards if there are several. And if it is very large, you must split it, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes forth again where the wound cannot close; but still strive to draw out or break into pieces with forceps, until you have drawn it out in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have completed your work, then apply the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and compress it, and place on top a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot aposteme; then resupply the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, then arise very well the wound's appearance in oil and water; then treat the patient with diaphanicon ointment and basilicon ointment, until they are healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot apostemes come to the wound and corroisons, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained there by this means, so that it does not flow with the urine: then put your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and ruin it.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	then lift the wound with water and oil and silk, and help him in all the ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works that you do to cure him, you bind his two hips together, and assemble the medicines on the bed.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small and it is in the urethral canal of the penis and fixed inside, and urine cannot come out; then cure him as I said before, by cutting repeatedly, or excuse yourself from cutting for this cure. I have already proved it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod according to this shape and be fixed at three angles in one piece:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take one thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the rod into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod in your hand slowly, piece by piece, as much as you can pierce the stone from the other side; then soon the urine will come forth, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. It breaks soon, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread under the stone and another above, then make the penis come to a stop at the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and loosen the thread, and purify the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure him until he is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of stone from women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Often it happens that stone is lodged in women, and if it does happen, it is a grievous cure, and it is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who will uncover herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of surgery; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more inward than the stone of the man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if necessity summons you to do so, it is necessary that you take a wise woman who knows well, and find her one who can help, and if you cannot find such, then seek out one chaste and subtle mirror; and the present one, an old woman well-versed in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command concerning the examination of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and look very well to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to push her buttocks or fundament and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, then force it down under her fundament, and command her to push her fundament or with the patient, and gently press her left hand on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then it is necessary to move the stone gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, where it will be made apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your hand above or below the stone, and let the cut be as small as possible.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then push the right side of the cut, if you feel the stone so far down in the wound that the stone can then come out freely, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and great, rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those with ridges; thus know their likenesses to know how to proceed.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the blood rises, put vitriol powder on it, and hold it there for an hour until the blood is stanched; then return to your work, until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men to aid you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	and if the blood rises, and it's from the artery that was cut, put powder on the spot and strain of tents and bandages, and don't start again, and leave the stone alone and don't touch it at all, lest the patient might die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is assuaged and the wounds have settled, then return to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshly hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramace aquouse is nothing else than an accumulation of moisture or white sac, which is below the skin of the scrotum that contains the testicle; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the testicle, if one thinks it is another testicle; and it's the skin of the scrotum between the white sac that we have said; and these things only happen when there is no other cause.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this ramace is due to weakness that comes to the testicles, and it spreads that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it's declining to yellow, or it's without red, or black, or white as water, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is in the white sac that we have said, then it is an abscess of the testicles, or a long pouch like the figure of an egg, and does not open up the testicle, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper membrane, then it is an abscess with a part of the testicle, and for that reason one thinks it's another testicle.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sac, then it's easy to feel; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, try to examine it carefully, for that is how the form appears as we have said before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, what comes after the examination, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure it with iron, then it is necessary that the patient be nourished according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then place a pillow on his back, on something slightly high, and put many cloths underneath him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right side, and extend the rod to one of the two sides of the scrotum.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatula left-hand, and cut the skin of the testicles between the long part and the finger-like projection, and make your incision entirely straight as you divide the skin of the testicles just up to the white sac, and scrape out subtly according to one's power.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	then pierce the white sac plain with water to a small opening, and extract all the water, and then put in your fingers, and stretch the white sac upwards; and do not touch the scrotum, but only the white sac; cut it all or in pieces similarly on one side, so that if you don't cut it well enough, the water will come back.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the testicle jumps out of your work, then put it back in its place when you have completed the work on the white sac; then bring together the two leaves of the scrotum with a suture, and cure it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	and if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, doubting the decoration of blood; then cut the scrotum to all the suspended parts, and extract the testicle, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the water is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two ramices; then cut the other part similarly to what you did with the first one, and dry the blood, and put a linen cloth soaked in rose oil on the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another linen cloth soaked in wine and oil on top of it, and place it over the two testicles, and cover it with doubled cloths, and tie it up to all the string that is according to this form:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two cloths and stuff them with linen rags according to this shape and let them be sewn together in the belt of the breeches, and one of the ends will take up on the foundation just to the back, and the other at the finger-like projection; and the other end will go over the two shoulders, and all will be assembled into a knot in the buckle of the breech.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and at times medicine is made with this ramic of cautery in place of iron tailoring and it is that you take one subtle cultellaire cautery, and cut the skin over the scrotum, and be heated as we have said, so that the white scarabaeus beetle shell containing water is uncovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	so take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white scarabaeus beetle shell with needles, and scrape it off with a subtle hot cautery;
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And cut it in all ways that you can, until you have removed everything; and take care that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more helpful; and beware of hemorrhage of blood, and beware as much as the works of iron.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing else opposes you, or abscesses or hemorrhage of blood or other thing, then cure what opposes you, according to what is said beforehand.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its unpleasantness, then offer perfumery, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well assured by the signs that we have said, the remedy is laid.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	so sit the patient on a low stool; then pierce the abscess in the lower part of the scrotum over the entire wide area, and make the perforation as long as the body; and let the holes be large, so that all the water can flow freely.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining water flow out, then cure it until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and if the white cloth does not allow water to come out at the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you insert a pin or the instrument used for draining the waters of dropsy, as we have described before; and enlarge the wound slightly, and know that the water will return, and be assembled after six months or thereabouts, and when it is assembled as before, thus the patient's days will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the section of this remedy there are many fears, therefore it seems to me that it is better left unused.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and similar things about the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and indeed to the testicles; and this is due to many causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by bitter superfluity and ague, which spreads to the testicles, or from blows;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and does not find any pain, and it is a grievous abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance is a grievous and piercing abscess, of a foul color, and at times comes from no artery, or from an inflamed vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is due to no artery, then it is known by the hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it does not seem right that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	He who is made from inflamed vein is known by its disposition to the expression of touching with the fingers.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can well make the incision on this appearance and on the other parts.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the skin of the testicles, then lift the egg upwards, and scrape away the white scarabaeus beetle shell, and deliver the suspensory ligament from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already bound with these new characters, then it is necessary that you loosen the egg and cut the skin.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is hard at the scarabaeus beetle shell or in what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that tension and cut it again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the scar is at the back, then it is necessary that you cut it all and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, then dress the wound with moist wool in rose oil and wine, and then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess enveloped in a covering resembling a berry, with the softening of the testicles.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and if the patient grievously complains when he walks.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the cure for this disease is just as fearful as the one before.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised stool, then put the suspensory ligament of the testicles down to your fingers.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	to all the vessels that are close to the penis, and tighten the master cord, and stretch them forth.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut into the scrotum with a wide, sharp knife in the middle of the vessels, until they are uncovered.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape off each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it at the first point where the vein came out, and tie it again at the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then cut them in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then dress the wound as you would other wounds that open up a bowel, so that no vessel bleeds that nourishes one of the testicles.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for by this, no harm comes, and if all the vessels come forth, it is necessary to remove the testicles from all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the route of the scarabaeus beetle shell
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The effects of this remedy are by the section that comes from the scarabaeus beetle shell or the extension above the belly in the part of the groin, therefore the intestines descend into that route to one of the testicles.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this route is either of the scarabaeus beetle shell or of the extension from it, and comes in these two ways due to many causes: either from blows, jumping, braying, or lifting a heavy burden, and by similar things.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is due to the extension of the scarabaeus beetle shell are that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are equal all the way to the bottom, because the scarabaeus beetle shell presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the abscess, which makes sudden pain come to the beginning, and there are diverse appearances of apostemes under the skin near, and it is because of the issue of the intestine and the body at the end of the abscess.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines come down with the intestine, and are retained there, and make the patient suffer great pain, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron cures one should beware, because of this one must avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of work is that you instruct the patient to push the intestine back into its place within the wound if it can fit.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then be placed on his neck between your hands and lift up his hips.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch the skin above and cut out all the skin of the scrotum from the long part.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then push inside the leaves of the skin according to what you need to open the wound, and make them such that the bone can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape off the abscess that is under the skin of the scrotum until the white abscess core is exposed from all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then put your two fingers in the place where the scrotum is, between the white abscess core that is under the skin of the testicle and between the second abscess.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and draw out what is behind the testicle, and between the second abscess; and then move your right hand into the skin of the scrotum, and stretch the white abscess upward to your left hand, and lift up the testicle to all the abscess towards the side.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant to stretch the testicle up high and loosen what is behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and search with your hands if the intestine is wrapped around or encircling the white abscess core, and if you find anything, then push it into the belly below.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten threads, and push it into the back part of the abscess, which is after the skin of the scrotum; after the testicle, then cut off the strings that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the abscess, which we have said is under the skin of the scrotum, with a strong ligament from two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the strings around each other and tie them together from two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, lest an abscess should not grow.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the ligament above according to the first long ligament, two fingers of that one, and after these two ligaments leave the abscess which is under the skin of the scrotum one finger's width.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after all the rest according to the rounded shape that the testicle bears; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the scrotum, as long as the wound closes and the bowels, just as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply moist linen soaked in oil to the wounds and put it on the abscess, and then apply the ligament that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white abscess core that we have said is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood decoration.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this happens many times, and leave the ligament until it falls away by itself; and if it does not fall off soon, then be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it falls.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	(Note: This appears to be a heading or title, rather than a sentence to translate.)
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this vein I never saw anyone who dared to perform the iron cure.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients say that it is done in this way as if the vein were a bunch of grapes, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after cutting into them slightly below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut in the middle and cure the abscess of those who work, until the vessels bleed; and then cure it as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Sometimes comes a rupture in the groin, just as we have said, and opens up the flesh; and none of the intestines come down to the scrotum, and if some do come down, it is little, and repair all hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and yet if it remains too long in this place, the wound or abscess grows, until the intestines come down.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens because of the extension of the abscess which is in the groin, just as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and swollen the flesh and opens.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the cure is done by cauterization, just as we have said before; and sometimes it is not cured with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and it is that the patient lies upon his back between your hands, then cut off the swollen flesh of the rupture from the wide part according to the measure of three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the abscess that is under the skin which ensues, and take the rag and put it on the wound appearing from the abscess.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it deep into the belly, then cut off the two wounds appearing from the abscess on top of the rag, and cut one and the other.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	and then take out the top of the rag, and do not cut off the abscess or extend the testicle or anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of the rectum.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the strings, have him and cure the wound, until it is completely healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The abscess is constricted and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more helpful in this wound, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	(Note: This appears to be a heading or title, rather than a sentence to translate.)
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men because the contents inside are softened, and it can be seen; and it is necessary when one wants to treat it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and cuts off the soft skin on top of the natural skin; then assemble the two lips into a seam, and if you see, cut off the excess skin from the softened skin at three or four seams; then cut between the seams, and cure it just like other wounds, until it is completely healed, and the thread bleeds.
dou chastrement	(Note: This appears to be a heading or title, rather than a sentence to translate.)
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Now, you should know that chastisement is ordained in our law, and because of this, I would have liked not to speak of it in this book; and it is only necessary for two purposes: one is that the mirrors may respond when someone asks them what to do about a wound, and how to cure it; and the other is because we often need to chastise certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts. I say then that chastisement is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Of hermaphrodites there are according to two ways of men: the one is that between the two testicles it appears as much as the figure of nature in a woman, with hair and sometimes urinating. And another way is in women, having on the finger as much as a member and two testicles. And the cure for man and woman is that you cut off the adjacent parts and cure them as other wounds; in the second manner, the men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles have no cure.
de la tentigene	Of the tenia
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	The tenia is a worm attached to the natural part as much as it is too ugly to see; and some women have as many as one hand's worth, and that is the cure. It is necessary that you tie back the superfluity of the tenia with your hand or onyx, and cut it lightly; and do not go too far in cutting, lest bleeding come from it, then proceed to another cure until it is healed; and there is another worm that grows at the mouth of the uterus, and fills it, and perhaps jumps forth, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and for this reason they called it "cow's disease" in ancient times. It is necessary that you cut it off as we have said for the tenia, and cure it until it is healed.
de erratique	Of the hare
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	The hare is when the woman's natural form is not clear, or if the womb is small; and it is caused by birth or disease that has come to be; or it is due to a worm attached, or subtle or thick abscess, and is done in the uterus, sides, or below, or wherever it may be; and prevents conception, childbirth, and perhaps also having flowers; and knowledge of this is through examination of the belly. If the swelling is close by, then you should hasten to it or go there. If it is a subtle abscess, and it is close to two books, then hasten quickly: take your two hands and join them together, and have the woman sit on her back, spreading her legs; then the two books will be formed, until the subtle abscess has been lanced, and the swelling subsides; then take linen, moisten it in oil, and place it on the swelling, and have the woman stay at home each day, so that she cannot sweat. And if the abscess is hard and thick, you should cut it off with a spatula similar to a mirt leaf. If the swelling is of born flesh, then suspend it from an onyx and cut it; and use medicines to stop bleeding, such as henbane, dragon's blood, incense, and other remedies; then apply a wide bandage of flax so that the wound cannot heal; and thus it should be done long enough, and then apply a linen tent; then be cured by other cures until it is healed. And when born flesh comes in the uterus, you should cut it off according to this manner, unless it is an enchanted aposteme. For at the enchanted aposteme that is in the uterus, one must not touch with fire.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that burst without warning, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hardened; and we have said in the division what their similarities and signs are, and I will say here those which receive a cure. I say that hemorrhoids and hardness, when they are pierced in the uterus and there is no feeling, except for heat by fire. Those which are at the mouth of the uterus can be felt, and those can be cured. It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, and then extract the hardened part with tongs, and cut it off at its roots, and then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as henbane and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then soak her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding comes, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomaceous bark and gallnuts and similar things, and then take barley flour and mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster on her back. And if it stays, that is good. If not, apply leeches to the back and breasts until feeling heat; then take linen, moisten it in plantain or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the swelling. And when the abscess subsides, cure the swelling with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to a rough head, and it must be cut off as I have said for hardness; and then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Of abscesses of the uterus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Of abscesses of the uterus
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It is necessary first to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs when you see the woman hastening downwards, and desiring to give birth; then the child hastens to come out quickly; then learn that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue is under its head, and the secondine with it; and when you see these signs, then it is necessary to press gently on her belly so that the child comes out soon; for when it descends above its head, then the secondine is with it, and the cord is freed from its superfluities by good cleansing; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes on its feet, and comes forth from the body or from the shoulders, or it may convert on its neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should help her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out above its head in natural issue, and the woman labors grievously, and her virtues are weak, then make her sit on a stool, or have women hold her; and mix her nature with oil or fenugreek, and then give the midwife to drink between her breasts the little spatula-shaped mixture whose form is this:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and cut the secondine, and tie it to her finger as long as the moistors that are inside come out; and take hold of the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to catheterize the woman with fenugreek mixed with oil of sesame; then make her take hold and estrange of condiment, and keep her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child is out. And if both hands come out, then it is necessary that you tie them gently piece by piece; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up; then remove the stool from the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall down; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then tie the hands to the knife that is before mentioned, and extract the child, and tie it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	Of the issue of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes out on its feet, it is necessary to lift it up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it piece by piece until it is even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take one foot and stretch it piece by piece.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can it jump as far as the thighs, then command her to take hold, and make her estrange with condiment;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps further, if God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not further as we have said, then turn it piece by piece until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easily so.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come further as we have said, then take muscillaige of aloes, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all together in one mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put it on the woman's nature inside and outside with this ointment,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then make her sit in warm water up to the waist.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened below, then make her a collar of mirre, and put it on her, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on a stool, then make her estrange and hold her mouth and nose, and gently take hold of her belly, for the child is now jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the issue of the child between its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, then put the midwife's hands piece by piece.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then be careful on its neck, and let the feet hang down below, and be laid on a bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold its hands piece by piece, and then take hold of the hands on the belly, and remove the cushions below, until she is prepared downwards.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, then take its feet and shape them well, then shape the belly upwards, then put your hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and help the child piece by piece; and command the woman to take hold until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	Of the issue of the child which comes forth with one arm hanging down
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman get up and walk.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and straighten out her legs well.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then administer the muscillaige that I have told you about.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a stool, and study how to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and help the child according to its natural shape, and make her estrange, and command her to take hold until the child comes out further.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Of the issue of the child on its neck, and having spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the midwife take her hand, then turn it piece by piece, and help it gently.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, then put on the natural muscillaige of aloes and oil, as we have said, then command her to move piece by piece.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, then make her sit on a stool, and command her to take hold; and make her estrange.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of the same manner for all the secondine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes out in this way to all the secondine, then cut the secondine at your finger, until the moistors are empty.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child turns its face and neck upwards, then cut it from the chin, so that it is not retained, and the child dies.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside, until you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to take hold at times:
adonques si istra legierement.	Then all will go smoothly.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an unusual thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are an unusual thing, and do not live unless piece by piece.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied, and are deprived by the sinew which divides them, which is connected to the chin.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they come out naturally as one under, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	If they heal well, then follow the treatment as we have said, and be subtle in the handling, and quickly and lightly do what she does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus as it is worth for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	At times they are formed in the womb, that is to say, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of an infant according to the measurement of the wise and glorious.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is necessary that the midwife knows all this, because by chance similar things happen to her;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	so do according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman after a stillborn or miscarried child, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained to manual labor;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	so it is necessary that you know whether the woman has a healthy constitution, and whether she has had an accident or fears death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	so it is necessary that the woman be positioned on her back, and have her knees inclined downward, and her legs lifted.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the servant should support her with two parts, or bind her to the bed so that she is not treated in the descent of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then wipe the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with althea and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and mixtures.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then fill the womb lightly, then take one lead or fill the lacunar openings that are suitable for this purpose.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take heed if the child is apparelled to descend upon its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if the lacunar openings are in his eyes or throat or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the descent is on the feet, then take hold of or pinch and tie the surrounding ligaments.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that you hold the lacunar opening in your right hand, and place the cord between your left thumb and index finger, and fill your entire hand lightly, and insert the lacunar opening into one of those places which we have said, until it comes to be empty.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and that is the form of the lacunar opening.
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then insert it opposite another lacunar opening, or the third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other, so that the lacunar openings are opened up, and let the lacunar openings be held open, as is its form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part remains, then anoint the midwife's fingers with oil and fill that part, and treat the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if there remains none, then put this lacunar opening or another one higher up, and do so until it all comes out fully.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back due to constriction.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	so it is necessary that you envelop on a cloth, until it all comes out.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then wrap it in the joint of the foot or at the heel, and thus it is necessary that you do the same in the other hand, and with two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's head is large and it is narrow in the issue, or has a sharp-angled skull assembled.
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	so it is necessary that you fill the spine-shaped bone between your thumbs, and make the head and extract the sharp angle.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you round it with the instrument called "almidach", by which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus do the same if the child has a large natural head.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then treat the bones with pincers.
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the head springs forward and it is strained at the forehead, so that they are split, until the moles which are in the issue come forth.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if she cannot come out, then cut her into pieces to the extent that you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is inflated in the belly or under the ribs, so it is necessary that you make a hole until the moles run.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is also light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is narrow in the belly or at the ribs, so it is necessary that you extract it to one cloth wrapped around your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and make the belly or the ribs, until the moles which are there run.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other members are removed, and the head remains,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	so anoint the midwife's hand with oil right up to the mouth of the womb.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then fill one or two lacunar openings, and treat it further.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the womb is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come there, then it does not seem necessary to work.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	rather it seems necessary to administer wet and greasy things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the administrator should apply ointments, and put them in softening and moistening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its side, and you can put it even, then administer what we have said in the living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one cannot, then cut him into pieces and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, then administer what we have said in hot abscesses that come to the womb.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if hemorrhages of blood come, then put it in restraining water, and administer other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb had borne a stillborn child, then she consulted another one on top of that, and rejected the stillbirth of the other one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came to her mouth and swelled so much that it burst open, and began great trouble.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not find a way to heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied ointment of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very astonished, because the womb has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	So I thought that it was the bones of a stillborn child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I cleaned the wound, and extracted many bones, until the woman was in a better state.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman lived a long time thus, and suddenly a small piece of bone fell from her.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I do not recall this chapter except because, when the master finds a strange thing, he knows how to take care of it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	of returning the joints to their place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the form of the prescriptor, in which we write books; and to two returns for two joints of two lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the combs should be more subtle than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and should be the mouth of the wood one and a half fingers wide, and the edge of the trees one finger, and as long as one and a half palms.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two lines should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two adjustments are fitted into the mouth of the joint to open when one turns the two combs.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of wood, ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of pincers.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and should have two joints two adjustments, just as you see, one palm long and one and a half fingers wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see the joint open with all the instrument, make the woman sit on one footstool, her feet stretched out and her legs apart.
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then put the two adjustments together into the joint, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand with all the instrument, just as you have done with pincers evenly, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the joint, until the patient does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all mounted and have multiple forms; and when the surgeons have prepared them, the work is done more quickly and the height of men increases according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained at childbirth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her urine, and then make her pass water with condiments, and hold your hands on the mouth and navel.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she passes it because of this, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If this is not the case, then take a pot, make a perforation or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the joint, such as chamomile, rue, anise, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all these herbs or some of them should be cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put one end of the pot or perforation into the mouth of the joint.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let it steep until the vapor comes inside the joint; then make her pass water, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondine starts quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if she remains after this treatment and is not cured, instruct the patient to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or mastic oil of aloes, and then insert it into the natural orifice.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and the secondine will be found; and when she has found it, grasp and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the joint does not collapse during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but it is necessary to move it slightly to the right and left, and then draw it out; it will come out and become dislodged.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the joint is constricted, we have said the treatment for passing water and fumigation with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if she is not cured by all that we have said, then be careful not to pull too hard.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the joint, you tie to the woman's thigh, then anoint her with ointment of four-pharmacized balm.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	so she will be helped and restored, and comes out cured; but however, when she has passed it, a bad odor comes up to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore it is necessary to do fumigations that are suitable for this: no ancient has proved the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain her flowers and secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is like to see something that resembles a cord, and one puts the thin head into the natural orifice, and the wide ends above the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be on the coals, and let it steep until she is satiated, and then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather it is stopped by a subtle membrane.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore it is necessary for the patient to pierce that membrane at her own finger's width, and not make it too sharp or pointed, and be careful not to touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put a moist linen on wine and oil, then the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not stop, then put a perforation of cloth in the wound, and let it stay for several days, and be removed when the child wants to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And whenever this stopping of wound or abscess comes, it is necessary to cover that stopping: if it is a wound, then be cured as we have said with the cloth of wool.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodulation, and grow as those that come from above the foundation to be removed or in the space between the two parts.
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodulation is ancient, it works, and brings forth moisture as white as milk or subtle bone.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are known by this that there is or ejection or windiness when the patient makes an ejection, and by chance one of them jumps forward.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that pierce just to the bladder, and just to half of the penis; and they reach just to the jointure of the thigh, and just to nothing of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows a persistent fistula at the foundation, and not a non-persistent one.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you put your two fingers or foundation on the fistula and put a thin needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has tortuosity, then put a tent of fine cloth or one horsehair strand there until you feel the tent or hair at your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you don't feel it, and it doesn't come out by perforation or windiness or urine, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	know that it does not penetrate; if the wound hastens to heal.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pushed through to the bladder or to the urethral passage of urine, and the urine leaps forth, and cannot be sewn together by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced right to the crotch, then the tent comes up to the place.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no tortuosity and the cause of pain around it, then it is that it will go away below, and none of the medicines or poultices by anointing are worth.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these pierced fistulas there is no cure other than hard work, and the vanity of foolish surgeons who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In that which is not pierced and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lifts his legs up to his crotch, and has his crotch inclined towards his belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then put a linen tent or one of iron if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it around the fundament, then it is necessary that you put your two fingers there.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	then sense that the tent has pierced it; and be discovered where you feel between your finger and the flesh or fat, then know that it is pierced.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if one does not work on it, then one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One says however that some can be healed, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid one gives there is that one scrapes off the subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula, as was said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and put it all hot into the fistula, until it comes near to the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that those charred things are burned, which are like a bird's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then cure it with moist tents in butter, until those charred things come out; then cure it with anointing ointment releasing and binding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus healed, that's good. If not, otherwise it cannot be healed.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent goes in and does not penetrate right to the skin which is on the fundament, and between your two fingers and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or fat, and you see the fistula at that point where the covering of the key begins.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	then scrape off from the beginning of the fistula, and put in ahead of the tent, and then apply the cauterization after, until it comes to the head of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and the tent will be delivered and fall off; then remove those charred things that seem like a bird's feather, and none will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood flows forth, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine again.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the cauterizations of fire assemble two good things: that is to say, the burning off of those charred things, and the drying up of blood and the removal of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then cure it with moist tents in butter or in crushed cheese, until the flesh yields below, and the charred things that are burned come out from below.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then cure the wound with anointing ointments binding and releasing hard flesh, and they are the dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not come back.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes right to the bottom of the fundament, and is distant from the body, then put your finger or fingers on the fundament, and feel what's inside.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tent, and between two is the cloth or fat or char, where it is near to piercing, then there is no doubt except the way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you scrape it right to the bottom, or if you can, put in tents and cure it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and don't go too far inward, lest you scrape the dwelling that holds the fundament, and the evacuations come forth unwillingly.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then cure it, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it then, since it has been scraped below the fundament, either by tent or by another appointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then remove that charred thing which is in the wound, as long as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the fundament: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And sometimes fistulas are in this manner: and it is when you put the tent into the fistula, and it is on the edge of the fundament near the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	so take a pierced tent at the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put one twisted thread in two, and put the tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is pierced on the edge of the fundament inside, then draw out the thread from that puncture, so that you put your finger or fingers on the fundament.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and pull the head of the thread, and bring together the two ends together, and hold one to the other, and let it be for one day or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it some times, until the threads cut through those charred things that are between them and are falling apart.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then cure the wound until it is sewn up and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too far inward.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not behoove to make a hole so deep and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spine-like spinous thing from which one makes the fistula is very rough and uneven, one side and the other.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other side not, because of that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	bleedings
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Bleedings are in two manners: or they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and shortly after blood flows.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and if there is one or more, and they are gone from the foundation and to the head of the foundation; but those that are gone have little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and again a little bit of yellowish water or a little bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the cure for those who have them inside the foundation is that you instruct the patient to stretch himself in order to air in chambers, as long as the foundations are released, and the sons appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	so hasten, and hold it with pincers or grasp it with your fingernail, then cut into its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the ligaments cannot hold due to their moisture, then take them up with a cloth, or a cotton cloth, or a piece of camel hair.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and extract them to your hands, then cut, and powder over some hot powders that are in place of a cauterization.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as is said or written in the chapter on cauterization, then cure with other cures until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot come out, then purge the patient with a bitter and sharp laxative to wash away what is in the foundation, so that it can come out clearly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patients are seized, and if their sons are gone from the foundation, then the cure is gentle.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or pincers, and cut, then cure as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is necessary that you bring the suture in this way: take one twisted thread, and put it into a needle, and then draw the thread above and make the needle pierce on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is of the width; and restrain the thread tightly, then tie the thread, extract the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one to secure the excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put a moist cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote on the foundation, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave him until he has voided, and when they are finished, then anoint them with ointment and other cures, until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the drying of the flesh or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it happens that the flesh dries in the intestine, and through natural constriction, and when the patient is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you remove the skin above with a spatula or your fingernail, which does not allow it to become moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then cure him until he is sound as is proper.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if he cannot heal, then continue the scraping more strongly than before, until he is fully healed and scraped.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure him until he is healed.
dou fremit	of the trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Fomace is a small appearance of abscess under the body, and goes deep in.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes the pus bursts forth, and it is felt just like a dead tremor, and comes throughout the body, more in the arms than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a goose quill or a strong turkey feather, and put that quill on the abscess, until the circles surround the abscess entirely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand around the entire quill until you cut all around the abscess, and put it deep inside, and extract the abscess from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit, do so with a file of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and drawing above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	but not pierce, to keep the edges together and pressing And if you see fit, then cauterize the abscess, as is written in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the purgative
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes one makes a purgative of silver or archaute, or of melted or hammered iron; and sometimes one makes these small and large instruments, according to how they are presented.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those therefore which are presented in the cure of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the purgative, small and great, is thus broad, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has an opening or the belly is bound, as you see, and the sides are pierced inward; and has on one side two holes, and on the other one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and the belly or womb is where one puts medicines in a bestial bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and has between each hole one piece of spacing, then put in those holes one strong thread twisted from a true cord of 10 or 12 times around, and assemble the belly as if it were a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, then tie with a strong thread to the instrument ahead, then purge; and that's the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And the medicine should not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the purgative with oil or egg yolk or something similar, then tie it lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then instruct the attendants to hold it with their two hands together, until it is fully visible, then extract the purgative, and lift the patient's legs to the appearance.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if the medicine wants to come out, then tie it so tight as it can be; and if he sleeps one whole night, then it is a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you purge him in the disease of windiness of belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then continue purging until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation or abscess, then the purgative should be as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and that's the form of the subtle purgative on which the skin is strained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the cure of wounds; now we will tell you the cures of hands and medicines, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on where or what kind of wounds are made, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by striking with stone, cutting with sword and knife, or with lance or club or staff or seat, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	wherever they are done according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the back, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with wounds of the head that are simple, for the reminder will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it's from a stone or similar things, and although the skin is torn and the wound is large,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt slightly of abscess warmth: if it does so soon heal the head wound itself, even if it comes from the blood of the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and instruct the patient to fill themselves with wine and thick meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not heal, then let his meat be reduced, and let him not drink wine, nor eat any flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, if a warm abscess comes, a moist cloth in rose oil alone, or in wine that is used to cleanse.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no warm abscess, then put powder on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and not moved by air, which I will tell you about a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the air has moved it, then put some ointments on it, until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great like a cut from a sword and similar things, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by suturing, just as I will say about wounds of the belly, with suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to the bone and putrid, and holds together only by a little, then scrape it off; then treat the wound with medication, and replace hard flesh instead of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat thick meats, such as cooked brains and wheat, also like pigeons, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find putrid skin, and it is not attached to the bone, then scrape off all the putridity, and throw it away, then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has an artery in the wound or vein, which is not cut, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then stop the artery, and if you find it loose, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put on this powder which dries immediately as soon as air has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the manner of the powder is: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of quicklime, and grind the powder finely,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the wound, and press it firmly, until it is well closed and joins all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, and let it remain unbound, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one does this with quicklime alone, whenever one does not have incense nor dragon's blood, but the air has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the air has moved the wound, and it is still in that state, then do not put on this powder at all.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some digestive ointments, or pigeons made of wheat flour, water, and honey, until it flows with pus.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the break in the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine tweezers.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you later about the breaks of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, with no difference between it and one of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's the nerves, then there is no other remedy but to leave the wound alone and not put anything restrictive, for it hurts the nerves and makes them retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be soft, like lime dissolved in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cook it also in sweet water,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, then puncture or probe lower down.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut and bleeding comes from it, then open it up, tie it off, and cauterize it as needed.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the gullet, and the conduit is preserved, by which the flesh goes.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	so cut the gullet on the windpipe of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back in its natural shape.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then bind it securely, and let it be for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then take it out.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, then remove all that you can, and leave what you cannot have, until the wound has rotted.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and let it be dried and lightened at the opening.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then powder with the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of lance or dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it's a wound from a lance or dagger, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are signs of infection that the patient will die from: know then that the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it's not deep, and it's fresh with all its blood, then do not put on the powder at the first hour, nor bind it for the blood that does not penetrate deeply.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and return to the heart, and kill the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you don't have oil, then put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if it doesn't come with spasm, nor bad trembling of the heart, nor signs of alienation;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good conditions, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cure it with poultices and other treatments, until he is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal or work, then know that there is a fistula; and cure it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from an incision by sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, then cure the one in front of that.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, by sewing; and if it is small, by powder; and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken pieces, then close the wound, and treat the flesh if it is deprived.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not deprived, then let the wound rot, so that the extractions will be lighter.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds on other members is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	from bursting of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are great and medium and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound sometimes the intestines or the membranes of the intestines spring forth, by which their introduction occurs;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a great one,
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because therefore one returns to stitches the intestines in, if one does not put them back piece by piece;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell at once as soon as they feel cold, so they return to their original place.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and therefore is the middle wound better, because one returns the intestine to its place as with others two.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the two common stitches occur in the stitching of the belly,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the stitch of other wounds of the body and two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and although they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, I will say each one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine protrudes,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and a gentle thing is to put back, this is by one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it up in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	soak an sponge or one linen cloth in lukewarm water only,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or you heat it up in water with squinat and cypress and spikenard,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes make this wine restraining, and it is good that it is only for deflation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling depart, then moisten the intestine with water or let it be cooked in ale and honey.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	because by this it is lightened the entrance to a small thing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a little opening in the wound with the instrument used to lance hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is good that it is cutting,
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that one should not cut without a great necessity.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and that's the instruments for cutting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	so cut inside the curvature and do not cut too far, and see then the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine protrudes further,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	so put it back according to its natural form in its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you have the power, because this is good.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	so it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and place his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the part below the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	so place the head and chest higher than the parts below.
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	so make sure that the injured part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to arrange what I say about large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds, do as seems proper to you,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	and then take in your hands one miserable minister who holds all the rupture in his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and bring together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and that is the common manner of stitching,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound.
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave from the head of the wound a good two fingerbreadths, and insert a needle where there is a good strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the two cheeks of the skin with the two points of the siphac.
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is below the skin inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and bring together the two heads of the siphac and tie them in three.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then strain it with a double thread around the needle from both sides,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	and bring together the two cheeks of the wound harmoniously,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave another good two fingerbreadths, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then tie the thread as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not cease to do this according to how many needles you need.
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until all the wound is restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and are the needles medium-sized, between fine and coarse.
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because fine needles cut through all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	therefore it is necessary that they be medium-sized.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not good to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	lest they cut and open the wound before the suturing.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cut the cheeks of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during sleep,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and put tents or cloths on the cheeks of the needles to hold them in place.
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them until the wound is sewn up;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because one needle or two can suffice.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitching is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is that you bring together the two thongs of leather and the two thongs of silk together with a needle, where there is one strong middle thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced all these thongs three together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	then pull the needle through to the part where you started, in the manner that one sews cloth;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space of about the thickness of a lesser digit between each stitching;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitching is for men,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I stitched a wound that a man had in his belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was wounded by a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm's breadth wide,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and his intestines were torn two palms' breadth wide,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was inside the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I brought back his intestines and it had been 24 hours since they had stopped,
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was healed just in 15 days, and I cured him, and he was well.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physician had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in one place where you could not find any, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I applied cotton twice a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until he was well.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle and wet it on one side from the outside to the inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced the thread directly in line, then bring the end of the silk or costeau to where you have inserted the needle;
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make it pierce from the other side from the inside to the outside;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the pelterers make the furs,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and that you leave once the silk on one side and then take it up on the other, until the stitching is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second manner of stitching, which Galen calls properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	is like what some people do, who bring together the two parts naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one end of the silk to the other end, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	insert a needle near the end of the thread and make it pierce only that one;
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the two ends of the silk;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside to the inside;
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave both ends of the silk;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make it pierce one and the other from the outside to the inside, in two other threads of silk that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the second manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galien says that this phrase, and some witness it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	one must sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one should insert one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and knows that when the rupture is inside the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	it is the stitching more difficult than for other places in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, and the iron has changed its color,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	then put back the intestine and the bowels; then place on top of it the powder mixed with charcoal,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the iron has changed its color, then put on some ointment that is present until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and tie up the thread, and make sure the silk and thread are sewn together;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure the wound as you would with others, until it is well.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you don't have medicine, then apply some cotton cloth,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and move it two times a day until he is well.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	Because you don't need any other medicine for most wound conditions when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound will cause community with the principal members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	then it is necessary that you anoint the linen lightly with oil of temperate heat or with rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place it around the wounds and under the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if he feels pain or burning in his bowels, and this often happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	then cleanse him with black wine, and especially if the burning comes just to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "jun" cannot heal when it is wounded,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it's because of the thickness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the intestine bursts from the wound, then put it back in place as the intestines are, while it is still fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and has become yellow or black, then it is necessary that you bind the place that is black, lest blood should come from there.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then sew what is between the ligament,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and leave the two ends hanging from the part below the wound until the intestine is extracted, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is rent, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	then it can be restored in some men,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I saw that one man was wounded in the belly with a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was emission and flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not stop subtletizing until he was well, and the wound was closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him heal, I doubted that the patient might have pain in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no more harm, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and certain experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take fresh herbs from great roots, then bind the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the herbs have opened the mouth, put it on the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	so that it stretches its mouth open;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then bind the head with a strap, and this stays so that he cannot undo it,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then put another herb after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely covered;
et cout la plaie.	and cover the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	This treatment if done in the intestine and does not cause harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and one can bind the intestine with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the end of this intestinal thread that is very frayed,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie to the end of this thread a thin twisted flax thread,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then insert the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and tie it off in a knot;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this way of sewing with herbs is not far from the path of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the intestinal grooves, then there is no remedy or health, except subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or whatever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes swollen, is universally called a "fistula",
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and even when it is hollowed out and runs downward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the natural concretion of hard and white flesh, or one that does not cause pain.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is also hollowed out like the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes it runs clear down below, and at other times it is thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes little, and at other times enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed and has no scar,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	is not far from one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	namely, by the smallness of the blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard scar tissue inside and on the lips that does not allow new flesh to form;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or because there is too much fluid;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the pus is rotten and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is a manner of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is slow to digest and slow to heal, and flows by natural tendency;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or because of veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies in medicine, in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	And it is necessary that I inform you of the treatment for a fistula which is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula can occur in all members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or to the sacrum, or intestine, or bladder, or to any of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it is located at that which comes from the property of the principal member and similar parts.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous healing, and there is nothing except labor and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is any fistula that does not come to the point that I have said, and you have faith in the treatment,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if you see it well, take a tent of iron or bronze, if the fistula is straight, and then pierce;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is crooked, then search for a subtle tent of lead.
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for lead bends and adapts to the curvature;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula has many holes and you cannot well search it with tents,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	so that you can catheterize it through one of the holes,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for the moisture so flows from one hole to another, and purifies it;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then pierce the wound as best you can, which you know whether there is bone or nerve, and it is hollowed out by design;
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand on him, and where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you know truly the place where it is, and whether it is away from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the places that I have told you, then bind it according to what I have told you,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and cut away the bad flesh and corrupted scars that are inside;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then treat it until it is healed,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well hollowed out in its right place, then it is necessary that you bind it tightly, as much as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I put moist tents of medicine in aqua, and tie them just to the top of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	until the medicine consumes the superfluity that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I put ointments of fresh flesh, as much as is needed, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If veins or nerves do not grieve or harm the principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it all until the corruption is gone.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it with things of fresh flesh until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not healed and runs downward as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you are not yet at the end.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	so uncover and pierce until you reach the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and cut away all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep within, and you cannot come to it.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	so there is no other remedy except through the natural course of things;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small piece of bone corrupted and you can extract it with pincers,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	If one stretches it to one suitable instrument for this purpose,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are many of them, stretch all the others too, and do not leave even one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture makes you unwilling, and there is no error or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	so cut and dry and flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place on the wound something that will prevent putrefaction,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave it so that the flesh is putrid around the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then the bones will come out more easily;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, such as one from the leg or hip,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	so remove only the corruption until all the marrow is gone,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is great part of the corrupt flesh, and it comes just to the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	so scrape and cut all the way to the corruption, and then cure it until it is sound.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in one man's leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	He was a young man of about thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	until the matters came to the leg and it was swollen with a great abscess, and there was no reason to delay opening;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the doctors because of their foolishness opened too much so that the abscess burst open,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and there came out a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and many pus-filled sores developed that all went with foul discharge from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many doctors tried to cure it for two years, and there was no remedy in the art of medicine,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	so that I was summoned, and I saw his leg and the medicines by which it was being treated,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and what flowed from the sores with great abundance;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the flesh of the young man became red and had a citron-colored hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I inserted a probe into one of those sores, and then searched all the sores,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and I found that some came together in the middle of the leg from all parts.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hastened then, and cut into one of the sores until I uncovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it corrupt and perforated, and the corruption came right to the bone inside.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I removed what appeared to be corrupt from the bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except for what I had taken out;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long time, but it would not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I repeated, and discovered the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and I found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then took it out, and was anxious to set the place right.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not do so until I cut around a palm's length of the bone, and brought it to its full depth.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored it with medicines; and it was healed and sound quickly,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and there was no need to continue the work except for the patient's weakness, which could not bear.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For by the evacuation it often bled, but he was completely healed,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and instead of the bone, a hard flesh grew, and he was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary from top to bottom, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it should be scraped in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	take one linen cloth and strain it to the top of the open bone,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command someone to stretch it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and place another linen cloth, larger than the first one, and tie it over the flesh that is below the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and stretch the top so that you remove the corrupt flesh below.
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the flesh on the place where you see it needs to be scraped, so that the scraping does not harm the flesh.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a hot iron or a heated table under the bone to remove the corrupt flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to scrape until you can see and feel the corruption, and then scrape again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	so uncover all the flesh; then place a hot iron underneath,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then scrape from one part to the other the corruption, and be careful not to cut too deep into the corruption, just as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupt joint, and scrape the bone on the other side where it contains;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut out;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or in the toe of the foot, then it is very strong,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but nonetheless you must ask about this corrosion, how it appears;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve hinder you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the incisors and scrapers for cutting these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and their appearance.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for that reason it is necessary to prepare each instrument according to the appearance of the work.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	so think about the instrument you need according to what is necessary.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head of the shoulder can become dislocated either due to a cause within or due to a cause outside;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have medicated that corruption with medicinal treatment, and it does not benefit.
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	so you must cut off that limb to the point where the corruption comes;
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the patient may escape either by death or by the greater malice of the defect of the member;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are such that the members become black, as if they had been burned by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and afterwards it puts forth after the darkness, then goes on to corrode member by member.
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes throughout the body; if you hasten to cover.
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if this is due to the blow of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar ones.
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the corrosion is at the head of the joint, if it copes, and does not give space for it to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, then copes at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, then copes at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it's deadly.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there is no remedy against death except the quantity of his virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and so it happens when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then copes at the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, then copes all the foot.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it goes up the leg, then copes at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy than to let the patient die by exhaustion.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the manner of coping or sewing the member is that you bind it above and below.
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and stretch one minister's bond downward, and another minister's bond upward.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you loosen the flesh that is between the two bonds to one spatula wide, until the bone is uncovered.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then you cope or sew, and put one linen wrap on each side, so that the seam does not touch the sound flesh.
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and another wound and abscess follows for the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if blood flows out while you are working, then cauterize the place hastily.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you put on some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to one man in such pain:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he had a darkness that seemed like burning fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corrosion came first to his knee of the foot, until it corrupted all the foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to wrap the foot, and was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long afterwards the corrosion returned to his wrist of the hand, and he came to me.
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put on him things that cause a reaction after the purging of the body, and he could not stop the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he said that I should cut off his hand, but I did not want to, because I had hope of causing the matter to recur.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he would not die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the virtues of the man were weak; and he lost all hope and returned to his land.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he hastened to wrap his hand, and was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not told this story except for the reason that one may need it to do another deed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	At no time does an abscess form in a well-nourished body, and stays so long that it causes a great gathering of pus.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then bursts and perforates, and the pus jumps out, and the body remains empty, just like a vessel.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin that is above is as subtle as one delicate veil.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and do not go all the way to the bone, nor all the way to the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it comes right to the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is like this: you cut off all around that skin, and similarly when it is subtle, just like a veil.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not heal due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have faith that the skin will heal, and the corruption is not in depth.
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is full of flesh, so wash it with a cleansing agent thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	look to see if the abscess is large, and the pus that flows from it has a foul smell.
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then wash with Egyptian medicine made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take equal parts of aloe, oil, and litharge, and mix them together in one vessel over the fire.
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey.
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and wash the abscess, and stop the fistula;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine in for two hours, then draw it off while sweating.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the abscess is opened and the pus is removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and at no time is washed with ash water.
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, and pour water over them.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then let it flow, and wash with it, until you know the abscess is well opened.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water;
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	then wash with water and honey or add a small amount of litharge to it.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or wash with honey and sweet wine, for the honey has the property of purifying and cleansing.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the skin healthy.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you have faith that the abscess is well purged,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	then wash with that which causes flesh to grow in it.
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and it is that you take defined plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or wash with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties or treatment of ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the opening of the abscess is small, and the catheter of the syringe cannot enter it.
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	so enlarge it slightly with a piece of iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment.
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or balsam ointment, until it is enlarged.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, so close it and leave just enough room for one layer or the catheter to enter.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the abscess that flows pus is above, so cut it or make it lower than where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	Since
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	For if you cannot cover the breast below as you see it,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	so arrange it in such a way that the bowstring runs to its lowest point as is.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the bow is deep, do not let it release its hair.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so arrange it in such a way that the bow runs slightly downward and does not release anything from the bow.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidative medicines to put on the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and bind it with one linen cloth that covers the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then cover the strong place on the breast of the nipple about a poignard longer than the first one,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then anoint it gently with another cloth according to the size of the nipple,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it on the breast of the nipple to lighten the bow, and do not remove the great cloth except after a few days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and that which is on the breast of the nipple, removes often to remove the bow,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and know what comes from the bow, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has been extended in such a way that you see the nature that bursts forth on the breast of the nipple,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	so know that the breasts are already healed and approaching health;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then loosen it in the morning or the third day, and when you loosen the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	so change another cloth and renew the anointing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts emit undigested bowels after many days, know that the breasts are not healed.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons continue for a long time, do not despair of health.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	for health is approaching. For there are men who slowly let the flesh heal in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if undigested bowels burst forth from the breast after many days, know that the breasts are not healed;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breasts are slow to heal and are distended, then add medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue,
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	as defined by anointing, for it contains a great part of vinegar, and this is the final medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take defined anointing, and mix it with rose oil, and rise from equal-portioned old wine in substance;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then cook it and use it; and this same thing makes cooked honey increased,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when defined anointing is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is over the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then glue it onto a cloth, and place it on the breast, and never administer it after an aristologist's long time,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of lily celestial, which is also like flour of vetches and centaury;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and use it in simples or compounds: grind them, and make a powder, and put it on the honey that I have said, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the wound is prolonged, and is not healed by this treatment,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then know that corruption has gone deep, and makes an impression on the bone, or hardens the members, or forms ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	so apply the treatment of fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the apostema of the armpit
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Pannicula is an apostema that arises under the armpit of the arm-pit of the hand,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or of the foot, or by chance arises in other places;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is ignored and one does not take care, then a foul apostema comes forth,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and runs and discharges bowels until it reaches the root of the armpit, and by chance may run all the way.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes to corrosion right up to the bone, so that it brings a stinking pain, and is the joints of the toe wide, and is the color flush.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	so it is necessary that you cut off all the superfluity that remains of the armpit,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound and the armpit is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the armpit approaches the flesh inside, and begins to prick and break,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	so it is necessary that you put a cloth under the armpit that pricks the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and tie it at the top, and cut off that subtle and delicate flesh,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put on the remaining flesh medicines that are burning and corrosive to remove all.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with anointing until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it off and take away, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the toe corrupting, then cut it off in one piece just as it is said before.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it until it is healed;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is inflamed, and bound up, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary that you heal it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the armpit of the scapula in a diagonal direction above.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and take care that the cut does not come down to the flesh beneath the armpit, for the patient would feel too great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the deafness in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The toes that arise on some men's hands by chance are all fleshy.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance there is one where it has bones, and sometimes there is an armpit,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of them are born in the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of the toes.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	That which arises in any toe of the foot does not move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and that which arises at the joint of the toe, by chance moves;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the cutting of one who is fleshy is light, in such a way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	That which arises at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: it's better to leave it as is.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In one who is born or will be at the end of nine months, it is necessary that you cauterize the skin first around just to the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cauterize the bone with a suitable silk thread for this, then care for it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The wounds that come from having to assemble come by birth, or by sudden wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is necessary that you cauterize that wound, so that it may be repaired according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two tents or wet cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two thin pieces of plank, until the flesh is sewn, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a wound comes to any of its two with the palm, then cauterize that wound as it is necessary.
Des vils	Note: This appears to be the start of a new section or paragraph, rather than a complete sentence.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are great swollen vessels full of melancholic superfluities that come to many members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more commonly occur in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary therefore that you administer to him sometimes purging of gall, and then heal the wound with basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The iron cure is according to two manners: one is by cauterizing and then drawing out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other manner is that you open the wound and draw it out entirely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The incision is according to this manner: first, arise the leg with hot water very strongly, until the thick blood is thinned.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then restrain the leg of the patient from above the knee to the part below the kneecap;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then cauterize the wound in one place, or two places, or three places, with a broad incision,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then lift and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient's virtues can endure.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then tie it up, and command that he eat meat causing black gall.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and begin the evacuation and healing again when the wounds are full and bad for the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The healing of it is according to this manner: rise the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs.
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then put it in a bath, and arise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and swell the wounds;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, then heat it by the fire, and then cauterize the place near the wound from the top of the kneecap to the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then apply the skin to its original place, and scrape off the wound from each part, until it appears when you feel;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems also like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then bind the strip below, until it is lifted from the skin, and then tie it to its original place lightly;
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then cauterize in one other place, above three fingers; then scrape off the skin over the wound until it appears.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then lift it to its place, just as you did, and tie it to another skin, just as you did first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	then make another incision, or more if you need them, then lift it, and cauterize at the heel of the foot.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then draw it out and lift to the second incision; then pull it from incision to incision, until it comes out entirely, then cauterize.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, then put an awl into each strong doubled thread;
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and tie and draw it out, and put below one strip, and turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and beware that it does not cauterize, for if it does, then one cannot draw it out or lift it, and it comes to harm the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have drawn it all out, then put a wet wool cloth soaked in wine and rose oil on the place of the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and swollen together, and it is not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	then it is necessary that you cut it awry, but do not cauterize it; and draw it out as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one cauterizes the vein is curved, and does not cut off, so that it may cauterize the wound.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of great curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut off the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
De la voinne civile	Note: This appears to be the start of a new section or paragraph, rather than a complete sentence.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This wound is located in the legs, in hot and dry places where there are no herbs or trees, and on land where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and by chance it may occur in another part than the legs, and this happens because of the corruption that comes from below the skin.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as if a serpent or worm were to come forth inside the body, and then be enclosed between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that it comes in the leg with a very great inflammation,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then the swelling changes color and the wound begins to emerge forth like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the swelling opens up, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plank from one and a half to two and a half hands' width, and tie it tightly.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the plank on the leg, and every time it seems to be getting worse, wrap it around the plank and tie it tightly.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, then cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining portion around the plank, and do not cauterize its root until it has come out entirely.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cauterize it, then it will go back into the flesh, and cause an abscess and corruption at that place, and a bad disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	therefore it is necessary that she be treated little by little until the top, and that none remain in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and sometimes this wound is such when it is treated with five or ten fingers' width.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and one man came to me, whose it was, and it issued from ten fingers' width long, and when you cauterize it, then put in one strip or peg, and pierce it right down to the bottom.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	So that all goes well; and let the matter inside be emptied, and bring to the place medicines in sufficient quantity for some day, then care for it as abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And at this vein, many times apply rainwater, and similarly when it opens in the joints of the foot or foot.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it comes out much pus, and where it jumps rainwater; then care for it as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "disease of oxen", because it often occurs in oxen,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes all through the body rising and descending.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it can be felt as it moves from member to member, until it breaks through the skin where it goes, and jumps out.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by some sort of corruption of humors, such as those that come from vermin and serpents and lice and ascarids or the belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and one doubts about its malice, for when it goes through the body and mounts to the head and comes to the eye.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it cured and pulled out, then one cannot prevent it from happening again unless it is taken out.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	so then it is necessary that you tie the place above and below with a strong thread tightly.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut on top and pull it out, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you cannot find it.
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	then cauterize it with fire above until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does is that it destroys the eye, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming to the head near the eye, then hold a small cloth under it tightly, then cut on top and pull it out;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is necessary to use the patient with purging medicine of the body for the bad humors carried.
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and beware of foods that promote corruption.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called in our land "vakkirir", and is a pain that comes to some members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and then moves from member to member; and I have seen this which I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and soon after, I saw it rise also like a worm on the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	faster than anything, just like sharp silver when it cuts from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain left that place and settled in the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little later it ran all through the body, until it came to the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it was running around the body again, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed how she moved like that from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	However, I had seen many who had moved well and had their pain from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but never had I seen it, as I saw it in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and her veins were uncovered,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and therefore this windiness appeared constrained;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and do not appear according to this reason in those who are sweet and have moist bodies and responded veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see this disease cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	then bind above and below quickly, and then cut on top until that constrained windiness comes out.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your own eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	then use remedies that stop windiness, such as fetid pills and viper pills, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is that there are some with large points, and small, and barbed, and smooth.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and that which strikes in some member strikes in two ways: or it enters the main principal member,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	such as brain, heart, liver, kidneys, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it strikes then in any part of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you later appears:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	so it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after in many conditions;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and springs out the sac that is above the brain.
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	It is when there is blindness and numbness and confusion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of bile.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and by chance it is without force in the nostrils or ears; and by chance affects speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and bursts forth from the moist white wound resembling pustules, and springs out also like a bruise on flesh.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if you see this sign, then hold back from curing, and pull out the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it strikes the heart is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow becomes still like a pustule, and in it flows black blood, and comes with coldness and cold sweat, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then you should not doubt that death is present.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow when it strikes the kidneys is that without foam or bubbles it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns pale, and they sigh deeply and seek cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow strikes in the cover of the breastbone, it is between the little ribs; and pours out great gall and great pain and sighs; and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow shoots or falls on the stomach, by chance some undigested thing from the wound may jump out of the flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow falls on the belly, and no fragment of the arrow passes through the intestine route, then there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow falls in the bladder, and the urine leaps out and flows away, and the patient feels very painful: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the armpit and the spine of the back and the nape and the heel and the knee and the leg and similar members, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, because of which you should act similarly.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to one man whose arrow fell on the nose in the root of the night:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried to remove it and pulled it out from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without numbness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I pulled out an arrow that had fallen in the fat of the eye under the eyebrow fold.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was stuck, and I could not pull it out except for the tip towards the tree.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bow, all of very light iron without ears; the wound was healed, and no bad accident came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I loosened the beard, and extracted it carefully until I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I pulled out an arrow from one man whose had fallen in his belly, and I thought he was dying;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after 30 days, his condition did not change;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the arrow, and extracted it, and pulled it out, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see one man whose an arrow has fallen on his back, and the wound is closed above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and the arrow remains inside him, and did not change its natural disposition,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor found any harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And if you see one other man whose an arrow has fallen on his face, and the wound is closed;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and remained thus without suffering great pain; and many others similar.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And I pulled out an arrow from one of the king's princes, which had fallen near his nose,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was slightly declining towards the right side; and the arrow was stuck very tightly.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was summoned to the treatment after it had been fallen for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I searched for it with great subtlety and did not feel it;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt pricking and pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought that it was from the point of the arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on the area an ointment attracting and digestive, because the swelling did not occur;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and the swelling of the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put on the ointment for many days, and the wound was resolved above, and the patient remained thus for a long time,
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put on the wound a medication of corrosive water for many days, until it was open.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I tried to remove it, and felt the head of the arrow which was sticking in its place;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I inserted it into the opening of the wound by means of that corrosive water, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and passed well through the boundaries for three months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then it broke free from the wound and I inserted pincers on both sides and pulled, but it could not come out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I did not cease to extract and manipulate it with various instruments until I caught it one day with well-made pincers;
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to the shape that will come at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the doctor judged that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was closed, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you put your treatment according to what I do not say, for books cannot take it all.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but wise masters can well enough grasp small things and that which is present and lacking;
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	nine works, and nine instruments, to the understanding of strange events that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not come out of members where they are stuck unless it is by two methods:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the path where they enter, or from the other side;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps out on the side where it enters is an arrow entering fleshy parts and jumps out sometimes now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, then leave it until the flesh is loosened around, and the exit is cleared.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, then leave it thus for some days, and move each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps out, and if it does not jump, then pierce all around with a very fine point, until the flesh around is expanded, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes just to one of the vents of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have said happen to the patient: do not remove it, but leave it until it is equal after several days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for if the arrow comes just to the surface of the skin, that's death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not come just to the surface of the skin,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient remains for several days without bad accident, then extract it by pulling.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stuck very deeply and cannot come out further, then administer gentle heat around, as I have told you; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is placed back into its position within the body so that it cannot be seen, then one must search for it throughout the entire tent.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then pull it out with any suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the deepness of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut until the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow that hold it in place,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	then remove the flesh that is stuck to both parts of the wound as far as you can;
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and be careful that you do not break the arrow, lest you pull it out more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the next day and pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the bleeding makes you contrary, then follow what we have said about treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of the incision of the nerve and vein, and put your mind to how you can pull out the arrow without danger;
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	or quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently; and put the patient in the shape he was in when the arrow hit him;
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for it is the greatest aid that can be; and if you cannot, then set him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another side, or it reveals something about him, or the skin is swollen in the area where one can see or feel it accordingly;
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	then cut above, until the tongs can take hold, and then pull it out; if it jumps forward now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and expand the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, then leave it still, and then resume the extraction until it comes out fully;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the head of the arrow is stuck, then push it in with all force;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if the head breaks off and you see that it needs to be administered again, then administer with one instrument sharp;
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of the arrow enters the edge of the instrument; and then push further;
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is broken, then use one instrument with an entering point to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is embedded, then it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as is fitting.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow hits the thigh or hip or belly or bladder or ribcage, and it is close, and you can cut above, then cut.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, and then pull it out, and then dress the wound, if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs used to pull out arrows are similar to the beak of a bird, and look at this shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in many sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the sharp-pointed instrument is also like the quill of a bird,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to push against the point of the arrow, as this is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for pushing and pulling is this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of the veins through which one is healed, there are 31, and on the head there are 16.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	that is to say: two jugular veins which are behind the ears, which are called the "herbeches";
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and two arteries that are in two temples appearing;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the two corners of the two eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and two jugular veins that are in the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and two veins that are on the upper lip above the mouth, and these are called "augeherich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins through which one is commonly healed are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side of the shoulder, and people call it the "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins,
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and people call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right side.
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and people call it the "vein of the belly", and it is above the femur.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is the one through which one heals, which appears clearly above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the saphenous vein is the one that is between the ulnar and radial veins, and it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is below the crease of the right knee,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second saphenous vein that is at the ankle of the left side; and the vein called "nisse", which is in the ankle of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The healing of the veins that are after the ears helps with catarrhs of old and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the quality of the healer, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and wipe the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck with a strap.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until the two veins appear behind the ears in two dependent parts of the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	which then come to your thumb, and where you feel the pulse under your thumb, then press down.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the lancet, and push it under the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand along all the vein above.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut and remove the skin and the vein well two thumbs' breadth across, and make the blood flow out until you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then tie it up and bind, so that it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The humor of the two arteries that are in the two temples is worth old migraines,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and puffy, and accustomed to obthalmia, and at the core of aged tears in the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the blood are such as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient stretches his neck, until the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the pulse below thy thumb, and then signs to cut in;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then lift the key on top of the vein above thy thumb's index, and thrust the lancet below,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and lift the vein up, and cut it, as you have done with the two other veins, and make flow of blood according to your necessity;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then free the patient, and put thy thumb on top of the vein for an hour, then put a cloth on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then bind it tightly, and let it be until it is healed; and we have spoken of their incision and extraction, at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The humor of the forehead vein is worth as much as the cephalic humor in ancient diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for rousing.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and it is that the patient stretches his neck in twisting, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fossor", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and strike with your hand or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then free the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is healed, and never once anoint with a broad bandage.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not necessary that the bandages be too thin; and the healing should cross, for the bone is near, and by chance breaks the bandages when they are too fine.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The humor of the two veins that are in the two temples is helpful to the eyes, and to the itch, and to the rousing, and to the oriol in the eye, and for diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and it is that the qualities of their humor are such that the patient stretches his neck in twisting without any bond, just as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then let it be, and let the humor of the crossbeams be a little bit long, a little bit wide, for there is no fat.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the bandages are fine, by chance they break; then make flow of blood, until you need it, and then bind on cloth, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The humor of the navel vein is worth for ague, and for unseasoned sode, and for diseases of the face,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	as in migraines and rousing that comes to the face, and likewise when it is ancient;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and it is that the qualities of the humor are such that the patient stretches his neck, then strains his navel to thy left hand,
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a thin bandage long, and thrust it between the two nostrils, in the space that is between them.
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will begin to flow now;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too far in front, and let the blood flow according to your necessity, then bind it for a night, for it is soon restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and that is the form of the bandage:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The humor of the two jugular veins is helpful for the constriction of the spleen, and for the beginning of menstruation, and for many diseases, and for epilepsy, and for corrosion, and for herpes, and swelling.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and it is that the qualities of the humor are such that the patient stretches his neck below one and the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the master stand on top of the patient's head, and the patient sit on one seat,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then let it be done with the vein long a little bit widely, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as is necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then do it on the other side in the other vein, then release the bond, and bind the veins moderately.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient does not choke; and let it be done until morning, when the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	Of the Humor of the Liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The humor of the veins of the lips above is helpful for ulcers in the mouth, and for the corruption of gums, and for cracks in the lips, and around.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	and it is that the qualities of the humor are such that the patient sits before you, and stretches his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left;
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and you recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	then cut one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	then cut the largest one from each side, and do it also with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the Humor beneath the Tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The humor of the veins that are beneath the tongue is helpful after the humor of the cephalic vein, and it's for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and it is that the qualities of the humor are such that the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and lifts up his tongue, and looks down on each side to find a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	then cut one and the other, and do not go too far in front, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the back which are commonly bled are bled according to two manners:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or by piercing with a broad mirtin bandage, or with an olive-green thin one as the back's trenches are called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are broad and thin according to the breadth and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the mirtin bandage is very well-known, and it is broad as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins that are quite full of thick and apparent blood, and which contain thick and troubled blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and that is the form of the olive-green bandage:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle and finely pointed, and it is for bleeding the fine veins, or where there is fine yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the breast, and in the stomach.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is fitting for the surgeon to bleed, and to beware of the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and blood comes forth, then it is fitting to stanch it, as I said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and he should not be grasping at the flame, but cutting like a silkworm.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open clearly, then it is fitting that you should manipulate it, and change another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	or you want to make an incision on it, or you bleed in place of it the vein in the arm: it opens clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and cut into the flame like a silkworm, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know the location of the vein, then it is fitting also that you manipulate the arm, so that you touch the location as long as you recognize the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the location with a nod, and then bind the arm, and cut into the vein like a silkworm.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the location swollen, for it is of the artery: withdraw then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it issuing upwards as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	hasten then, and put your finger on length, then remove your finger if the blood stanched, for many times this has happened;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be above fear, and do not move him until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stanched, and it flows out, and medical help is not present, then cut into the artery if it opens up, for the head of it retreats; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a slice of fustic, and make it thin, and take one half and bind it on well up to the other day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if the blood is stanched, that is good; if not, then cure him, as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stanching is not grievous in more positions because of the small size of the wound and the power of the ligament of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The vein of the basilica in the middle so helps that it treats blood from above the head and below the body.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is fitting for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that is below, and if he goes too far in depth, and he finds the nerve.
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells and the wound is grievous, and by chance cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some men because of its subtlety, then it is fitting that you should make incisions with the instrument like a silkworm; and withdraw the nerve as far as your power allows.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make an incision long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The vein of the cephalic so helps that it treats blood from the head and aids the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is fitting to bleed at the olive or myrtle vein, for it is the most safe of all veins, for it has no nerve or artery below.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is fitting to seek out the lighter location, and do not cause any harm if it does not work the first time, and one renews.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance the locations swell in some men, when one fails the first time, but it does not cause harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the vein is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you should know about bleeding, is that bleeding is not ordained for anything except to preserve health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent illnesses from coming;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are on the neck: that is to say, the cephalic, the facial, and the basilic.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed at the beginning of quartans to gain, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding that is ordained for illnesses has no fixed hour or time, but whenever need arises by day or by night, in all hours and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not fitting to bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman who is carrying more than four months up to the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should one bleed those who have passed 60 years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever way it may be, then it is fitting that they should cleanse their intestines with a light clyster.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if he has many bad humors retained, so that the veins do not draw out from the intestines the superfluities which are harmful to the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor should one bleed someone who is too full of meat, or drunk, as long as it remains so, nor those who are dropsical.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and beware of bleeding after colic passion, and vomiting, and purging the stomach, and frequent lying with a woman, and travel, watching, and fasting, and all that comes from the virtue or by something of the arm or body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtilize the humors, if the blood is thick, by foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then take a bath, unless something hinders it, to subtilize the blood.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and make an incision in the vein of the navel around the third hour, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep that day from labor, and toil, and lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be light-hearted and joyful, and let the bleeding be higher than the one who is being bled, and apply a compress to the arm two or three times.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then manipulate the ligament above moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then apply a compress to the location with your hands, until the veins swell and one can feel them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then moisten the bleeding with a small amount of old oil, and then place your left hand's thumb on that vein below the location where one wants to bleed.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	The vein does not flow and fails to bleed when cut.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flow like strings at the surgeon, and those that are full of windiness.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	so when you put on the flame, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus you are among those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if the vein is too narrow, it is too tight a wound, therefore it is necessary that surgeons be advised in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens at first, that's good; if not, then it should be reopened a little below or above quickly, if the swelling is not excessive.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the swelling is excessive and the patient is frightened, leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	perhaps an abscess will form; do not enter the bath, then resume the treatment if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it will not flow as much as you see, then trust in that same opening to let out all the flame correctly.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and work a little quickly, while the swelling is occurring; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the swelling growing, do not reopen the wound, and put on a little bit of oil, because it lightens the body's blood, and is good in this swelling, the oil that the linen wraps.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil-soaked cloth in each wound that you treat veins, to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this same thing makes triple and double vision when you put it on the swelling; then subtly the blood flows out and separates when it becomes too big.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if a large abscess comes forth, which often happens, especially when it is not treated right away or the opening of the vein is small.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	so hurry and put on the swelling a moist sponge in water and a little hot oil, and hold it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has stopped flowing from the vein, and if there remains at the swelling after some days any blackness or greenish color, then it does not harm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on something of aloe or myrrh mixed with calamine, paste-like or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and appearance of the wound at the basilica; then put your hand on it, and if you find the swelling soft to the pressure of the hand, that is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance the artery is cut; but make a dry poultice to harden the swelling, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each blood according to its quantity of virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become thinned out; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for him who is full and fat, and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and the incisions be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and have him heal little by little and often, and one should heal him by cutting across, not piercing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of healing is safe from bleeding and numbness of nerve, and is worth more than the healing of a long or wide wound.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for him whose body is weakened by the healing, it is necessary to give moist bread in juice of green apples; if he is feverish, treat the blood three times or four.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he has a cold complexion, moisten his bread with murmured syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickweed, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he pukes after the issue of much blood, it is necessary that he drink broth of charcoal and subtle scented syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use the other things we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to stretch out his arm and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue, continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to stretch out his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he heals in 7 hours after the first bleeding, or in 9 hours.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he wants to heal from another part, then he should heal on the second day or third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood inside the body that is already fevered, and causes fever; therefore it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and enlarge the opening until it reaches the pelvis.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then you will fulfill all the conditions of healing, and put your hand on his pulse when he is healing, so that death does not come instead of the pelvis.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this often happens when the surgeon is negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not necessary when you see that the arm should be loosened, and blood should flow out the second time, and the opening is closed, unless you press strongly upon it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	unless he is bent, let him stretch out his arm quickly, for that would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let him leave it until he heals the second time; or you can put at the tip of the flame until the blood that is frozen at the vein's opening flows out.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on a little bit of oil mixed with water, and press on it lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not bind it tightly until the abscess is calmed down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires drawing blood the second time, let him heal in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein inside the arm is healed in place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of healing is that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the scab becomes red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it should be bound loosely, so that the vein appears well, and then he should heal now across, not longwise or widthwise.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the opening be wide, and let it heal well near the joint of the hand, and if there is still blood that cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in summer, then do not put your hand in hot water, for it will get worse in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the blood of this vein is more preserved than all other veins, for it has no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The blood of the wrist vein on the right hand is worth to all liver diseases, and this is the manner:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	strain your hand and put it in hot water, until the vein is emptied, if you can see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the blood flows across, and you cut from top to bottom, then nothing hurts;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not go too far inward, for the nerves are below all the fatty flesh,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put your hand in hot water, if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have let the blood flow as much as is needed, then put oil and a ligature on the vein to close it quickly, and do this for each one.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The blood of the wrist vein on the left hand is worth to the disease of mice, and do it just like I told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The blood of the saphenous vein is worth to all diseases that are below the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	such as diseases of the uterus, and retention of urine, and disease of the kidneys, and of the old thighs and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of its blood is that the patient puts their foot in hot water and rubs it on the vein until it breaks.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and many veins go above the foot.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	then let it flow through the larger vein or at the ankle, which is more valuable.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you let it flow above the foot, then be wary of the nerves that are below, and let the blood flow across as if cutting; and let there be no swelling.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let it drain well from the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the bleeding fails the first time, then try again the second time above a little bit, for the flesh is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	nor doubt about nerves, as we have said, and do it equally with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of strength, and its blood is worth to the pain in the groin, when it's for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its blood is that the patient enters or bathes and stretches above the ankle 4 fingers in twisting,
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then let the blood flow in all ways you can, and crossing.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and is worth more than you cut it, for the flesh is sound, and it is very responsive to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not open it, then let the blood flow through any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be wary of the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and let the blood flow as much as you see fit, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and bind it; it is now healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	(I'm assuming this is a new text to translate)
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horns, or of clay, or of glass; and ventosation is done in two ways: either by piercing and attracting blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this ventosation that is done without piercing is in two ways: either it is all-consuming, or not consuming at all;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and ventosation that is done by piercing and extracting blood is done in 14 places of the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	of which one is all in the head; and the others are in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two others in two sides of the neck; and the ventous below the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the ventous on both shoulders; and the ventous above the knees;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the ventous in both arms; and the ventous in both legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the ventous in both ankles; and the ventosation does not treat of blood, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and therefore one should not weaken it at all, just as one does not bleed a vein.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not fitting that she be administered, whether all-consuming or not consuming at all, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the entire body has been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to bleed, or for habits, then we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at each time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are some who suffer from repletion and redness on their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and there are some who suffer from a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and spit up blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are some who imagine, and see through bloody pus, and hurt, and death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command them to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The bleeding of the nose also helps in the alleviation of headache... that comes to the eyes, and it is not fitting for this to be done after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this bleeding is in place of the bleeding of the cerebral vein,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it is not fitting for someone who has a cold complexion to bleed, or who has catarrh, for this would cause them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and therefore it is not fitting for elderly people to bleed, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And one who often recovers from this becomes forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the ventous a little lower down due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The bleeding in the neck is in place of the bleeding of the head and of the basilar vein, and therefore it is useful for the constriction of the stomach,
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and for the rupture of the channel of the womb, and for all, and for repletion;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to apply a little pressure, for if it holds too tightly, it may cause forgetfulness or constriction of the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The bleedings on both sides of the neck are useful for headaches, and for obtalmia and migraines, and for strangulation, and for pain in the roots of the teeth,
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in place of the bleeding of the basilar vein; and it is necessary that you command the servant to stretch out his hand when he puts it, so that he does not touch the artery, nor let the blood flow down.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The bleedings below the chin are useful for mouth diseases and for the corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in place of the bleedings of both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The bleedings on the shoulders are useful for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The bleedings of the sides are as effective as those of three veins in the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and command the servant not to pierce too deeply in front, for the flesh is thin and there are nerves and arteries underneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventous on the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids of the fundament and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the ventous be large and made of clay, so that it can draw well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it would cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The ventouses on the legs are cleansing in appearance, for they draw blood from the entire body, and are useful for ancient pains of the kidneys, bladder, and urine, and restore flowers; and they are in place of the two shins and two ankles, and although they weaken the body after long use, they bring about numbness in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the ventous is that you apply it first empty, and then suck in a temperate manner, and put it on hastily, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the redness of the blood; then pierce, and remove the ventouses, and take heed to the disposition of the body, for there are some who have hard flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to prick only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to prick twice: the first time to make fine the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is extremely thick, it is necessary to prick a third time; and when we want to draw out the blood little by little, we are only satisfied with one attempt.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want a lot of blood, we often recommence; and if the blood is thick, we pierce to the depth, and then it is that the heart is pierced suddenly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and it is necessary for those who have thick skin and hard, and who have wide pores, that you anoint the places of the ventouses with oil that is appetizing and dissolving:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it's in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it's in winter, with oil of wormwood, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluities are thick and cold, take bitter oil, or balm oil, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if the person being treated has soft skin and large pores, it is not necessary to put any oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it is necessary to wash after the vaporization of rose water, or cold water, or water of wormwood, or water of citron melon, or water of porcelain, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, if he rises easily with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have great surpluses rise with old wine, or water of sage, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and it is not necessary to wash with a poultice before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after the vaporization.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary that he washes when he must be vaporized and when he is being vaporized.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are curing themselves are choleric, and the skin is too red and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	so it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as green apples and endive and lettuce easily, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and honeyed plums, and mutton, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion, if they take syrup of honey, and aromatic wine that is between old and new, and honeyed plums, and honeyed plums, and small birds and quail.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day when he will be vaporized, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some men at times treacle or muscat before the vaporization, or after, to comfort the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the skin be refined, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The poultices that are applied without causing pain are those that are applied to the liver, and on the back of the neck, and on gouty joints, and on the belly and navel and kidneys and buttocks, because these members do not tolerate being struck or pounded.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and one only does this to attract blood from member to member,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we put it on the breasts when the baby is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put poultices on the belly and navel to reduce the swelling of the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and it removes the pain when there is inflammation or piercing, and by its attracting virtue, it happens to remove the inflammation, or dislodge the piercing from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and thus it does when one puts it on the liver and back of the neck when there is retained vaporization.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these poultices are administered empty to suck only so much; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes flat and cold water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	such as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this manner one fills the poultice with warm water only, or with water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the poultice administered to fire is this:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should be two fingerbreadths in width and half a palm deep, and have on the border around the middle one small pit, just as if to hold an awl.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and it should be of earth, soft before so that it does not wound the patient when applied to the member;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have in the middle a rod of crossing earth or iron, to put a candle in place.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and they should be great and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the poultices for children are different from those for old people, and for thin ones than for fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should thus place this poultice on the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candle of wax or a linen thread, and place it inside the poultice across the rod that is inside the poultice.
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the light is at the bottom of the poultice, so it does not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the member, and the two edges should be on the pit that we said, so that when one wants to, the steam goes away, and one removes the poultice.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take again the linen thread just as before, and repeat it often if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the poultice then which is administered in a disease of pleurisy, it has only water and no rod or pit, and is applied only when it is full of water, and is placed on the member alone.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Syrups are administered only in members where one cannot put poultices because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar parts.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in bare bones, such as the joints or nipples, and other similar ones;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the user is that when you find syrups that are in sweet and pure waters without adulteration, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in a vessel of sweet water, until they are well known and have nothing in their bellies.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be bled by vein and poultice, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the syrups;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full and sweet, if it is a place where one can put a poultice, then put it there, for this is very good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the joint easily, and then with water, quite well, and then stretch it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the joint becomes too sore after the application of the syrups, then wet a linen cloth in cold water and place it on it, until the swelling subsides.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the swelling is greatly increased, then apply a poultice of vitriol dissolved, or gallnuts, and similar things, until it subsides.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put half a handful of peeled broad beans on the joint, and leave them until they have absorbed into the joint, it will now subside.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more of it, then take other syrups.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	and if the syrups do not wish to be taken, then wipe the joint with fresh blood, or drive an awl into it until the swelling goes away.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will absorb.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are discharging, then powder on a little bit of aloes and saffron dissolved, or ashes, so they will now sweeten.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is a remedy for fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Listen, dear son, that the foolish mirror sees nothing in this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books, nor read a letter.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and because of this reason is estranged the science in our land, for I never found any good.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing, except by the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the habituation of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and abbreviated it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of instruments that are presented, just as I did in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say the prologue of this book, summarizing the words and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remaining on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and learn it from others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when breakage or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one side and the other, unless something else entirely takes over, such as weakness of body, or childhood, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if the weather is not very cold or too hot; and mild choleric diseases, that is to say, cold fits, and flesh of hare and goat, and do not drink wine, nor indulge in fatty meats, and do not overfill with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are certain about aposteme hot or spreading matter to a member; then restore the patient to their original good governance which they have used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to recover, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with foods that make thick nourishment, or if they have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and peas, and pork belly, and beef, and fresh fish, and good wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with thick nourishment the breaks are repaired more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken bones of old people and decrepit ones cannot be well taken up or soldered according to their nature because of the weariness of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but don't worry, reset the broken bone with one thick splint that sets and joins the member together, so long as it strengthens to what it was before; and don't let it fail in its work, and therefore it is necessary to nourish it with thick foods, such as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that broken bones are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the breakage of the head is one thing, and the breakage of the breast or leg another, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of breaking.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that occur with twisting, and others with bending, just like the cutting off of a quill to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a break with wound, and a break with a small crack in one piece.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each kind has its own device, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings into its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and is known the break of the bone by what the joint is twisted, and appears well by the absence, and sounds under the pressure of the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting nor sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no break;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it may well have twisting, or crack, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	So do not move him with your hand, but put on the medicines that come later, and then strain him gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the breaks that occur in twisting, and are the two parts dislocated, it is necessary now to bring them back into equal alignment, so that cold apostemes may not come.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if hot apostemes come, then leave him alone for a day, until the apostemes are appeased;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then set him back in alignment with the joint that you can do gently and wisely, and know that the restoration of this one is more gentle than the restorations of those who have pieces; then strain him, as it is necessary afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, two parts, whether it is hands or feet, or at your hand if it is small members, or with two strings, or one string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are disarranged, then reset by all means the additions in their places at the joint that you can, and take care that through your work no lesion or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the two joints of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well: then dress it beautifully, and do not strain it too much, nor press it as those who bring about hot apostemes and contractions in the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is in place, then chastise well the patient so that he does not move it, neither while watching nor while sleeping, nor while turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it is necessary to put it into such a condition that it feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and take care that it is set correctly, so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members, such as fingers and toes and similar ones: then it is necessary to envelop them in soft and subtle linen cloths.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: then it is necessary to envelop them in a wide and strong linen cloth, for the broad cloths enfold all the great member and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no flaw.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then wrap it with light cloth bandages, three turns or four according to the member, and restrain your hand slightly at all the linen, then go above the break and restrain less, so that the break will move away a little from the break;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the linen a little by little, until you take up a great part of the healthy joint, then take another bandage and wrap it around again above the broken joint;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then go to the part below the break, and strain it moderately, not too strongly nor too gently, as we have said in the first lesson above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then put between the stitches strips of linen or cloths, until it is completely even, then bind all together with one bandage, and then place well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or abscess, then put on something soothing for the abscess hot, which removes the swelling, and leave it thus for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then strain on top of the splints, and be made of half a long willow branch that has been split open, or of boxwood from which one makes hinges, or of palm tree strips, and be in accordance with this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the break be a little bit bigger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be also as long as it is needed for the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then strain on top of the splints just as you did in the first lesson, then bind above with a thread smoothly, as in the first lesson above the break;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	The tighter it is up there, the looser down here; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of fine linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the thread is thick, like I've seen the works of fools who make their bandages from twisted linen cords, and that's a great error, for the binding cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it does not need to have between each splint less than two inches of space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the splints after straining in their joints, then put beneath them strips of linen or shorn wool, so that he does not get hurt.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the break, and the ligaments are torn, I will say its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not need to strain all broken limbs with splints on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it does not need to put splints except after five or seven days, or more according to your security about hot abscess happening.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and behold here the manner of ancient ointments to restore breaks, dislocations, and twists: and it is that you take flour that remains at the walls of the mill, and mix it with a great deal of egg, and put this concoction, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it is the common manner of the ointment restoring the break in many dispositions, and especially for women and small children, for it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of ointment restoring the break and dislocation and twist: take 10 parts of absinthe, laudanum, and aloe, and 5 parts of gum arabic and myrrh; mix with 8 parts of aloes, and grind into powder, and mix with a great deal of egg; if the complexion of the person is hot, then use this ointment, for it is of good composition, and will quickly restore broken bones, and is worth to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of ointment that is worth for twisting: take myrrh and gallnut, 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, 8 parts; aloe juice, 6 parts; Armenian balsam, 10 parts, and grind well, and mix with water or a great deal of egg, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another manner of ointment for joints and bones that are out of their places, and soothes the pain that follows, and is used to shape the bone and break: take new wool, and soak it in olive oil and warm water, and put on the joint. These ointments do not restore, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly remove pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another manner of ointment that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of fig and leaves of terrestrial poplar, and grind together, and make an ointment.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another manner of ointment for the restoration of bone break and to ease the remaining abscess. Take root of gallnut, chamomile, violets' flowers, and wheat flour, each one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the member is heated, mix with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another manner of ointment stronger than the first one, when abscess persists in restoring the member. Take roots of gallnut, and flax seeds, balm, melilot, and sanicle, and violets' flowers and chamomile's, each one part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the warmth of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on the broken member to restore it with anything except a wax and oil mixture, and nothing more, and he says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, things slightly warm and dry, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another manner of ointment that is worth for lesion and pain: take myrrh and human hair or bird feathers, and gallnut, and mix them equally, and grind into a powder, and make an ointment and bind it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then loosen the bandage a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if so, do not loosen the bandage for many days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the joint, or pruritus, with no rest or swelling, then hasten, and loosen the bandage, and remove the ointment now; and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and plunge it into water, and lift up the joint, until the pruritus ceases, and the pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry wool, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind with a nut, until you are sure of hot abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let the inflammation of the member subside, and let the pain be removed, then resume the subtle binding, and a little ointment, and do not strain it so strongly as before; and bind subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is gone and red, and pain and swelling are all removed, and you need to apply ointment and binding again, then do so, just as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	If it does not come to the member what we have said, then do not release it except after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, as one sees, until the bone is set, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh on.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then restrain it more than before, and increase its flesh, as I have said before; and if you see the place drying out more than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Then take hot water and bathe it, every time you release it, and do so each day, and slacken the bandage a little.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this work, the nourishment is cut off from the member, and I hasten to correct what foolish doctors do, who leave the member twisted: that's bad, and it's a perilous job, and I see no other way than to tire oneself out and work correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways of breakings and various forms, and the causes are destined;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	for there are breakings that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone takes away all the bone up to the sacrum which is below the bone, as happens in hack or fist; and for this reason it is called this manner of breaking "hack".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts through the bone above, without piercing it, and is called this manner of breaking "absolute"; and the wound from these two breakings is great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an enclosed percussion, or splitting or cracking of the collarbone, or falling onto stone, or falling on top of stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent breaking which approaches just to the skin that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is reunited with the bone as fine as a hair, and the splitting is small, and for this reason it is called this breaking "capillary";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	and if the wound is made or caused by piercing with a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and makes the piece of bone go down, and the bone splinters as blacksmiths do when they heat up their forges; so the stone goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often to those who have or have had moist bones, as in children's skulls.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and happens with all these ways of breaking where small pieces are separated like that, and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of breakings by the pulling away above them, and the inquiry made by probing, and through the corrupt flesh that is on.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary appearance is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it gently above, then the black breaking appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the breaking, take note of the patient's accidents, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, paralysis, fever, and the eyes coming out and becoming red, and other similar conditions in many dispositions, then it cannot be cured without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no unbelievable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wound comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the 14th day of the moon that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the 7th day, lest the skin below the bone be corrupted, and come the accidents that we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the breaking of the bone comes just to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the part that is split in this way: and it is that you take hold of the patient's wounded head, and uncover above the bone in all ways that you can, and above the shape of the wound as gently as you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if bleeding of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess appears, then give what is needed, and it is that you fill the place with moist cloths soaked in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and make the wound rest until the abscess is appeased, and be assured of bleeding of blood; then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to two ways of work: one manner is that you cut in a narrow trimming before, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then put in another trimming larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have various trimmings of different lengths, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and made of iron; and in working lightly, that you do not wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and rough, it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you administer trimmings with tapers, not too deep lest they go through the bone of the skull, and should have above the point a margin or a circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each comes in its own place to the edge of the bone, so that you have tapers for all tests; and this is the form of the three manners of tapers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one taper on the bone and turn it to your right as long as you know the bone is pierced; then put the taper in another place a little later, and do this all around, then cut off the edges of the bone which are between the pits, and make it more subtly than you can, lightly, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand or to any of the instruments that you have such as forceps, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sacrum.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have the bone pierced and trimmed, it is necessary that you take the remaining edge of the bone to all one other instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more taut and more subtle than the other incisor.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if there remains nothing of the small bones or scales, then remove them lightly with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with liniments and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other manner of work is that which the Gauls say, who is more sound; and he binds it very tightly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the breaking appears moles; so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under the head of this lenticular incisor, whose form is:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut one way only, and the part being cut is in two sides, so that the cutter is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly scrape all around the bone, and take good care of the skin underneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is applied to the bone, then lightly scrape away, because one scrapes well without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not pierce all the way to the skin, and the bone is scraped away only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and scrape off the scales with a subtle scraper which you should have various quantities of, in order to make each place as suitable as possible, according to the work and shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Then scrape with great scrapers, and after with more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other subtle cuttings and breakages, it is necessary that you bring cause according to its direction; and this is not something that can be easily learned by one who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is uncovered, then it is necessary that you take one piece of linen, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another piece of linen doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first piece of cloth; and do this as lightly as you can so that you do not further inflame the wound, then apply above one more layer of linen, and do not strain it too tightly except until it only covers the wound.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is calmed down, then loosen it and apply medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, and incense powder, and aristology, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and apply medicines again without biting.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and watch so that the wound is soon clean, and do not leave any ointment there, nor allow bowels to gather beneath the skin of the brain, for when bowels assemble above the skin of the brain, they will flow and burst forth, and great harm will come to the patient; for when one places something biting on the wound, it will harden above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take heed if any bad accident befalls the patient, as we have said, which is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if nothing worse comes forth except through the medicine that one has put on, and that such virtue exists, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and one piece of cloth, and place it on the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply the treatment in the manner of treatments that are necessary, until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one only by itself, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, except it causes swelling or twisting, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you apply your little finger or pertus to the neck, and insert that break into your finger's index, and push it gently back into its natural place until the neck returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this lightly, and watch that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the neck, and it cannot be brought back to its place by the finger, then it is necessary that you put it equal to the top of a small rod.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, then do it in the same way, and hurry to restore it as soon as possible, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is calmed down, then bind a cloth around the neck, trying pieces of linen, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind another piece from the other side, if there is a break there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the pores of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And certain restorers say that the tents should be soaked in butter, and changed every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they are soaked in a concoction of egg white, and mill powder; then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilage has been toughened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one binds an oyster shell to the neck instead of tents, and if there is a soft cloth around it, and keeps the break together, and blows on the patient's breath between; then do what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the neck while you are working there, then put a poultice or damp cotton in rose oil, or in a small quantity of daguanion.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess does not come, then put a poultice in the back, made from wheat flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then place it on light cloths, and do not bind the neck.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break in the neck is small and has been broken into small pieces, then pull it out with suitable instruments for this purpose, then sew the opening, and apply cures that bring forth flesh and bind together, just as with poultices and ointments suitable for this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound within the neck, then apply the treatment of tents, and put leaden cauls on it, until he is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	(The text continues with a new topic: "On the dislocation of the jawbone")
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated below, and there is no wound beyond, and the break is only as far as the coronoid process, and it is not broken in two, except for the coronoid process, then one can tell this lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part of the jawbone, that you place your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left side of the mandible, then place your index finger from the right hand, and gently push the break back into its original position using the other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jawbone is separated into two parts, then it is necessary that you apply an extension of two parts, until it becomes equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth are moved or dislocated, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jawbone a poultice, and put on it a double cloth; and put on the cloth a large strap well made, or a piece of leather equal to the jawbone, long and wide according to its shape, and tie it as tightly as you can, and command the patient to rest, and give him light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If thou seest that the figure changeth, then loose it on the third day, and then put back to point what hath changed; and put upon a plaster, with powder of mill with abundance of egg or farina of wheat, after thou hast removed the cerote; and put upon a light linen plaster, and if the plasters stick, and the disposition of the patient changeth not, leave it thus until he be healed; many times he is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess breaks out, then apply what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, remove no part of the bone that has been taken out; but rather, with suitable instruments, extract it carefully.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it by fire as needed.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, then cover the wound, if it is large, and put on one of the plasters suitable for this, to stop bleeding, until he be healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps breaks many times before the shoulder, and the break is in three manners: either it is broken and separated into two parts, with pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is when the break is without wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the aid that feels the forceps broken; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then set the break evenly with your hands, so that the form be as it should be, and there be no appearance or deformity.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a rounded sphere made of cloth or linen, and it should be thick according to your need; and stretch and lift the forceps, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you set the break evenly as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the forceps to the outside because it is deeply embedded, then it is necessary that the patient lies comfortably on his hatreil, and puts a pillow under the shoulder; and have your assistants press down on the shoulder until the bone of the forceps is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then direct the break to your hands, and if you find it debris-covered, then it is necessary that you cut through it; and pull out the pieces slightly, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, then use one of the cutting instruments you have; but put this instrument under the forceps to protect the surrounding tissue.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and resembles a spoon, and is not at all rough, and should be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, as you see, with one being wide and the other being narrow, just like the edge of the wound that you made when you broke the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are assured of a hot abscess, then cover the wound, and if the edge is small or you doubt that it is a hot abscess, then fill the wound with cloth and tents according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess breaks out, then soak one cloth in rose oil and azime and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The dressing of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of mill powder and abundance of egg, and put light cloths on top, and place a sphere under the armpit, if you need to.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very wide band of palm width, then put one double cloth on top of the cloths and plaster; then take a thin roll of three fingers' length and wrap it around that band, so that the head of the band is hanging.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and place the roll on top of the break, and turn the band around the neck and under the armpit healthy, and under the armpit patient; and reset each part, and when you see that the linen holds the break well and you clearly see that the roll does not move above the broken bone, then leave it for each day, and when the linens slacken, then restrain it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the patient sit on his backside, and place under the armpit when he sleeps a small pillow to lift the aid upwards; thus it will ease the break of the forceps by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie unless bad accidents occur, until 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then reapply the plaster if you see that it is needed, and restrain and leave it thus until he be restored; and she is restored in the most within 28 days, and less to some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Sometimes it happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes wide and does not meet, and there is no swelling except by touch; then prepare according to the figure of the break, and reset according to its natural form in all ways you can; then put on top of the wound powder of mill with abundance of egg, and light cloths, and put on one double cloth; then put on a wide and subtle roll, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there are knots under the roll anywhere on the shoulder, then use those knots to tie up with linen cloths so that the roll stays evenly; and then restrain it tightly with a large band, so that the roll does not move from its place, and check the band each day; and every time it becomes loose, then restrain it again, and put the roll back in its original position if it has moved away from its place, and have the patient sit on their side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when this number is complete, then loosen it, and be sure, for it is not a bone that gets loose easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes before and points under the key, then do so, and extract it, and do what we have said about breaking off an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the chest
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The chest is sometimes broken inwards, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often to the outside. And when it is broken inwardly, then declines downward, and the patient feels great pain, lacks air, and all, and by chance vomits blood, and opens up the knots in the broken bone, and it is felt to be so.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient sits on their backside, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and subtly places it evenly in all ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on plaster and cloths above the subtle roll with salt or other light material, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the band around again, and restrain it well, and reward each hour with linen, and if it becomes loose, then restrain it again; and if it needs to be untied due to corrosion or pruritus that comes at the wound, or pain or abscess, then hasten and untie it, and remove the plaster, and address what has come from the ways of cures; then reset the plaster, and restrain until he is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of ribs does not come except in stout men after the back and at the top inside, and do not bend except because they are pliable; and one knows this well through examination by touch.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the remedy is that you put equal pressure on the break, just as it should be. And then apply an ointment, and hold it with a small stone, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels extremely great pain and piercing, just as from a pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and he swears oaths, and vomits and spews great abundance of blood, and this is a grievous health, and the ancients have attributed great skill to it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if one says that it is necessary to administer foods that inflate the belly, in order to push back the break outwardly.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do so, unless a hot abscess comes to be.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then let it heal.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of us say that one puts poultices on the place, to draw strongly, and this seems like reason; however, there is doubt whether the poultice attracts the superfluities to the place due to the weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of us say that one should cover the place with a wet cloth in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to put equal pressure around, then be cured through the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure through the bone that pierces the membrane, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut on top of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath one instrument to ward off the syphilis; and then one must file down the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew up the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure with ointments until he is healed. And if abscesses come, then place wet cloths in rose oil on top of the abscess; and cover the area; and care for the abscess as necessary, and be cautious over the ribcage where it is, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes the break occurs at the bone of the neck, and then it bends; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if you see their hands soft, swollen, and dead, and cannot move nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they become numb and feel well when one tightens and pokes them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one applies care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if the feet are soft, and if the accidents are in the hands, and on top of the back there is windiness and vomiting without willing it; and when one has vomited on their stomach, there is vomiting without willing it. And when he is treated on his back and wants to settle, but cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not bother with its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, then the thing is easier.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, by putting rose oil or egg yolk oil on the spine, until it is calmed; then put a comforting and drying ointment on top, and bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone is dislocated, then it is necessary to cover on the joint; and remove the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a seam, then cure with ointment releasing flesh, until he is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", then put your handkerchief from your left hand into the other hand to your power, then put the ointment and stone on top, if you need it; then hold it steady, and if there are dislocated bones, then set them, and cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the breaking of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Not often does the hip bone break, and if it breaks, then there is not much diminution at the top; and it becomes long, and declines downwardly, and comes to the patient with pain in the place, and piercing, and swelling up what has broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the remedy is that you stretch out your hand to it, so that you are above the break; and know what kind of break it is and its shape; and if the break is only at the top, then put equal pressure on that break, until it returns to its natural figure.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or it declines inwardly, then make the patient lie on their stomach, until the restoration of that break becomes apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it back in place, then apply an ointment, and then put a wooden or bone instrument on top, and steady the break so that it does not move; and fill the area below the ribs with something, until the sides are equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if hot abscesses come, do not touch them, until the hot abscess is calmed, and apply what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and steady it as needed, unless there is no bad accident; and that is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the cut and the head of the arm, and if it breaks, then it must be restored according to one of the two manners: one of which is that you take a wooden stick of mulberry wood, in this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two heads with two bandages, and bend them upwards, and seat the patient on a chair; then throw his broken arm onto the stick, until it comes to the elbow, and has in the middle a curve of wood, then bend it upon some heavy thing or have the assistant stretch it down; then place the break even with your hands together, until the break returns as needed.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one should bind the patient to his bedstead, and tie his hand to his neck, then command two attendants to hold each what is on the bedside table in their hands, and the other to stretch each one to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then bind one line under the bedside table, and another above it, and have each attendant stretch to their part. And if the bedside table is near the top of the shoulder, then it is necessary to put one line midway under the armpit, and the other towards the neck, under the bedside table; and also if the bedside table is towards the neck, then you must put one line slightly, without labor, until the bedside table is even above and below, and then bind it, so that there are no abscesses.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses do come, then do not bind it at all until seven days, and put a moist cloth on it in a sheltered place and with rosate oil, until the abscess is appeased; then bind it, and the manner of binding is that you put an ointment on the bedside table, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put a cloth around it, and bind on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, as long as nothing is defending it, or if the bone is not loosened.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use splints, and put a larger and stronger splint on the bedside table, with two to three inches of space between each splint, and have each splint be so large that it passes over the bedside table three inches from each side; then bind on the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the bedside table, more firmly and less distant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the seat of the splints and the binding, as we have said, in the time when you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, then leave it alone until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each three days at the bandage, lest inflammation or swelling come to the place, or the numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight. If so, address it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accidents come, then do not loosen the bandage until after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on his back with his hands on his stomach; and put under the bedstead a soft linen pillow, and look every hour of the day or night to see that the shape of the broken member does not change or become loosened; if so, address it by the power of medicine, and give him food as we have previously set forth, in such a way that the food is for the first subtle ones; and when he begins to recover, let it be substantial. And it is customary that the bedstead and leg should be rewrapped every 40 days altogether; and then one must loosen and administer baths and medicines of ointments to bring it back into place. And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, then wait one day or two months before loosening.
de la brisure du bras	Of the breakage of the arm.
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fossicles", because one is small and is the one that follows the pouchet; and the other is large and is the one that is below, towards the little toe; by chance, break only the large fossicle, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small fossicle is broken, the restoration and healing are light; and when the large one is broken, it is a bad healing and more grievous than when they are both broken together. If only the small fossicle is broken, then you must slightly stretch it and make it equal.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large fossicle, then you must bind more tightly; and stretch it on a cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little toes lower than the other toes, and have the patient crossed over himself, with a cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then have one attendant stretch the arm to the part below his hand, or to one line, and another attendant to the other above. And then put it back into place, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the break has pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is none that are loose and can be grasped by the key, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint of wood and bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the break there is a wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; then take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the beginning of the restoration there are hot abscesses, then apply a cloth made of roset oil and white wax, not too hard or too soft; and bind the cloth subtly on top, until the hot abscess is appeased. Then remove the cerote, and put an ointment made with mill powder and abundant egg yolks on it; then place the splints, and let the splint of the break be a little stronger and wider than the others; and know that it should have 6-8 splints or more in different positions: either the break is in one bone or two; and bind more tightly above the break than elsewhere, always lessening the distance, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths on top of the break be soft and moist, not hard or dry; and let the thread that binds it be made of linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said. And reward the member and bandage after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if some bad accidents come to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you bathe the member in hot water, until those itches are appeased; and let the member not too tightly rest. And then resume the binding, and if the bandage is worn out and the bone loose, and similar things, then address them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take care that numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little and let it rest thus for some days, until numbness comes to it and then bind.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of the things we have said do not come to the patient, then do not remove the bandage until after 20 days or so, and then let him put his hands on his neck, and let his necks be even; and take care of movement and gesture, and sleep on his back; and know that this break is restored in 30 days or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the temperaments and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and in our fingers it often happens to break, and there is no more than it bends many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the finger of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged and sit straight in front of himself evenly; then he puts his hand on the extended cloth, stretches the broken bones, and makes them equal to the mirrors, until they are well joined; and applies an ointment and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then it is applied with a straw according to the quantity of the injury; and it should be enveloped in one fold of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is around the belly of the finger, make a ball of cloth and instruct the patient to wrap it around his broken finger; and then bind it with a long cloth, and let the bandage be as smooth as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the tip, it is necessary that you put a bandage on top and another underneath in the finger, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it entirely around the hand, and stop the swelling between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to any of our fingers, if it's the middle one, make it equal, as is necessary; and bind it with the finger, and if you see that it needs a small straight bandage to lift the break, and do not move it; and if the break is on other fingers, such as the index or another, make it equal, and tie it with the healthy finger that follows; or you tie all together in one holding, whichever is better, or place a bandage above, like a poultice; and take care in restoration and disposition of hot abscesses, and help those that come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that one tie above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then stretches each of his assistants to his equal part; and it is when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, it should be one of the ties towards the armpit, and the other ties below the break. And also if it is near the knee, and then it should be the tie beside the knee, and be extended downward; then put the mirrors to make the bone equal to its natural figure, and then apply the ointment, and bind it, if hot abscesses do not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down and then return to your work and care; the binding is done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap above the break with a bandage of double cloth in two or three layers, and leave the superfluous parts; then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the knee, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, beside the knee below, and let the end of the thread come up; then turn above the leg and above the thigh the bandage, then put on the break bandages, and put one bandage on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to make equal the binding; then begin to bind strongly three or four turns around the break; and when you go up above the break, and less bind it; then attend to the two knots of the thread that you have inserted between the leg and the thigh, and tie three bandages that are above, then return down below to the head of the thread, until you come beside the foot; and bind it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, unless there comes an abscess or swelling or any similar thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there is a complication, then release it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that grip, then it is necessary to sew, if possible; and if not possible, then it is necessary to split the skin, and draw out the fragments; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no time is the thigh broken in such a way that one puts bandages on it, as in the aid and arm; although, in the restoration made in this way, the patient does not complain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the various conditions of temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the rupture of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the rupture of the knee there is often breakage, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a fissure or a hole, and has to be treated for all wounds, and without wound, and this is well known.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one makes equal what is out of joint in his fingers, until it is assembled as much as one can; then apply an ointment, and put on a round bandage if you need to, and bind it as it is necessary, then return all the dispositions that we have said for other breaks, such as hot abscesses and any similar thing; and give each accident what it needs, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "tibia" and the other "fibula"; and it has all the same breakage as it comes to the arm, and therefore the restoration is done equally as that of the arm, and all the works are thus.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bone is broken, then bend forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the thick bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen well; and bend down. Then apply an extension, and make it equal, and tie the bandages evenly; but nonetheless, it is necessary to see if the break is ugly, and there are multiple pieces, that the extension be less and more gentle; and adjust according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed all your work, take two pieces of leather that go around the leg from one side to the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down; then wrap in two layers a bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus it is well; and some people put a stick along the length of the leg, made of leather, and set the leg to prevent movement, and properly do what is needed in the break where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is hot abscess or any other accident; and care for it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breaking of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	Of the ankle there is no breaking, but sometimes the bones of the foot break and one must take care, and there is only a slight wound in more than one disposition.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the foot are broken and you see these bones mounting one on top of another, then set the patient's foot on the ground, just as if they were going to walk, and now put your foot on their joint where the bones are raised, then press it so that they return to their places; then apply plaster and bandages, and under the foot of the patient a small tablet at two full cups, then strain the foot correctly, and when you have wrapped it in cloths, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days are passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the toes broken, then set them in place, just as we have said for the fingers; then put on each broken toe a splint according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then put under the foot that tablet which I mentioned, and strain it correctly; and if there are two or three or more broken toes, put on each toe a splint according to its size, wrapped in one cloth of linen, and strain the tablet under the foot; and let it be so that what is above the top of the tablet is outside the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said about other breakages, when we have spoken; and each accident should be treated according to what is needed.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, make her sit with an enlarged pillow, then bend her towards the back part, and have it held from behind; then fill the natural cavity with cotton, and put in as much as one stook; then lift up the woman, and gently raise the back piece by piece, and then the cotton jumps out until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and the bone returns with the stook; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back on, and do this for seven days or so: the break will be restored, and if you see, take a vetch bladder, and tie a cord around the anus, and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow strongly into the cord until the bladder is emptied inside: the nature will return to the break; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the finger of a man or woman is broken, then set it in place just as we have said for the thumb; and these breakages are not hidden from one who puts their study and use into practice and intends my book. For the breaks indicate the right path to restoration: heed this accordingly.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose gizzard and put it inside; then wrap cloths around it, and let it be for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of breaking with a wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a breaking with a wound, whether it be great or small, like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that they should be healed now, so that the healings which we have said bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, but the breakage remains, and you have no other remedy, then start again to restore the breakage in the same hour or day, unless abscesses do not come forth.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come forth, then leave the restoration alone until the ninth day, until the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible above the skin uncovered, it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, to a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not suitable for you to put in place with your hands, then take this instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight fingers long, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them, according to what they have need of in each cure of breakage; and be rough and a little big, so that it does not bend under compression on the member at your work, and be flat in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called a "palainche", for which reason the curved nails should be placed on top of the apparent bone; and fill it once, until it revives, and be even one against the other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you file the top of the bone, until the instruments have power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, then file it with a suitable instrument, or knife or rasp, to your power; and then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small scrapings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is restored, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So do what is necessary to get it back to its place, then soak one cloth in black stiptic wine, and properly apply it; and do not put on the wound ointment or any other thing with oil, lest you bring about putrefaction and corruption; then administer these remedies when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and file away the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not strained with the breakage; for many foolish doctors have done this, and have brought about death or decay in the patient on occasion; and be the remedies more gentle and soothing than those for other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that bad accidents may come from it, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then do not put on any poultices; but wrap around, instead of poultices, hard cloths and tie them. And when you see after one day or two days bowels loosening up to the wound, then remove everything you had put on it with all wine, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrafarmac and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the member two times a day, in the morning and evening, until it is set and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be aligned in such a way that the bow can run down easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but goes back down, know that there are small bones, for which it is necessary that you search the wound with a probe, and remove all these loose fragments that cause such pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula comes to the place or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken and appears on the member, like the bones of the hip or shoulder, and similar ones of the great limbs, do not pull it out, for many times death ensues, but leave it until it has purged; by chance it will fall off after twenty days or thirty, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of boils that come on the sweat glands
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see after the healing of an incision, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sad sight to behold the shape of the member; and by chance the member cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take heed therefore if the swelling is fresh: then administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarsaparilla, aloe, and similar others, either one of these things or all together, and boil them with stiptic wine or with abundant egg white or with oil; and put it on the night in cauldrons, and strain it well, and do not remove it for several days; then remove it, and start another, until the swellings are removed; or you strain it over a piece of cloth well made; for the properties of the cloth are that they remove all the swellings from the members; and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above, and make the superfluity apparent; or you give it to any scraper, until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is restored, and after the member remains weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: one of which is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and could not come the nourishment to the member; or because of excess inflammation; or because of excessive movements, not in its proper hour; or because it has a lack of blood in its body, thus it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and keep the body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths, and give joy and ease to him; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and removes excess moisture often with lukewarm water, until the nourishment runs to the member; and restore it to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the twisted member after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone appears, and the shape of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the member all over again; many foolish men have done this in our land; and this practice is blamed, and great evils come from it, and by chance death; however, if the swellings and tortures are fresh, then they should be removed with hot water, or herbs that soften should be cooked, such as yarrow leaves, roots, and melilotus, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, like well-made daquylon, and take the sap of yarrow, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or take figs that are rich in grease, and grind them with henbane, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And at no time is the swelling removed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with many moist things. And be administering movements to the member every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is hardened and calcified, like stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, then it should be cut just to the bone, at the incision, subtlety lightly; and put caution and study into the care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to someone, then it is necessary now to bring it back into place carefully.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, the swelling increases, and by chance, if one resets it with pains at the joint; therefore it is not necessary to move it to its proper place when it is swollen: many times this brings shame and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	however, when this happens, make the patient whole, then leave him, until the abscesses are appeased; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and care for each member as the remedy comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from head to toe.
des mandibules	of the jawbone
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes it happens that the jawbones are dislocated downward, and the dislocation of both is in two manners: or they are a little removed from their place and softened a little; or they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by gentle means.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if she is entire and complete, then it is necessary that you reset it quickly, and do not hesitate.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in such a way that the attendants hold the head of the patient, and put the probe's pouch from one of their hands into the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two hands are apart to make equal; and command the patient to relax his jawbones and move them all around.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the attendants put it in its place, until it returns to its natural position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the resetting is difficult, especially if both jawbones are together, then raise them with hot water and oil, until they reset lightly; do not hesitate in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset equally, and the patient's mouth closes well with gentle softening, then put on moist cloths in a wax made from rose oil and beeswax, and tie it lightly with soft strings.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	et the patient sleeps on his back, and his knees being between two cushions, in such a way that he does not stir to the right or left, nor does he exert himself at all to make it better, but takes light food, until the pains are gone, and the jawbones are quiet.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then gently moisten what he wishes lightly, and does not trouble himself to open his mouth when eating or drinking, until the jawbones are well quieted and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be brought back into place within an hour, and are not converted to their natural state, then fever and accustomed sweats come, and perhaps dissolution of the bowels, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of death; and many times the person who has it dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the shoulder
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder cannot dislocate from the side within the continuity of it and the breastbone, and is sometimes dislocated to the rear, and one can well perceive this.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, stretches out his arms; and then presses the joint firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on the poultice and bandage, and restrain.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the head of the shoulder which is towards the back cannot dislocate; if not, and if it does dislocate at all, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the poultice and bandage, and restrain, and command the patient to rest until he is healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and similarly bring back the head of the spine when it has become dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: namely, one way is when it dislocates downwards towards the armpit; and the second way is towards the breastbone; and perhaps dislocates upwards, and this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, for they jump out quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps out slightly and returns slightly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And perhaps happens to some men a blow or breaking, and the shoulder becomes swollen with an abscess hot, and thinks it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you examine it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it goes down towards the armpit, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest diversity.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the armpit, touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an ox; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck nor move with any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touching.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this way of dislocation is not to be reduced when it is new or if the patient is feeble.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up high, then puts his fists under the armpit, and lifts the jointure with force up to its place; and the minister lifts the hand and stretches it up high, then puts it back down; so it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said within three days after, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister should arise slowly mollifying and soothing, just like a decoction of alethae and fenugrec and millefoil in water, and be administered.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the patient should be placed on his back, and a piece of woolen cloth, neither too soft nor too hard, should be put under the armpit; then the minister should place their heel on the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and pull the patient's hand.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another minister should hold the patient's head, so that it does not move down; this shoulder comes back right now, and if you see that it is reduced in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and that you make sure one man who is taller than the patient is present; and stands straight towards the side, and pushes his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lifts the armpit up high, so that the patient hangs in the air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another minister should pull the patient's hand down towards their stomach. And if the patient is too light, then make him carry something heavy with him, and the dislocation will come back now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And we also restore it in another way: and is that one long iron rod is stuck in the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is as high as a pistol, and is not too big nor too small.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then it is put under the patient, but so that he has wrapped a soft cloth on top, and the patient's arm is stretched down from the other side firmly, and the jointure will come back to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not want to return after all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take one iron rod of two arms and three fingers in width, which has the head bent so that it can enter easily under the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie it on top of the bent head of the stick with a soft cloth so that the stick does not hurt the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient; and stretch one's arm over the long iron rod, and tie the assistant to the iron rod, and lift one's arm up to the top of the hand, then put one's arm on top of a small shield from a wide basket, and let one's hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the jointure will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is so, in whatever way it may be, then it is necessary that you put under the armpit a woolen sphere, then put the poultice wrapped with powder from the mill, with incense and egg white, on all of the shoulder and around, then restrain it under the armpit gently, and turn the bandage over the poultice, and encircle the hand around one's neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he drinks little, until the limbs are comforted, for he will heal sooner; and then drink more after five days or seven, and move him; and if he is firm and is not softened, he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is dislocated from its place due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, then you must apply cauterizations to three pores, as described in the treatise on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and it happens after seven days, and the joint does not hold and cannot lift your arm above, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the chest and breasts or the back is caused by sudden impulse and stretching of arms, and another treatment should be applied; and cure until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes swelling in the member and delayed movement, then the patient should take baths many times until that swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the hip
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the hip is displaced a little bit, and then returns a little bit; and it is displaced from all sides, just as well in front as behind, and the dislocation is not restored, because one can see it clearly and feel it clearly; and displace according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the diseased hip to the sound one, then you can see it clearly. For the joint is distorted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as apostemes come to it, for if apostemes came to it, it would be grievous to reset; and in any case it cannot be completely reset from top to bottom, especially when it is at the back; and it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and in any case death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that one can reset it, that you stretch out its hand to your two hands; and its arms be spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the hip around, above, and below, and push the joint back into place with its folds together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and brings back the hip that is displaced.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it doesn't want to return to its place, then apply strong extension; and it is that two ministers should stretch out the arm, and hold it for two ministers, so that it doesn't move at all; then turn the arm from each side, once you have wrapped a double fold long and wide.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mirror has joined the joint to its hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, and then push the joint firmly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is at the place, then put on dry plaster with some egg white, and strain firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels swelling after the setting of the joint, and it becomes inflamed, then bathe it and rub it gently, and press until it is relieved; or you put a layer of sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make him enter into the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he bathes, then gently rub the joint, then put the fat back on, and then enter into the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is healed; and if you see that it helps, then apply warm moist vetch with butter, and strain it on; it will return to its natural state.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated and the return is light, more than other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to bring it back to its place hastily, in the same hour that it is dislocated, whether the swelling be present or an apostema hot come.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the restoration is that you put the diseased hand on a board, and stretch out the fingers of the ministers, and place it even, so that it puts its palm on the appearance of the joint, and push it until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Moreover, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in place; then put the patient's back of his hand on a board for extension and restoration.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient's back of his hand on the board, and the mirror puts its hand on that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is well.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then apply soothing plasters to calm the hot apostemes, and leave it thus without reapplying.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint will remain twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and nothing else is wrong with the patient except that his hands are softened, and he cannot strain anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut or the arteries; there is no other reason for it except to strain by applying cauterization in such cases, and perhaps there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, then put on the plaster as we have said, and strain it and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well and there is some swelling, then soak it in hot water and rub it gently until he is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are displaced on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the wrist.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then stretch out the fingers and push the dislocation back into its place until it returns, then support the tip of the finger and guide it towards the part where it was separated.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and leave it for two days, and then put it back in place that day; and bind the joint with a thread, as we have said, and release it each day, and guide it to move, and rebind the joint; and do this often until it is straight.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, and do as you have done before, until he is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Loosening of the spine's curvature
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the curvature of the back or neck is loosened, or there are multiple loosenings, if there is no treatment, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the evacuations come forth without intention, nor can it be held, and many times certain members become softened, or the two knees, or both arms, or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the curvature bends into four parts; that which bends at the back is called "humpbacking".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is to correct it if humpbacking has come from childhood: otherwise, there will be no treatment or recovery at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment say with great words, but there is no great benefit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have shortened it according to my intention, and have fashioned instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the humpbacking that comes forward at the chest, there is no intellect or sanity;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes straightly in both sides, and one can only cure the farthest one that comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in one place even, and have a strain below him, so he does not hurt himself.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then place one iron rod on the head firmly in the earth, and another at the feet, and tie a band around the hips of the patient, and another around the knees, and ankles, and shins.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and two ministers know the bands, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two iron rods.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well closed, the rods as we have said, and the operator put his palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not recover with this treatment, take a board three arm-lengths long, and carve an opening below the appearance, and have the patient lie on their side, and place the head of the board below the appearance, then put the middle of the board on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and the operator puts their feet on the other head of the board, and presses well, until it recovers its shape; and if you see, then do so to the corner that turns towards your hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you place two iron rods at the head of the patient, one arm's length apart, and have between each rod, above and below, a palm's breadth in length.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and have in each rod one perforation, where the corner turns, and be the rods firmly planted in the earth, so that they do not move; and between each two rods have one turning rod, on which the band turns, and have in each of the two turning rods two small rods, one palm's breadth long, to turn the corner.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the band that is between the hips to the corner towards the head, and the other band towards the feet to the other corner, and each of the ministers turns their corner to all the band, and the master places the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then apply a drying poultice with an abundance of egg white, and then stop it up, and then apply the plaster from a tablet three fingerbreadths long, which should straighten out the curvature of the back and the part of the spine that is healthy, then tie it with a band, as we have said, and use gentle massage on the patient until he is cured.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if nothing comes to the end of the cure, then it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines with the plaster that we have said above; and sometimes one should administer a piece of bread.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and sometimes the appearance comes in the back part of the spine of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; and this is the bone that opens, so one should not have any assumption: by chance it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not come forth except through dislocation alone, nor does it come forth as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is loosened according to three parts: within and without, and before and behind; and more so within than without, and less loosened before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee appears more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot double their knee over.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the place that is below inflamed abscess hot, because the head of the knee comes loose.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it happens in the back is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of him to whom it happens in front is that his leg is well straightened according to its completion; however, he does not double his knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot at first, and retains his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he steps on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him to whom it happens behind is that he cannot straighten his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the knee is at the level below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this type of dislocation are that you correct if the dislocation is ancient, and it remains according to its disposition, so there is no treatment; and one should not have any assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the three manners of dislocation, hasten that you turn the joint, and straighten it within and without, and move it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and there is no need for further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary that you have a strong minister appear, and straighten the leg strongly with two hands, or with one band that is tied above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and the other minister stretches his hand up in this way that he places his hands under his hips, then tightens it with a soft band on the knee; and another takes hold of the head of the band.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they all stretch up and down at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to all three forms, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, then it is necessary to apply a cure to its appearance. When the dislocation is at the shoulder blade, then you should instruct the patient to lie on their side with good posture, then place the strap above the root of the hipbone, and the part that is below the armpit, then pull the strap upwards towards the armpit and the shoulderblade;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then take another attendant's arms and embrace the thick part of the patient's hipbone, and extend it far away strongly: if it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot compress it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the patient's two feet together with a soft strap on the two heels, and on the two knees, and have the patient's affected leg extended two fingers more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then be suspended on the head of a beam, and be above the ground two arms long; then instruct one attendant to embrace the patient's hipbone, and have another attendant holding with the patient, who will embrace it strongly, for the joints return now quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is far away, then have the patient lie down, as we have said in the one with gilboesite, and stretch one strap on the patient's affected leg properly, and also on the hip.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two hot irons, one at the head and one at the hips, and then insert one iron between the patient's hipbones in the shape.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have damp cloths planted around, so that the patient does not get hurt, then stretch each attendant towards him, and the surgeon puts his hand equally on the patient's affected joint.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that's good. If not, put him on the table and press him thus as we have said in gilboesite, and have the patient lie down on his side with good posture.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is before, then it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I said; and have the surgeon place his hand on the armpit of the patient's affected side, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is far away, then it is not necessary to extend the patient downwards, nor lift up towards the earth, but rather that he be as if his hip were dislocated far away, as we have said about the position on the two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and be on his face, and the strap extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be done when the patient stretches out his legs and they are even; then adjust the hipbones, and put on the plaster, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and if it rests for three or four days, then loosen it, and put the plaster on; and if you see that they are even, then strain, as before, and leave it alone for three days; then loosen it, and let him go about pleasantly, until the limbs are comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and forward, and backward; and it does not dislocate ahead.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their hipbone, and if it does not bend to its hipbone, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch their leg if they can, and place your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take their knee with your palms and draw it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee strongly; and another attendant stretches their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it bends well into its hipbone slightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and put the plaster on, and make the leg fit into the hipbone, and keep them together strongly for three or four days, then loosen it; and do not trouble the patient to walk, until the limbs are comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limbs are not right, then administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes strained and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and tends towards the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the remedy is gentle, and one must stretch it gently with their hands when it is strained only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright, and have one attendant hold the leg on top of the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then draw the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and press the foot firmly upwards.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this twice, as we have said, by pressing and drawing the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, then begin the work again, for it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return thus, then have the patient sit on their back on the ground, and place one strap firmly in the ground between their hipbones, and bind cloths around, so that the patient does not get hurt.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then have the attendants hold the hipbone, and another attendant stretch the foot to their hands or to one strap, which they will bind on top of the ankle.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then stretch each attendant equally, and the straps be thus between the patient's hipbones to retain the patient when one is stretching.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then have the surgeon place his hand equally on the joint, and another attendant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is back in place, then put on the plaster and bandages on top, and strain strongly, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the straps are not too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	then leave it for two or three days, and if the straps become loose, then strain; then loosen it on the third day or fourth, and prevent the patient from walking for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he walks before that term is reached, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess appears there, then it is necessary to pacify it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	you must
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two bones are dislocated, then they should be gently stretched without labor, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on one plain seat or on a table completely straight, and place your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it recedes.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is equal and there appears nothing, then place a board under the heel of the foot at two joints, then strain firmly, and let it remain three days, then release it; and make him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one tries to restore it, often happens that the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are pitiful and merciful and slow, rather than hasty;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use at the beginning soothing things for a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the member to its place, in such a way that the abscess appears.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the member is at place, then administer soothing things for a hot abscess, and treat the wound, as it behooves, with dry ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are separated, then set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and take care to enter into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worth moving you according to your Creator, and by the wisdom of thy arm and body. Amen
Explicit le romen de fisique	The end of the treatise on physics
