Oh, sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by the completion of it you will achieve perfection in it, and by its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I have provided you with a treatment that is part of the operation of the hand, that is surgery.
For the operation of the hand is prostrated in our region and in our time totally deprived, until the science of it has perished, and its practice is stopped; and there remain of it only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which made the most errors and deviations to those mistakes and excesses until the intentions of it are closed and its force is elongated and the art.
And it seems to me that I will revive it with the ordering of this treatise in the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes to the forms of the preparations of cauterization and of the other instruments of the work, as is necessary by addition of the declaration, and by preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the reason why no artisan is found skilled in this art in our time, is that the art of medicine is long and requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes knowledge of the joining of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and has the understanding of the bones, nerves and ligaments, and their names, and their functions; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their emission.
And for this Hippocrates said that a small word is enough, especially in the work of the hand.
We have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy, it is not surprising that they fall into error, through which men die, as has been seen many times, because some are formed in this science and boast of possessing it, yet lack its practice and experimentation.
For I have seen a foolish and inexperienced doctor having made an incision on a scrophulous abscess in the neck of a woman, and having cut some arteries of the neck, through which a great amount of blood flowed, until the woman fell dead among his hands.
And I saw another doctor who ordered that he would swallow a stone of a man which was stuck in his throat, and the stone was large, and came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, through which that man on the third day died.
And I have already called it foolish to extract that, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I suspected that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was paid by a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he applied a black plaster to a patient who had a fracture in their thigh; and the doctor, with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, put a poultice on the wound, with strong bandages and tight binding, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And return the dislocated according to the desires of the sick, and return the relaxed, and return the loose one for all joints and command that we untie the ligament; and it is necessary that thus between the thigh and the foot an abscess forms, and it comes to a dangerous loss.
And it is called relief for him, and prepared to dislocate the ligament, and acquired is tranquility and thus removed are his pains.
Greater corruption had already been confirmed in the member, for which it could not be restrained, and did not cease to spread the corruption in the member until the patient is in danger.
And I saw another doctor who made a cancerous abscess, and it was ulcerated in the following days, until the evil of it was magnified with the lord of it, his master.
This is because the bitter humor is pure melancholy, then it does not happen that it comes to him with all iron, but rather that it be in a member which suffers so that from it all is hosted.
And for this, sons, it is necessary that the operation with the hand be divided into two devotions: one is the operation in which health is associated, and the other is the work in which danger is in the greatest dispositions.
And you have already extracted this from every place of this book in which an operation is described where there is error and fear; for which it is necessary for you to guard against this and let go of that, so that the foolish do not accuse you of speaking and dishonesty.
And then take up your arms with solicitude and protection from God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God to achieve health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind the terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and put away your arms from what makes you fearful, so that it does not diminish your faith and your name: for many are remaining for your glory, and may they be in the world and afterwards among your sanctities.
Indeed, I have already spoken to some wise men: Do not treat a bad illness poorly, so that bad doctors are not named".
And you have already devoted this book to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first from the first part. The first chapter deals with the head and the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the preparations of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second section. The second chapter, on drying and perforation, and on ventoses, and on plasters, and on extraction of arrows and on similar things to them, all chapters and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on treatment of twists and on similar things to them; chapter ordered from head to feet, and on the forms of instruments.
It is good to discern the quality of the juices of that cautery and of its instruments, and in which complication it is prohibited to apply cautery.
Therefore I say that the discourse on the quality of the juice of cautery and its instrument is a long and prolix discourse, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many sages have spoken about it, and they are discordant, and for me it suffices to take a small part of their discourses, fearing prolivity.
And therefore I say that cautery is suitable for all universal complications, whether they are with material or without material, except for two complications, which are complications without material.
In the complex of the tail and dry matter, it will become disordered; because some said that a cauterized wound is helpful for this, and others said the opposite, that cauterizing is not convenient for an illness which is caused by heat and dryness, since the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is convenient that an illness of the tail and dry matter be treated with what is hot and dry to be healed.
And it is said by him who says the opposite, that cauterizing is made helpful in all dry and hot illnesses that occur in men's bodies, because when you compare men's bodies and their humidity to the complexity of fire, you find men's bodies are cold.
And I speak from the sermon of that one, who has already experimented on me several times to discover.
But I more openly declare that it is not necessary for that which has already been proven and practiced in the chapter of cauterizing through previous exercise, and having understood the diversity of the complexity of men and the disposition of their illnesses, and the causes of those, and the accidents of them, and the timing of those.
But in other complexities, it is not about your fear, and especially in cold and humid illnesses, because already all doctors agree on those, and are not disordered in the help with cauterizing in those.
It is known, sons, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, is that a cautery in medicine is burning, because the fire is simple, its action does not reach except to the member which is cauterized and it doesn't harm another member near it but only with a small injury.
More, the action of burning medicine reaches to that one in the members which is joined to it, and forces it to come into the sick member with difficult healing and forces it to be heard.
But the fire, by its subtle elevation and the goodness of its substance, does not make that which is superfluous; And it is known to us through experiment and through long duration of service in study of the art on the truth of the causes; and for this I am excused from the length of the sermon. And if it were not that my free will is bound by this secret, I would tell you about the fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies, and of its expulsion through which we expel sicknesses, in a philosophical demonstration, which would be acute in your understandings.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to do a cautery and they pause for the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of that which the cautery attracts, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and frequent, which do not suffer delay so that it is feared that evil will come, which is greater than small harm entering through time.
And thus it is not seen in your steps, or, sons, that they esteem only the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that for that illness which is healed by cautery, all time is not required, and they pause to consider that consequence.
And the cause is not seen thus by them because they believe that cautery is only in place of medicine, which alters the complexion and dries the humors, which are the cause for which pains come.
More, I prefer cautery over medicine due to the will of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that the illness returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of their illness, and the virtue of it, and that which is prepared in the body from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and that which has come to it through food and habits similar to those causes; but that the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humors, thus as cautery of tooth for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in it the pain does not return, but rather it happens in a small place.
And most common speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is the speech of ignorant people, not because they understand it, but because they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved by medicine or any other cause except through cautery.
And the cause is to the contrary of that; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not unless when we administer the ways of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and then at the end of the cause, we administer cautery, and apply it to that. And therefore it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish doctors understand.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not burn, as it is not absolutely true, because it has been proven and found that it does not happen except in certain bodies besides the others, and cautery with it is good and better than with iron, as they said; but however when you make cautery with fire or gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and prepares to receive cold; and if you adjust it on the ember, the gold melts by the fire, and sometimes puts in the fire certain laminae so that the artisan can work with the occupation of it.
And for this, a cautery is made with iron, which we apply lightly and carefully to the rectitude of the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head between the feet, so that I alleviate the demanding one what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization is opposed to humidity and cold on the service of the accidental one from which two causes are: it is a cause of swelling and multitude of flux, called rheumatism, of the head to the parts of the ears and of the hearing, and multitude of sleeping, and of toothache and of throat pain, and universally of all sickness that comes from cold, as well as paralysis, swelling, and apoplexy, and symptoms in those sicknesses.
The form of this cauterization is this: that first we command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine, for three or four nights, according to what the virtue of the sickness and the age of him and his custom require.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make him sit between your hands on a wooden bench and place your hands on his chest.
And then stop the flow of your palm's root near the nose's root between the heels of the shoes. More emperor, when the said inner part is perforated, mark that place with a probe, and apply the olive-tree cautery of which this is the form:
And then stop that on the place immediately with a probe, in a manner that descends, in which the inner hand is constricted little by little, and you turn it.
And then lift your hand slightly and examine the place, and if you see any part of the bone being uncovered to some extent, such as the quantity of a grain of barley, then lift your hand, and if it does not return to its former position, or if another part is cooled, until it is seen by the bone that which was said to you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the place and apply it for three days.
And then stop on the cloth dipped in wax and apply it until the scar is destroyed by the fire. And then heal the place with Tetrapharmacum ointment until it is healthy.
And it is said that the more the wound is opened, the better and more youthful the arm will be, for which it is better.
They said that some of them should have the tendon cauterized within the bone, and a cautery should be held within it so that a part of the bone's vitality is taken away.
And then the part that is next to the bone should be scraped, and then it should be cured.
And they said that others should push the cautery from behind, so that it presses strongly into the bone, until the bone breaks, and this is the method of minor surgery: And they believe that from that place, vapors of the head are expelled.
And the open wound should be held for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
But to me, these two species of cautery have not been seen, except in some men according to the way of fear; and that, it seems to me, is better for health, because the head is revealed by solution of continuity of the urine as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
And the first species of cautery is safer and better, it seems to me; and from that practice and in that work, health is obtained.
Chapter according to.
Of the cautery of the head.
When in the whole head there is chronic and long pain and it is prolonged in the patient, and it uses treatments such as purges and suppositories and poultices and plasters and dressings and bandages and liniments and remedies, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not help due to the lack of knowledge of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frivolous and removes much cold, then that cautery is applied with another cautery, and place that one a little. And then cauterize that on the horn of the sick head with a cautery in which the cord is divided. Cut the cord and let it be uncovered by the bone the quantity that we have recounted, and cauterize that with a cautery in the right partition of the head, in the place which is called "vas" - and this is the place where the windy vessel is situated. And raise your hand thus, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient through this will remove much diverse pain different from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And I say that this cautery is in its place, because it is known that the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occiput are cauterized is a more subtle cautery than that with which the middle place of the head is cauterized; and this is the method of it.
Head of the bed.
From the cauterization of an old migrane.
When there is pain in the part of the head, or it is a sharp pain inside the eye, the head must be evacuated with evacuating medicine, and another cure administered, which has been mentioned in the treatises on illnesses; and this is not advisable, then cauterization can be done in two ways: either cauterization with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
The best cauterization with burning medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and scrape it and apply the ends to both sides of the affected area. And then cut into the place of the pain in the temple with a sharp knife, so that it enters and the abscess is emptied out, until it is hidden.
And then tie above it with a bandage to constrict tightly, and leave that for three hours; and then untie it and extract the alum, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then apply a poultice on the affected area submerged in hot water until the place forms a scab.
And then heal it with an ointment until it is healthy.
And if you see, make that with some medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on combining medicines.
We perform cauterization with iron in this manner: instructions for the cautery of which this is the method:
and it is called clave or nail, because its head is like the shape of a nail in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small protrusion.
And then place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand - so that the artery is not irritated, which is underneath - and move the small iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it that is irritated by the sharpness of the cauterization is as much as its size, then lift your hand so that the artery underneath is not irritated, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
And then soak a cloth in salt water and apply it to the area, and leave it there for three days; and then apply a clean bandage, and treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you see fit, cauterize at the extremity of the cutaneous tissue according to the cauterization, and beware of the incision of an artery in this migration properly not ancient.
Fourth chapter.
On the cauterization of ancient migraines.
When you treat migraines with what we have said about previous treatments, and what we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes because of the illness that is not enough what we have said about the first cauterization by medicine or by fire, then it is necessary that you apply the cauterizing iron, which has been purified, on the place of the pain along the line of longitude where the greatest pain is, or in that area; and place your hand for a while and firmly hold it while you make an incision in the artery and penetrate to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard the continuity of the jaw, which is hindered by chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerve which moves it, and that there is no spasmodic contraction.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, for in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially for one who ignores what he does and is not careful and is reckless; then leave the operation to someone who begins.
And you will come with the reminder of the treatment of accidental bloody flux in the manner of the liver's custom, in its own proper place.
And if you see that this sickness does not improve with this cautery and you see the patient's body tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you want, administer the cautery that we have spoken of in the chapter on constriction of the liver with a cautery having two points, and this is a better cauterization and more beneficial.
Chapter five.
Of the cauterization of the pains of the ears.
When in the ear there is pain from cold and it is treated with laxative causes and with the other cure which has been said in the division, and the pain is not alleviated, then apply the cautery, and this is what is called a point, of which this is the method:
And apply the point near the ignition, and let it be carried around the entire ear as if it were rolled, or in a circle around whichever part the pain is in. Bring the cautery to the root of the ear little by little until you feel the place with your finger.
And if the cautery of twelve points on the entire ear, and which one, then carefully cure the places between which they are healthy.
Chapter six.
Of the cauterization of the tortoise or turtle, but more likely it translates to: Of the ca
Tortoise, which is cured and with cauterization it is not except for the species that come from flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of the illnesses.
Avoid cauterization of the species that proceeds from dryness or from spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that species of tortoise with earth and purge and evacuations, and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize the illness with three cauterizations: the first gives the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third gives the junction of the two lips.
And apply the cautery on the opposite of the affected part, because mollification is not seen except in the part that appears to be healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right of the extremity of the ear, placed a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the aforementioned thumb, and place your hand with the cautery until it is burned the quantity of the weight of the species of the codena.
And this is the shape of the cautery, and it is a specialty of the surgical knife, the shape of which is described in detail. More subtle is that which a little cuts the veins; and it is good to cut in the superfluous and gross part a little.
And then heal the place with what is previously described as a proven remedy for the disease.
Chapter 7.
On the cauterization of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said and it does not respond to your medication and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with a cautery in the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the neck. And the handling of the cautery is done according to what has been previously stated.
And it is cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then it is healed with what has been proven.
Chapter 8.
On the cauterization of oblivion caused by weakness.
It is good to give to the patient at the beginning large pills and lozenges that purify the blood.
And then raise the patient's head and place it on a plaster or poultice described in this treatise of plasters.
Then apply certain dressings, for that is the method of cautery. And do it according to the doctor's order which has already been stated.
And then if health is restored to him by this; and if not, then apply three cauteries on the back part of his head, which are dependent on the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck. And place the thickness of the said bandage between each cauterization, and carefully treat the cauterized area with what has been prescribed.
But if you find the patient is more tolerant, then apply the cauterization in the middle place; and if your art is greater, then cauterize above the two horns.
Then treat it carefully until he is healed; and let the olive oil cauterization be according to the form previously given.
Chapter 9.
Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of the whole body.
As you proceed with the purification of the head with earth and with what we have said; and raise the head of the patient, and apply a cauterization on it in the middle place of the head, and cauterize above all the horns of the head, and cauterize above the back part of it, and apply three cauterizations on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the malady of mollification of the body with many sufferings and the malady is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the spine of the back, and immediately with a cautery enter so that it is combined from the codena word of it, and elevate the third hand. Then return to cure that one so that it is healed, and this one will be cauterized with olive oil.
Chapter ten.
Of the cauterization of epilepsy.
It is not the epileptic who is cauterized, but rather that epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And thus it is fitting that you modify the brain of the patient at the beginning with years and with another cure, which we have dictated in the division when the malady is great and the exception of medicines is tolerated.
And if it is an infant who does not tolerate medicines, then administer gargling and masticating servants to modify the service, giving that for many days, with improvement of the food.
Then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle place of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the occiput of it, and on each horn of the head let it be cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize them with the same cautery that was mentioned earlier, having previously softened and warmed the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the olive oil be cauterized according to what has been stated previously.
But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery in this manner.
Chapter 11.
On the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are rotten humidity and gross flaccidity, then cauterize them with the same cauteries that we have mentioned in regard to paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is a superfluous declination to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give them a drink that purifies their brain according to what has been stated previously in the division.
And rub the patient's head, and make a decently made plaster of egg on the circle, and apply it to the middle place of the head.
And let the patient be seated in a chair, and be held firmly from all sides.
And apply a plaster; it is also worthy to anoint around the eyebrows. He heats that on the hearth by tempered heating for measurement, which the said sufferer feels most in it. And then put that in the middle place on the head of it in the circle, and let it be inside so that it is refreshed.
And do that to the patient for a whole week, with another regimen of it inside so that it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that making small points according to the worse part of it, except that you hold your hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
And then apply that cooked in butter or in broth of chicken.
Chapter twelve.
Of cauterization of descending water in the thigh.
When it is declared to you the beginning of water in the thigh by the signs which I have already told you about in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient that which cleans the head of it, and keep it from all humidity.
And make it sweat in a bath for ten days.
And then command it to shave its head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle place of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of rising of water in two thighs, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one thigh.
Make incisions with a cautery on all the veins and arteries that supply the kidney; and let the cauteries be in that length in the width of the temples.
And beware of flows of blood when it is being cauterized; and if you see any flow of blood, stop it with some medicine, which is within your power.
And I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries and in the removal of those and caution of flows of blood.
And some times it is cauterized on the neck, where two bones have two cauteries applied to produce a good result.
Chapter 13.
Of the cauterization of old tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and dirty, and through the veins and arteries which are in the obvious place of the head before and it is verified that this is an excess of hot and humid blood, then cauterize that with a cautery, which we have mentioned in the chapter on beginning of water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle place of the head and with two cauteries on the neck behind the two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck behind the two bones. And if you indicate the addition, then cauterize that entire area of the heel on the extremity of the ankle with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
On the cauterization of foul-smelling nasal discharge.
When you treat the patient with the remedy that we have mentioned in the division and do not press your treatment, then prepare it and give to the patient the decoction for three nights; and place a rag on their head, and cauterize them with a middle cautery or an olive-tree cautery. And then cauterize that area with a nail-shaped cautery or two cauteries above the two eyebrows, leaving a small amount of hair.
And beware of the acidity that you do not set that on fire.
And the nail-shaped cautery, this is its form.
Chapter 15.
On the cauterization for the softening of the eyelids of the wheels (or possibly "eyes" or "ulcers", considering the context).
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery or this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form:
And if you, cauterize that one on the two eyebrows with a small instrument of two cauteries in all divided areas, and they are lengthened from the temples. And let the length of each cauteri be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press your hand with the cauteri too much, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is touched.
Chapter 16.
Of the cauterization of the eyelid of the eye when the skins are converted to the internal parts and puncture the eye.
When the skins of the eye are converted to the internal parts and thus puncture the eye, cauterize in them according to two manners, either with iron or with medicinal caustic.
If you cauterize it with a hot iron, warn the patient beforehand that they should lift their skins like those who are cleaning them, until they are lengthened and widened; and if you puncture that one, then bind the eyes of theirs with a bandage so that it is not moved until the skins are reborn.
Then when they are reborn and widened, place the head of the patient on a pillow, and put a sign above the eyelid of their eyes with a tape, shaped like a fig leaf, and let this sign be according to the shape of the wound, and its beginning near the skins.
And then stop the flow of blood in an abscess or in a swelling of pus under the skin.
Then apply the cautery of which this is the shape.
And then cauterize on the figure that has been marked, little by little, in repeated touches, until the surface of the cinder is completely burnt, so that it appears as a figment of myrtle, entirely open and visible.
Sign of health in the said work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already being contracted and the pulses of it being elevated due to the puncture of the eye.
And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and then stop the flow of blood with a bandage until the wound is healed. And then cure that one with an ointment until it is healed.
But if it returns through the skin for some cause, then apply warmth and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery on that one just as you did previously.
But if the skin grows onto the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is elevated to its own natural place and is smoothed out so that the skin does not touch the eye.
Put the cautery in medicine to burn this is what is commanded to the patient that they lift their skins while they are extended and narrowed, and then make a paper of cloth in the shape of a woman's womb.
And then take soap made from congealed and living earthworm, or whatever that is, and mix those things together, and make a paste with celebration so that it is not chilled; and then spread that paste on the paper which is made thus in the shape of a woman's womb, and apply that to one side of the hip; and apply the other hip wrapped in a poultice of warm water, and let the head of the patient be in the same position.
And then put the finger on the medicine and press a little so that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for this biting is to them like fire.
And then when they perceive that the medicine is biting, then remove the medicine and take it away from the finger; then when the biting stops, then wash the hip with water; and then consider if the eyelid is already lifted as if washed by the constriction of fire or incision, because this is what it is; and if not, return to the place where the medicine was not applied and do not neglect until the operation is completed and the hip is contracted.
And then stop on the cut with a border until the knot of the adjustment is eradicated, and treat that one with a deafening ointment or another one inside until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, that your operation be with diligent vigilance so that no harm from the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid after some days is softened and some cause of the pellets enters the eye, then apply your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and properly as it was done at the beginning, and put in a wrapper so that it may be healed.
And this is the shape of the mold for eye salve.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to size and smallness, and thus according to that your contraction is made.
And let not be hidden the way of straightness to one who has studied in this art.
Chapter 18.
Of cauterization of the fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with the method that we have spoken of in the divisions of illnesses and do not confirm your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: order the patient to put their head back, and hold the head of the patient by some servant between the hands, in such a way that it is neither hidden nor agitated with the head back.
And then apply a poultice made from the white of an egg or the mucilage of plantain on the wound of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery, of which this is the shape:
which should be hollow, such as the shape of a reed or the quill of a feather, on one end of which the cautery is made.
And if it is necessary, let it penetrate to the other extremity. And if you want, let it come out like a tentacle.
But I consider that which is cooked is better for the said work.
And then press the fistula if it is opened, and draw out from it blood and dry it. And if it is not open, then make an incision on it and extract the purulence from it.
And then apply on it the cautery which should be ignited, and you will hold the patient's hand with a little device to divert the attention from the pain to the nasal area, so that neither the hand nor the patient is disturbed, and then apply the cautery in the groin of the wound and cauterize it.
And then if at the beginning of the application of the cautery you see it enter into the bone, that's good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and let it be like that for three days, and then apply on that place a dressing with oil and wrap it with a bandage exsiccative until it is healed.
More often if the disease has lasted eleven days and doesn't heal, then use medicine with a sharp corrosive effect until the bone is exposed and scraped according to what is convenient in this chapter.
And there's another method of cautery for fistula which some first authors described: put it in the place of the fistula and make a hole and return to that fissure with a subtle iron instrument, which is the shape of it: put in it the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand around it with good retention, and don't let the patient move so that the melted lead doesn't penetrate to the hollow of that; and cover what you put on the hollow of the patient with cotton soaked in white of egg or in water, because lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it with marvelous sanitation.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and the cure, it's good; and if not, then it's necessary to administer a tube through the nose and return the fistula to the body of the nose according to how it will fit in its proper place.
Chapter 18.
On the cauterization of the fracture of the feet.
Warts that appear as cracks in the lips, and especially on the lips of infants.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with the method that we have described in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then apply the small knife of the cautery according to this form that is taught:
And let the cavity of it be according to the subtlety of the cotella.
Then gently push that knife carefully into those fissures until the point of the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then treat it with wax until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
Of the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth an apostema is found and then it is broken, and then it is ulcerated, and then it is corroded, and a fistula is made, and then you treat that and do not deepen your treatment, then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then put that applied thing in the mouth of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron thing penetrates to the bottom of it, and afterwards make one or two openings; and then treat it with the method that we have described for treatment until it is healed.
And thus if the blood is separated and it is healthy, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and to remove the corrupted bone according to what will be said in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
Of the cauterization of the teeth and the softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines and not cauterizations, then place the head of the patient in a sling, and prepare to apply the cauterization in the form that will be described later, so that you place the swab on the tooth and introduce into it the ignited cauterization iron, applying it firmly, and make a small opening so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being penetrated.
And then lift your hand, and apply the cauterization for a few seconds according to what you want.
And then let the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, because the decayed tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupted humidity is dried out.
Chapter 21.
Of the cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is caused by cold or heat, or if medicine does not cure it, then cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with a cow's horn, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with a cow's horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in a kettle of iron, and then take the cork and wrap it around the end of the stick, and then dip the boiled horn into it, and apply it to the painful tooth, holding it there until it cools down.
And then repeat this several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip the wool or cork in the aforementioned cow's horn, and place it on the painful tooth, and place it on a hot iron until the iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
But the greatest danger in cauterization with fire is that you pay attention to the size of the iron or rod, and it be in the core of some thickness so the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery in the form of which it was found, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery cools; and do this several times until the pain is relieved, either that day or the next.
And it is proper that the patient should apply to their mouth the opening of a good pipe and hold it for one hour, and then return to scoop up; this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize as much as you can extract according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
Of the cauterization of excesscences or tumors.
When excesscences are of phlegm and cold humors and are not obedient to digestion through medicines and you want the digestion of those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form of which is this following, having two extremites covered so that the smoke of the cautery goes through the other extremitate, and apply that ignited thing on that apostema once, and another time if it is necessary for that, until it reaches the bottom of the apostema.
And if the apostema is small, then apply the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and return it for three days and apply on it a dressing in good wax until what the fire has burnt is renewed.
And then cure that with plasters and bandages and dressings until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of cauterization of the throat and of narrowing of the spleen or perhaps "Of cauterization of the throat and constriction of the spleen" or better:  "About cauterizing the
When humidity comes upon the channel of the lung, and especially when it is mixed with coldness of complexion, then it is seen that the patient should be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the vein at the root of the throat in the affected area.
And beware that you do not touch the throat with the cautery nor press on the patient's spine except a little.
And cauterize it with another cautery at the joint of the neck on the patient's last vertebra. And the cautery of it should be done in the manner described previously.
And then heal it with that which has been prepared, until it is healthy.
Chapter 24.
Of the cauterization of lung disease and of coughs.
When cough and lung disease are from cold humidities and the patient has no fever nor wasting, and it is an ancient disease, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the furcula in the affected areas of the lungs and liver; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cautery be done according to the previous method.
And if you want, then your cauterization should be done with a pointed instrument called a "puncta", the shape of which is used in the treatment of ear pain.
And make points between the sides to those areas; and then heal that which is treated with the method that has been previously mentioned, so that it may be cured.
And you should have the cautery having three edges, because the cauterization is done with this: in one session you can make three cauteries according to this method:
Chapter 25.
Of the cauterization of the nipple, which is the tip of the helper/breast ( possibly referring to a type of tumor or infection on the breast or nipple area).
When the tip of the helper/breast is dislocated due to causes of lubricating humidity and it is not stopped at the time of its return, you must return its dislocation before it becomes a habit of returning, and then with a small movement it is displaced so that it goes back in, as we have testified, because primarily you reduce the dislocation, and then the patient is turned over on their back or side; and then you lift the codena which is in the inner part of the citillic to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner parts.
And then apply the cautery having two ends; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the tendon so that it penetrates the other side; and the figure of cauterization will be seen with four or five cauteries.
And some treated areas are adjusted according to this count and for which there are five cauteries.
And then pause on the cautery and cut it with salt, and make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the member not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is thus done, then cauterize on the muscle with a key-shaped cautery or with many pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and many humidities come into the stomach so that it extracts from its completion and thus multiplies rumblings in it, and if you continue the manners of treatment and do not confirm, then it is seen that the patient is on their back resupinated, and extends their hands and their thighs, and then cauterize with three cauteries: with one cautery place on the chest for the quantity of a finger with key-shaped cautery, and with two cauteries place on the two sides of the chest, until the triangular figure of cautery appears; and lengthen between those that are not adjusted so that they will make a poultice.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the coding of the thigh.
And the figure of the cautery is added according to this form, And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle place of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
And the stomach should be cauterized by pricking the one who is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you apply your senses to the stomach, applying according to the quantity that you want with a tent, and then cauterize that spot with the cautery; and then cure that spot with the cure that precedes it until it is healed.
Chapter 27.
Of the cauterization of the cold fever.
When there is pain in the liver due to cold or humidity or gross ventosity until it is expelled from its normal completion through excessive egress, and the disease is treated with what we have said and not contradicted, then it is seen that the disease is resupinated above its cervix, and apply a tent with three cauteries according to this form and quantity placed on the liver of the hypochondries, where one sees the dejection of man.
And let the space be the one that exists between each cautery according to the thickness of the said thing, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
And do not press your hand on the moving cautery.
And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the mixture of the specificity of the coda, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already spread their thighs, and raised their arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife cautery, when you are with subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the specificity of all the coda be absorbed so that it is absorbed by all the body and penetrates into the intestines, for the coda here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28.
Of the perforation of the abscess of the liver with a cautery.
When there is an excavation or abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will have grave gravity and sharp pain.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, then the pain is greatly increased and many times the doctors have weakened the cure of it.
Therefore, it is necessary that the patient be turned over on their back; and then anoint the place of the abscess with a tent; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled in a bundle, the shape of which was described in the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery inside which the entire cord is burned, until it reaches the spleen, until it penetrates where the blood comes out.
And then treat that one by treating the other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used unless the one whose study in the art of medicine has been prolonged, and on whom many illnesses have been diagnosed; but I have experimented with some tested things and thus dared to write about this operation, but above all, I have read that which is suitable for us, and it is better.
Chapter 29.
Of the cauterization of ulcers.
The ancient doctors said that the root of aristology heals ulcers in this way: being a maker, and it is this which you take from the roots of aristology, a long dry root, which is found, and is of the thickness of a finger.
And then submerge that in oil and apply it to the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at the location which is between the continuation of the arm and the neck; and with two small cauteries guiding them, slightly inclined towards the part where the beard is located, and with two cauteries on what declines between the fifth rib and the spine, declining slightly towards the back parts; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back parts; and with a cautery at the location which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on the two sides of the chest, leaving the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And do not think that you will press your hand with the cautery, but rather it will be evident in the manifestation of the swelling in action.
And some ancient doctors said that they used a cautery of iron resembling a dart and ignited it, and put it in the location which is between the ribs, until they reached with it to that aposteme and extracted the unhealthy matter, as we have said in the case of the aposteme of the foot.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, because where it is applied to the location of the fistula, there is no healing.
Head or chapter
On the cauterization of the wound.
When you treat the wound of the thigh with what we have said about treatment in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are necessary, one of which is to make three or four marks according to the length of the wound according to the shape of the cauteries of the thigh, the shape of which has been described previously.
And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be the same manner that we have described for the thigh cautery in this treatise.
And do not press your hand on the cautery, and let the patient be elevated above it two fingers.
And there is another manner of cauterizing, which is that you should ignite the cautery having two virtues, which cause we have described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the tendon which is in the interior of the thigh where the vein appears to the sinister side of the patient.
And let your elevation be such that you elevate the tendon according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two instruments, ignite the wick, in that entrance where those penetrate the coding of the other part.
Then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
And if you see it, cauterize with a cautery having three instruments.
And then you will cure the cautery so that it has ceased to give an arm over many hours, for it is most confident that the other preceding causes in the cure.
Chapter 31.
Of the cauterization of dropsy.
Cautery is not applied in dropsy but rather on the spleen specifically.
When you treat the dropsical person with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not confirm your treatment, then it is necessary that one applies cautery with four cauteries around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the chest, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the coding.
And then place the cautery iron near the opening so that it can be grasped for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment, place the cautery on that which covers for what will be added to their two intestines, and it will be fastened with aid of a healthy bandage.
The shape of the cautery iron with which the belly is cauterized should be curved, according to the shape that is previously described, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, as its form is previously described.
Chapter thirty-two.
On the cauterization of the feet and of the thighs.
When the feet are affected by dropsy and are full of watery humor, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in the area that is between the ankle and the toe, and raise your hand with the cautery iron and do not press down; then raise your hand, and do not return it at all, because the salty water will flow out.
Make the cautery iron in this form: And then make on both thighs two cauteries, and on each thigh let a cautery be made at the extremity of the knife-shaped cautery. And be the cautery according to the length of the thigh: place one on the outer and another in the middle part of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
And let the opened wound be cured for a long time so that some water oozes from it.
And then cure the wounds with those remedies which we have mentioned.
Chapter thirty-three.
On the cauterization of the belly.
When the belly is affected by cold and humidity that weaken the virtues, which are the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, and it is treated with various methods of treatment and not contrary, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cauterization of the virtue showing, then cauterize that with a large cautery on the upper stomach as has been previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four cauteries around the subtle navel, with a thin claveguin cautery; and a cautery on the upper arm or with two cauteries.
And if sometimes the exuberant humidities and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that on the epigastric region and on the intestines, and firmly apply two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, which is a perfect cure of youth, from which you will not err.
Chapter 94.
Of the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When there are in the nature behind ancient hemorrhoids or one of gross humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured with what we have said in the division and do not confirm their cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus of the spine of the back, a little and a little triangular, and with a cautery above the navel for two fingers.
And if it appears that the stomach of the patient is weakened and their food is not digested, and their face is often discolored, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the middle of the back with a keyed cautery, and let the cautery stay for some time open, and carefully treat the inside so that it may be healed.
Chapter 95.
Of the cauterization of the thigh near the abscession of the groin.
When you dissect the thigh, then ignite the cautery that is assembled in a line. Then insert the ignited thing into the dissected thigh, and with your hand inside guide it so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And make there a remedy or two, for if the humors are excessive, then cauterize each of them according to what has been recounted, and properly cure those with it that contribute to the healing of the joints.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the shoulder blade, it is more harmful in young people.
Chapter 36.
Of the cauterization of fistulas that are made in the rectum, in the lower parts of the body.
When the rectum does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal it with a cautery.
Therefore when someone has a fistula in the rectum, and it is old and corrupted, with rotten blood and corrupt humidity, then that which is most worthy to be covered is what proceeds from it with subtle thread, and then feel the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned thread at the front.
Then apply the cautery that resembles a razor. And then insert the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the thread is inserted.
And repeat the cautery on that area until the corrupted body parts are burned, one, two or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
Be cautious of combustion of nerves and veins; or if a fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you think that it is not penetrating.
And then heal the place where it was injured.
And if the place is sealed, and its matters are separated from it, and it rests thus for a long time, then you will know that it has been cured entirely.
And if the matters are not removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the press of its bone corrupted, or this comes from those causes which will bring recollection to their place.
Chapter 37.
Of the cauterization of the kidneys.
When in the kidneys there is pain due to cold or due to great abundance, and thus the cotyle of the patient is constricted, then it is fitting that you cauterize over the kidneys with a cautery on each kidney with a sharp-pointed cautery, by which the recollection will be pressed.
And strengthen the cautery on the second with a small hold, so that three linear cauteries will come, and thus they will serve as more recent aids in healing.
Chapter 38.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area and place a dressing on the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with a cautery on the right side of it, and with another on the left side.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of nodes on the foot; and cauterize that area with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
And let the cautery be applied to the hip bone as needed.
Chapter 39.
On the cauterization of the uterus.
When cold and humidity come to the uterus, and because of this conception is prohibited, and the menses of it are corrupted, and the flow of them is delayed, and pain occurs in the abdomen, then it is necessary that the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the bladder; and with a cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be applied to the hip bone.
Chapter forty.
On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When moist humors accumulate at the ankle joint, and are the cause of the swelling in that place, it is a sign that one thigh is longer than the other when compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is found in which way it is bent.
Therefore, you should cauterize the patient on the ankle joint with a circular cautery, because you will have felt with your hand in the circuit of the joint as it is turned, and so that the joint falls in the middle place of the circle.
And let this cautery be of the type which follows the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then cauterize with three irons and an olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the thickness of the entire cord; and take care that which enters is healed.
Chapter forty-one.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and it is caused by cold and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said before and it does not help, and this is ancient, therefore you should treat the patient with gross humors with fetid or artificial plasters; and then cauterize.
The handling of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either a cautery with burning medicines or a cautery with fire.
It will be according to two scientific methods, of which one is that it cauterizes the area on the side of the patient with three triangular cauteries, in this form; and do so with good depth. And let the space between each cautery be the amount of the thickness of the finger, and if the olive or grain-sized cautery.
More often the cautery is placed on the middle location on the head of the ankle for which there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the circle in which the form is previously described in the cautery of the dislocation of the ankle, that the circle be continent and burn the stiffness of the entire cod.
And this is the method of cautery in cases where pain is adhering to the ankle and is not extended into the thigh.
But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh at the location where you find the patient who has the pain; and with one cautery on the hip, a little below the pubic area.
And if the cautery cuts, then its depth should be according to the quantity of the spasm of the tendon.
And if the patient complains that the pain is extended to the area proper to the toes of the feet, then cauterize that place where it hurts with a cautery for three points or four or more if indicated by that.
And if the patient complains of pain being in the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize that place with a sharp-pointed cautery.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not touch with the cautery so as to harm a nerve or a large artery, and that because of this you cause evil to the patient, an inconvenient or contraction.
And I have already seen one and another of those whom I have cauterized on the hip and finished with the cauterization, and the leg became swollen within which the tumor reached the foot, and it became perforated and corrupted the whole foot. And then follows a strong flux of belly, and then comes death.
And if the pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise men say in the cauterization of this cautery, that the method is: make a figure like a circle of iron, whose circumference is the size of a palm; and let it be hollow according to the thickness of a date stone or a little finger.
And let that circle be another thumb; and let the space be the amount of the knot of the foot; and let those circles be divided into two parts; and let the length of those chains be a knot or two knots, and make in their margin a decently dressed iron in the circles; and this is the shape of it:
Then let it be ignited in the fire until it wraps and sparks, and then place it on the affected part of the ankle, the patient lying on their side. And thus cauterize that wound with three cauteries applied in a single occasion.
And then leave it for three days; then plaster that wound with paste and leave the open wound for many days; and thus cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Says Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this type of cautery we have made little use due to fear of its management, and because we have found few that take care of it.
Worse than the cauteries is he who suffers them, and it is even worse for him in the place where it is applied.
A worse cauterization in medicine is that you make two circles having an armula with a perforation in which the iron hook of the door would fit; let the length of the partition be on the narrowness of them, being two knots or chains those.
And if the space which exists between each of the quantities of the thickness of the said thing; and they are opened underneath and above, and they contain themselves between them according to this form:
And then stop on the part of the ill person's flank, and press your hand on the part of the flank; and take warm water and put it between two cloths, and the quality of that should be with a small fire, a little at a time, and apply that for the quantity of an hour, and let the patient suffer the biting and adjustment of it  because that burning bites like fire  until the biting stops.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away the warm water from all the flank with cold water.
And then let it be for three days and stop on that bandage until the blackness of the adjusted wound is cleaned, and let it be for several days, and beware of its putrefaction; this is necessary in treatment.
And then heal it with an ointment until it is healthy.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or the leg, make a plaster for it that contains water according to what is done in the aforementioned ointment.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe for alkaline and non-extinguished lime, take a part of it, divide it into three, and put it in a new pot, from which the part will be perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the container.
And put the bottom of one pot into another covered pot, and pour over that alkaline and living lime sweet water which takes those with a finger, and once you have compressed them well with your hand for good compression, and release the pot that separates the sharp water from the part in the covered pot.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living lime and other renewed alkaline, because that water will then be strongly acidic, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for the operation makes a burning.
And of medicines some are those with which it is cauterized, such as vitriol and honey and lime mixed together with soap, so that they are mixed.
And Galen recounts of one of the ancients the operation and the cure with which is cured pain of water and of vein sciatica, and magnifies much to be of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and that it is healed by a single glance, just as he recommends, because the man went into a bath and was already healthy before that.
And it is that a plaster of vert is applied, and if no vert is found, then a recent figua is applied; and the mixture is triturated with a few grains and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the leg, and is tied.
And it should be left for a duration of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the adjustment.
And then put him in a bath and when his body is sweating, rub him on the ground, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
And be aware that it's not suitable to use a cautery with these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Moreover, Escorides said that when the strict vein of the goat is cauterized, it benefits him; and let the cautery be done in this manner: take a wool and dip it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fingers.
And then take dry goat's fat and melt it in fire until it becomes charcoal; and put it on the wool and squeeze it in so that it is absorbed. And then repeat this, and do not stop doing it until the sensation of the biting reaches the water and relieves the pain.
And this manner of cautery is called cow's cautery.
Chapter 42.
On the cauterization of pain of teeth.
Some pains in the back are due to many causes, such as a fall or a blow or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, from an infusion of humid and cold matter.
And cautery is not applied except in this single case, which is made by an effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, apply evacuation to the patient with warmed pills and similar to them, which are made on the back where the pain is, three lines according to the latitude of it, putting seven or eight cauteries in each line, according to the quantity that is seen from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
And let a cautery be made with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or with four with the middle clavicle cautery in this manner:
Chapter 43.
On the cauterization at the beginning of gibbosity.
Many times this sickness appears in small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they have a stiff structure in their legs, with elevation and restricted movement.
And we attack in the upper part of the spine and the nodes of the patient that have already started to protrude over the other vertebrae.
And then when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that part with a cautery that is circular in shape according to this form: which takes the cautery on the entire affected part of the vertebrae.
And if you want, cauterize around the vertebrae with a pointed cautery two or three lines. And let the points be properly spaced between them.
And then heal the place within which has been sanitized with what we have said.
But beware that cautery is not administered in yellowness that is made by spasm of nerves.
Chapter 44.
Of the cauterization of gout and of joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And then how gout is cured from cold cause with manual cure and the pains are not alleviated, then they are alleviated by cautery.
And it is that you should cauterize with evacuation of the circuit of the joint of the foot with heated cauteries.
And be an olive-shaped cauter, which is the form of this:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cauter. And if the pains rise into the teeth or to the other joints, and this hot iron reaches the end, then cauterize that area on each tooth with three or four cauteries of the entire partition with this olive-shaped cauter.
And if many cauteries are needed so that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize and do not press your hand too much with the cauter before, it being only surrounding the specificity of the cordon.
And if the pains rise into the tooth and the two, then administer the cauter that we have spoken of in the sixth chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands, and it is called gout, then prick in the circuit of the veins thus as they turn, prick on those two lines.
And if there remains pain in the fingers, then prick in the circuit of the veins over each knot and over the joint of the hand.
And if the pains push close to the joints or the muscles, then cauterize all the parts of the helpers.
And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is done and the flux is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God helping.
Chapter 44.
Of the cauterization of fractures.
When a fracture occurs in the limbs and intestines protrude from the wound, and this is a common beginning, then command the patient to leave their food for that day and to use gentle laxatives so that the wound of their belly may be evacuated.
And then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to hold their arms inside so that the intestines or the wound are not protruding outward.
And then return to the thighs of the patient and examine the rupture on the bone of the pelvis with a sign that shows the extremity of which is similar to the majority of circle at the upper divided parts of the body.
And then apply the cautery, the shape of which is this:
Into the area where there is a lot of movement and sweating, tie bandages. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then cauterize the area with your hand holding the cautery upright, and in that place where you feel the bone of the patient's ankle in the middle of the joint; and if you did not succeed with the first attempt, try again.
And be careful with the movement of the intestine during the time of your cauterization, so that you do not harm it, lest the patient suffer death or some other great evil.
And know that when you have the cautery, if you do not touch the bone, your operation will not be successful.
And it is fitting that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure.
And then treat the area of the cautery for three days with a poultice until the scar is formed by the heat.
And then treat that one with the other ointments until it is healed.
And let the patient sit on the seat for forty days until the place and the wound are sealed.
And give that one nourishment according to the length of time of their treatment, which will cleanse the belly of theirs, and so that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of straining.
And then when it is time to get up, administer a gentle decent treatment, and keep that one for another forty days.
And let it be spared from work and from abundance of food and drink, and from violent vomiting, for when one uses this regimen of complete healing they will be healed.
And we will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and you want that they not protrude, then cauterize the rupture of that one with a heated cautery according to its quantity, and let it be that which is exuded from the coding, thus as the third part of it; and then treat that one with what we have said, and it will not be out of place.
And we have already said that some first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is done with a tent.
And it is customary to make a line with the cautery along the width of the wound, and another line on the bottom; and place your hand with a clavical cautery, but the first cautery is put more lightly and better.
Chapter 46.
On the cauterization of the throat.
When pain enters the limbs through a blow or a shock and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is advisable to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be of the whole limb according to its size and smallness, and virtue and weakness, and location of the throat and pain of it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, it is good; and if not, then apply the cautery to it again; for it is customary with those pains that they be punctured in the limb next to the one to which it is closest, so that it seems that the patient will be healed with the cautery.
Chapter 47.
On the cauterization of leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes treated with a cautery for great youthful humor, and more so if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And so when you want to cauterize that person, consider if the leprosy is contagious and if it can be cured with what we have said in the division and do not neglect this, and be afraid of the corruption that comprehends the entire body and its entirety, then cauterize the person on the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another at the back of their neck, and on the forehead to the end of the hair; and two on the horns; and one behind, on the nape or servico.
And finally put your hand on the cautery a little inside so that it presses on the bone a small impression, and from this the dislocated ribs are rearranged, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the middle as it is prescribed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is seen that you should cauterize them with those cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and put a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on the two clavicles, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the hip, and two on the shoulders, and one on each shoulder, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the sixth rib; and cauterize them on all the joints of the arms and hands, and on each heel of their feet, and on the soles of their hands.
And beware of the nerves that are on the sole, so you don't damage them.
And in some cases it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis and with another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery, as they do from other things, because the body of the patient is already stunned.
And it is fitting that the cauteries are large or small according to the limbs and the joints, as it is determined by the species of the instruments.
And then treat the cautery with flour of toasted rushes and with honey, and with another remedy until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of the cauterization of numbness or stupor.
When a limb is numb or dormant and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let the cautery enter the depth of the skin a little. And then treat that wound with an ointment that is healthy.
And certain areas are cauterized, which causes numbness to the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back and gives movement to the nerves which govern that member, and the numbness is relieved.
But do not touch that except for one who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the members and of the exit of the nerves throughout the whole moving body.
Chapter 49.
On the cauterization of ulcers that cause mortification.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to the ointments of medicine, then you cauterize it with a pointed cautery, taking a little according to the quantity of the acidity of the body in which the whiteness and the color of it are restored, and its color is changed.
And then treat that wound with a flour of oats and of lentils mixed with rose oil and with leaves of arnagrosa, and with blood of pigeon or blood of curlew, each one a part and all mixed together, and then apply it as a plaster on the area, and place it so that it is healed.
Chapter 50.
Of cauterization of cancer.
When cancer is suspected and you want to treat it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around the area of the affected part as it is turned.
And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; but to me it is not seen as such, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this many times.
And it is better to cauterize around the area in a circle as we have said, or with multiple small cauteries.
Chapter 51.
Of cauterization of swelling.
When some swelling is delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess of humor, or because of the age of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the swelling; then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, making small punctures; and immediately apply a poultice that will promote maturation.
But if you want to make a perforation with the cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape: and apply it to the middle place of the swelling until it penetrates the skin.
And if the cautery is applied in that place where it was put, so that the body of the arm is alleviated; then return to cure that which is injured.
Chapter (or Headings/Title) Four.
Of the cauterization with corrosives.
Corrosive is a wandering corruption in the member, which corrodes that thus as fire consumes dry wood.
Then if you apply that corrosive in the place where it suffered from the cautery by fire, then you will ignite cauteries of small nails, and large ones as is convenient in that place where there is corrosion.
And then cauterize the entire affected part, so that you eradicate all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
And then let it be for three days, and apply on the cauterized places a dressing with oil mixed so that the scars are all eradicated and all corruption.
And then heal it with an ointment that generates flesh.
But if after three days the flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, that's good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which is rotten in the corrupted places.
They corrode with medication certain wounds of sharp medicine, for that is a substitute in place of cautery. It is better to apply cautery on the focus of the pus rather than to evacuate it gently.
And I have already said the treatment of it with sharp medicine in division, and therefore take that which of its humors is deficient.
Chapter 3.
Of the cauterization of the claws and other similar things.
Moor or tumor is found at the joints of the foot of the sick person who has a claw, and it is a thick, swollen cause, which hurts the foot; and cautery in these cases is done in two ways, that is, cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
Better is cautery with fire, that you shape the cautery iron similar to a pen for writing, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that the claw contains in its entire joint, and it should have subtle edges.
And then apply the ignited iron to the claw, and then turn your hand with the cautery in the circumference of the claw until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the claw. And leave it like that for three days until it starts to form a scab. And then apply a plaster made from ground marsh salvage mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on for nine nights, so that it will eradicate the roots of the ailment.
And then heal the area with an ointment made from generated flesh, so that it will be sanitized.
And if it does not convert, and you see inflamed pimples on the surface of the body, mainly on the hands and feet, then take a cautery iron and dip it in water, and it is that you grab a needle of iron or of stone or of pumice, and place it on the nail; and then put a small quantity of hot water into the needle, and hold your hand, and you rotate it with compression of your hand, and be pressing the edge of the needle on the root of the nail, and introduce the hot water through the pressure of the root of the nail; and let the patient wait a little for the penetration of the hot water for one hour, and then remove it, so that the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do the same on the other one and then come out all over the places of the body where they are.
And then heal those areas where the roots of the nails have been eradicated with an ointment that generates flesh.
Chapter Three.
Of the cauterization of trembling.
When you have a patient with trembling caused by cold in the nerves or by fever of a similar cause, then it is customary to cauterize them with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cauteri; and a cauteri on their chest, and another on their stomach, with an olive tree cauteri.
And the trembling of theirs is relieved and the health of the cold disease is restored.
Chapter Five.
Of the cauterization of accidental ulcers on the body.
When on the body there are spotty ulcers, and there are pustules or fissures which are made from gross corrupted matter; then it is customary at the beginning of the treatment to make an appearance, that it should be cauterized over every head of the fistula with a subtle cauteri of burned mint, whose extremity is extended with fire; or with a long cauteri of aristology; or with a slow-burning cauteri.
And some wounds are cauterized with a mixture at the beginning of their expulsion in this manner; and they are not believed to be cured, and the excess is broken up, making them healthy by removing those things.
May the emperor command that this be done with proper evacuation through phlebotomy.
Chapter 56.
Of cauterization of accidental bloody flux by incision of the artery.
Treatments applied to the flux of the artery that is cut by the wound, which applies from the beginning of the pain, or from the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and it seems similar, and it is difficult to remove that.
Therefore when it happens to someone, then you must cut with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and press on that spot with your finger so that the vein is constricted and the treatments entered, so that the flux of blood is stopped, and does not come out.
And then apply the hot irons to the spots of the cauterizations, which are called "moxa" by name, and blow on them so that they are ignited.
And then take from them a small or large thread of the location and the wound in which the artery is broken, and apply it to the vein, firmly holding that you have constricted with your finger, and sew the cauterization so that it is bound and restrained, the blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you touch the vein and extract the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this until the blood is constricted.
And beware that you do not injure the nerve that is here, and let another evil come upon the patient.
And be aware that when a lot of blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the blood in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with a cautery as mentioned before, or with extraction when it has not been extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of the veins are injured and the blood is constricted; or that it be tied with a thread or ligature for strong constriction, or that medicaments be applied to them, whose virtue is to constrict the blood; and they be bound with a bandage or with a tight binding.
More so, he who administers a proper constriction with a ligature and binding, or with cloths, by means of applying causes that constrict and of similar things, does not do harm but rather benefit.
If the doctor is not present and no medicine is being administered, then treat with caution according to the indications for the orifice of that vein as we have described, and understand the great constriction within which the blood is blocked from the upper part of the wound, and above the scar the aforementioned should not be removed; and from above the scar apply cold water of great chilliness so that the blood congeals and coagulates; and also consider whether cauterization or medicinal treatment is necessary.
Of incision and perforation and of vein cuttings and of phlebotomy and of wounds and of their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter all the ailments in which a cautery with fire is convenient and with medicine combustible, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them with the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters concerning the treatment from the head to the feet.
And we will proceed in this chapter with that medical method, by which the one seeking it may be alleviated, namely, concerning what has been asked for.
It seems that you should commence this lesson, cave, sons, so that you may learn what in this chapter is by fear that which is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And by that which it is necessary to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many things are considered evacuation which is with blood and in which life depends on the aspersion of the vein or incision over the postema or perception of exiture or purification of the wound or extraction of arrow or incision of the flesh and similar things. And all those things are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their hands there is death.
And I warn you that upon you does not fall that which is destruction, because some times it happens that you will treat men with many manners of evils. And of them there is one who will rush to their illness and will hasten their death, and thus by the vehemence of that which he finds in his illness, and by the length of his illness, and with the illness is fear which means death.
And of those there is one who gives you to have hope and speech, you hoping for health, and their illness is pernicious.
And therefore do not consent to that which is shown to you by one who is of this manner; and let your caution be greater than credulity and your rashness; and do not presume any cause concerning this except through certain science, which proves what you must believe, and to which successful experience gives testimony.
And use it in the cure of all your patients for prognosis and indication to him who is health converted, because in that you are helped regarding acquisition of fame and of memory, of praise and of glory.
Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding and grant you direction and protection, for this is in His hands.
And I have written and ordered this chapter distinctly by chapters as it precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure from head to feet, so that may be alleviated for you what you demand of it and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the heads of infants.
Know that this illness often seen in infants must be given to the infants and when the nurse tightens the head of the infant, it relieves the swelling.
And some times it happens for a hidden cause which is not known.
I have not seen this illness except in children; and all those who I have seen with it, I have covered their death, and thus for me it has been a sad work on them.
And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of it was so magnified that one could not see itself due to the greatness of its head, and more that the humidity had increased until fatal heat.
And this humidity or is collected between the cartilage and the bone, or is collected under the bone on the vertex of the head.
For the operation on this case where the humidity is between the cartilage and the bone and the abscess is small, it is necessary that you make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in width, and let the length of the fissure be two nuts so that the humidity can flow, and this is the form of the spatula:
And then if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, there are here two incisions in this manner:
And if the humidity is under the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head swollen on all parts and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand on the separated parts and it does not come back to its original place. Make sure you sew in the middle place of the head with three sutures according to this method:
And then extract all the humidity from the incision; and tighten the sutures with bandages and plasters; and apply an ointment of wine and oil onto it until the fifth day, and then dissolve the ligature and cure the wound with tents and poultices, and tie the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which considers how to open the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, because some times it is more in the occipital bone, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and so you should do the incision where the abscess and the collection of water appear, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
And be careful not to cut the artery and do not let the flow of blood and humors, because it will kill the patient due to that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter second.
When something reaches to certain colds or rheumatisms the lungs or the chest, and it is antiquated, and doctors do not agree on this cure, then the last cure in this case is the beginning of those two arteries.
And then cover when you want to incise those that the patient's vein makes near the head, and rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and hold the patient's neck with a cloth; and consider on the pulse the vein; and the places of each one on the places which are near the ears being pressed, and so hide themselves in some homes.
And then mark the artery with a needle, and incise each one on the edge of each partition near the incision that enters into the bone, and let that be through the width of the head.
And if you want, introduce the spatula under the artery and cut it to the incisions of the aforementioned parts.
And let the length of the incision be two digits adjusted, because when any vein is incised, the blood exits with pulsating egression, which often escapes with frequent beating.
If the spleen does not appear in the cincture, then take the measure of the width of three fingers from the auricle, and apply the sign with a tent, and enter into the bone.
And that which is taken from the blood is a quantity of twenty units, and take it from the patient's urine or blood, and all that is according to the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and from the replenishment of the spleen of theirs.
And then consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause of the disease, then cut it out so that no abscess or gatherings form.
And then strengthen the wound with dressings and with bindings of clean cloth, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter three.
Of the extraction of the spleens which are in the temples.
When to some it happens that an old or chronic humor falls, through humid and agrimonious qualities in the sides of the temples, or a violent and vehement pain, and it is treated with the manners of medical cure and this does not alleviate, then we have spoken about the extraction of the spleens in the temples, or cauterization of those thus as we have shown.
The handling of the operation and extraction of those things is that the patient scratches the skin which is in the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by the pulse, and is hidden except in few men due to violence of cold.
And if it is hidden from you, then stretch the patient's neck with some cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water so that the artery appears to you manifestly. Then take the spatulum of which this is the shape: And then scrape the cord with that which will facilitate entry so that you reach the artery; and then cut in one side and extract that from the superior parts so that you extract that from the cord and discover that of the tunics which were covering it, of the entire partition.
But if the artery is subtle, then envelop that with the extremity of the instrument, and then incise from that one partition according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are lengthened and contracted, and do not find a flow of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not flow at all.
And then evacuate the blood of the vein that enters the thigh.
And if the wound is large, then it is necessary to tie it in two places with double thread of hemp or with cords at length, and do not allow putrefaction to occur before consolidation of the wound and a flow of blood.
And then cut away the excess which is between two ligaments; and do this at that hour or at another hour.
And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery iron within the bone with a cutting cautery iron where the extremities of it are cut, and it will stay in place of that half-healed wound.
And it is better to do this if the patient has fever or is of a hot complexion; for cautery is one of those things that helps with finishing humors, and therefore it is better in youth.
And then it is necessary to extract the varices that fill the space of an old ulcer, and let them be treated with dust decently made, and then let it be cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow and with poultices within which it will be healed.
And if while you are working another vein is found with a flow of blood from the wound, then restrain that blood, either with a cautery or by filling the space of the cut, and press your hand within to constrict the blood. And if the cause of those things is not present to you, then apply a warm cloth over the area until the blood is congealed, and wet the area with water of vehement coldness until the acute pain subsides, and be strengthened according to what is suitable.
And that which is easier in extraction of acidity is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, since you have seared the two areas with a thread, and applied it to each spot, without moving, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two spots, so that what is between the extremities of it, which are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
The sharpness of the two points should be equal. It is better if the sharpness of one point is greater than the two, because if they are too pointed and close to each other, it will not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, when there is some thickness in those, the heat of the fire is held on them and the flesh is cut more easily.
And this work is better than all works and also easier.
And let the space be that which is between two hips the quantity of the thickness of the said.
Fourth chapter.
Of the cure for bodies with acute and acidic rheums of the wheels ( possibly referring to the eyes, or more likely the joints).
When there are acidic rheums, and it is the body of those veins which are on the head, and they do not converge in any cause for the cure of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already turns red and feels like walking as if it were a walk of ants, and the wheels (joints) of that one are so weakened, humidified in such a way that already their skin is constricted, and the eyelids are scratched by the acidity of tears, the ancient bitter mixtures used in the cure of those of this operation, I call that cure a waste.
And you command the patient to raise the skin which is on their forehead, and then insert three distant grooves on the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the groove is two fingers: one groove is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little above the movement of the tears which are in the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
Be careful at the beginning of the arthritis which is located in two sides, and stretch your hand from the continuity of both jaws. And if the space of each injection requires the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
And if you have a piece of sponge applied or dry cloths moistened with which to dry the blood.
Then insert the spatula between the two pointed extremities, of which this is the form of the incision: which is from the separation of the temples to the second incision. Scrape away from that all the cartilage which is between two incisions around the zygoma, which is above the bone, and then make this from the middle incision to the second incision. And then pull this spatula and insert into the first incision another tool which is called a chisel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And push the edge of that sharp tool between the flesh attached to the cartilage, and the edge of it within the bone, and drive it in so that it reaches the middle fissure, and cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
It seems that the incision should be continued in this apparent cavity of the coda, and then make it in the middle fissure entering into the other fissure.
And then purge the blood of a certain quantity, express the places of the veins of the congealed blood.
Then apply a poultice on each warm fissure of old cot, and put it on those inflamed and wrapped in wax and oil and sharp vinegar, and beware that the apostema does not develop into an ulcer.
And on the third day dissolve the ligature and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and then cure it with an ointment made from basilicon and oil and rosewater and other things so that the wounds are healed.
Chapter five.
On the treatment of pains caused by cataracts and descending humors from the divisions of the head.
When one has cataracts that are sharp and continuous, and the humors of the patient are attenuated and small, and already their regard is weak, and the eyelids are ulcerated and from them come pus, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and extrusion as a consequence, then you will know by this accident that the materials and cataracts do not come except from many veins of the divisions of the interior proceeding.
And the best cure for those is this: that you command the patient to shave their forehead, and make an incision in the middle of it, a small one for the width (and start from the left temple's incision towards the right temple; and let it be an incision through the bone; and stretch out your hand with the fingers of the temples which are weakened by chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or with dry cloth and fill in between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or with bandages. And then strew dust made from vine or oil over it so that there does not develop a post-cautery abscess.
And when you see that the abscess has diminished, then it is time to scrape the bone until new flesh begins to grow, and treat it with a drying regimen which makes the flesh heal, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of collofonium and mix them, and from this make a plaster and administer it on these wounds of born flesh.
Chapter 6.
On the cure of that which falls into the ears.
The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral pebbles or similar to pebbles, such as iron and copper, or it is from plants such as seeds or beans, or it is a fluxing cause such as water and bitter vinegar and its similars, or some beast.
And then when pebbles fall into the ear or another similar cause from those causes that do not adjust in the ear, and stop the ear with the sun, and if you shake the pebble, it is distilled by some oil of violet or sisam, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the patient sneeze with condition, and stop the nostrils for fear of sneezing. And then put in the ear canal some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to its separated parts, because moist heat is introduced with these causes.
And if it is not introduced, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called fine forceps, of which this is the form:
And if it is introduced with forceps, well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a fine hook of little duplication.
And then if it is not pierced by that, make a needle of iron and insert the extremity of the needle into the hole of the ear and close around the environment of the needle with wax and oil softened so that it does not come out except the needle. And then extract strongly with the finger pressure, for the mucus accumulated with that which we have recounted.
More if it is not pierced in this manner, then take of alum or prepared vinegar and with which the soles are pressed a small quantity, and place that on the extremity of the vein, and then wrap over that place decently. And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of humidity.
And then if it is not pierced with all the causes which we have recounted, then you should consider that which appears before, whether it be an aposteme abscess or spasm.
And the manner of taking that is that you at the beginning anoint the patient's vein sephamical and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make a gash between your hands and turn the ear towards the divided parts, and make a small incision in the root of the ear and pour the grease of it into the place where it is pressed. And if the lunar-shaped fissure penetrates to the stone, and the stone is obstructed, then this can be treated with an appropriate instrument; and treat the fissure at that hour with speed, and cure it so that it becomes healthy.
And if the cause in the ear is one of the fatty growths that swell and become inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your external treatment, then take a subtle spatula according to this form: and administer to him the abscession of that growth which has fallen into the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put it in warm compresses, and extract it with fine or subtle gestures, or with a gentle incision as previously mentioned, because the extraction of it is thus alleviated.
But in the water that has entered into the ear, it happens that the patient must use sneezing with conditioning to commence, and fill the other ear with an old cloth, and put on that ear where the water is, and if by this it is expelled, well; and if not, then take warm pebbles and onions according to the length of the finger, and heat them in the fire a little, and let the patient introduce one of these into the hole of their ear and press above one stone of that part and strike with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear. Therefore, do not stop pouring water until all of it has been poured out.
Therefore, do not stop pouring water until all of it has been poured out. And when the water has been poured out in this way, you take a piece of paper or cloth, and put one end of it in the ear and stretch the other end to the fire until it is burnt.
And you put another cloth and make it in this way as many times as necessary until all the water has been poured out, and squeeze that one with a tube so that it is said to be an extractor of excess water from the body.
More in the extraction of the beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, take it out similarly and to its likeness, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size which causes pain in the sense of the stomach, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and anointments, and the cause of it is considered lighter than all the other causes that happen in the ear.
But in the extraction of a worm engendered in the ear, when you cure it with water as we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations and do not confound your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to the sun.
And therefore if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with subtle gesture or with fine fingers, but if no cause appears, then take a narrow tube and insert it from below to above, which is the form of the treatment: And insert the thin extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; and then suck strongly on it with a firm suction, and make repeated motions, until all the worms are expelled.
But if it does not obey your assault, then stop up and close the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer the distillations which the ancients have already proved in the cure of worms, and you will find it in the treatise of distillations.
And let your effusion be that with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form. And make that one of silver or of bronze, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and with a flat surface.
And therefore it should be as one would pack that which is in the cavity of the tube so that it will be necessary here. And if you wish, take the thread and wrap it around the extremity of the tube decently cut, and then put oil in the cavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever of these medicines you want in the tube  and this is in the ear , and then insert the thread with its end into the hand and press with your hand a tempered compression until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil penetrating.
And that which has infiltrated in the ear should already be scraped with a small focus. And beware that the cause you distillate in the ear is not too cold, because ear medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter 7.
On the treatment of obstruction of the ears.
Some infants have been born with imperforated stomachs of their mothers, and this has already happened to some men, obstruction in the middle of the ear due to a plague or flesh growing in it; and this obstruction sometimes occurs in the passage of the ear's tube, which does not allow for evacuation, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the tube of it, which does not allow for evacuation, is among the major conditions of difficult healing.
And in that case where you achieve evacuation, take care to put the ear of the patient towards the sun and observe it. And then if you see apparent obstruction, open it with a subtle spatula, of which this is the shape:
If the extremity of it has a small width, where one part is sharp and the other not, and the spatula is two fingers wide so that it does not cause injury to the ear.
And so if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the ear or in the middle of it, then you will apply subtle and violent facilitations until all the flesh is removed.
And if the obstruction is in the fold of the ear, then take a subtle thread and warm it with a little fire, and place it in the middle of the ear.
And so if you have perceived an obstruction in the ear that the patient feels as a difficulty, due to gravity of hearing, force out the oppression with a facilitation; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
And place a poultice on the ear made of linen according to the quantity of the size of the wound that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take cotton and put it in hot water and pulverize it over the affected area and use it; and if the ear has become apostemated, then remove the cotton and replace it with another cotton that you will wrap in wax mixed with rose oil, until the aposteme is cauterized; and treat it until it is healed.
When there is an excess of blood flow, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use another remedy that restricts the blood flow, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 3.
On the treatment of cataracts that have developed on the eyelids.
Cataracts that have developed on the eyelids of the eyes, some treatments are moist, others are dry.
Therefore, hold those in your hands or on your knee, and separate them with the spatula of their roots, and apply pressure on the places, following the prescribed method.
When there is pain with a flow of blood, then cauterize those areas with a subtle, lancet-like cauterizer.
And the best cauterization is to apply incisions and moist dressings that promote healing when some cause of the roots remains; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Treatment of cataracts that come to the eyelids of the eyes.
Moist spots appear on the eyelids of the eyes for some reason, which is similar to cataract in its strength and hardness, and because of this similarity it is called cataract.
It is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid and underneath.
Therefore, the operation on them is what you consider then if the greatness proceeds in it in that which appears of the eyelid and is bad in all parts; and the cause of it is laziness.
Then make an incision on that part with width, and return the corrupted flesh with ease so that it evacuates, and hang that part with a bandage and cut off the dead parts.
And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from that because the angent of it restores and regenerates.
And if the greatness declines to the inner parts of the eyelid, then remove the inner surface, then evacuate the eyelid and hang the greatness with a bandage, unless you indicate an incision, and press on the entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, this does not harm for any cause.
And then apply the treatment, wash the wound with salty water; and cure the area with the liquid that promotes healing from within.
And then put a bandage, wash the wound
Of the treatment scratch on the eyelid of the wound.
A scratch is a grievance which is generated in the eyelids, and mainly it hurts children, aggravates the wounds of those who have cataracts, and prevents them from looking at the clarity of the sun because tears are collected in their eyes.
And for this reason they rub their eyes on their faces for a long time, and they sleep with their faces down; and also their eyelids are humid from the discharge, which has already covered the inflammation, and a sign of cataract is apparent in the wound; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the cataract inside.
And a certain method of operation is for the one who has the disease, to hold his head in a cloth, and then put a warm wrap on it and make a plaster, and make a circle according to the amount that contains the entire affected part, and then apply this on the area and press with the fingers all around so that the cataract is collected in the middle of the circle, and then make an opening in the middle of this humidity with a spatula through the fissure with caution, and the fissure should not be larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
More in the stomach cavity that you find the entire intestine wrapped up inside, so that it reaches to the diaphragm, because in most cases the intestine processes through a fissure according to the form of white grey matter.
Then extract that bone with the rags you have enveloped between the strings of the divided parts and turn it around with your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure so that with the spatulum you do not reach the hole and you do not touch that thing.
More if it does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust in the fissure a small one with facility until the intestine comes out; and then extract that bone as we have said; and then soak rags of flax in water and wine and vinegar and place them on the area and hold them with bandages.
And thus they are applied with salt and placed in the cavity of the fissure so that it absorbs the remainder of that humidity.
And then heal it until it is healthy.
More if there appears on the spot a hot abscess, then treat it with cold plasters until it is healthy.
Chapter eleven.
Of the manners of touching the urine.
When in the eyelids of the urine there is a born plaque that adjusts to the natural pellets and becomes ancient, then those who are accustomed to the urine and make it come out in manners of maladies such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelid and web between which this is cause of destruction of the urine that is called touching of the urine, and cure itself in four manners: either with cautery on the focus; or with acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter of cauteries; or it is done by touching for incision and suture; or with canes as I will direct.
And then it is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your thigh; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, it is good; and if not, insert a needle in that part where there is faithful flesh under the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate to the faithful tissue, and this be  near the margin of the eyelid where the lashes are born  near the lashes, and pull the thread to the upper parts with the eyelid, and turn it to the edge.
And then put a thread in the partition of the eye, adjusting the skin with a spatula incident to the larger tear duct entering into the smaller tear duct; and then extract the filament and place it on the eyelid, covered with a small piece of cotton or cloth, and then sew above the eyelid with a needle, and let it be like the figure of an iron instrument.
More importantly, consider that the figure should be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because this is diversified in men, since some of them indicate that a large quantity should be incident on the eyelid, according to the quantity for which the eyelid is softened.
And then put a thread on the spatula over the two lines that you have sutured, and begin from the larger tear duct into the smaller tear duct. And if your natural skin opening is as large as the thickness of a kidney.
And then put the hook in one of the two corners of the wound, and then scrape off that entire area, and then adjust the suture with the two lips to the skin or thread of fine flax, and let the blood flow out, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads onto the eyebrows for some hidden causes, if you want to do it, and if not, do not cure.
And then heal the stitching of the veins within three or four days, and then take care of that.
And if you want, leave the wound without stitching, and treat it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is lifted by the separation of the wound and the aggregation of it; a better stitch is not needed. Thus said the ancients about the treatment.
More emphasis is placed on being solicitous over the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another manipulation in treatment, which is that you make a figure on the eyelid like a fig leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three separated and gathered sections according to this form:
But if it is not possible, to have the sections, and it is not stitched, then take a needle in which there is thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and pass one end of the thread near the larger tear duct, and the other end of the thread near the smaller tear duct, and adjust between the threads so that they are equal, and then with those, lift your hand with equal elevation, lift all the skin over which is made thus as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture, and cure that interior part that needs healing.
More often if an abscess forms on your incision or your fissure, apply that abscess with wax and to the similar area, with an ointment.
And some times it happens to the eyelid that the eyes are converted, therefore beware that you use in that case what we have said about incision; but a suture is more artificial in every case.
To prepare a pipe according to this method: and it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure which is next to what has been reported; and then by art make two pipes or two subtle rods from which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them is less than the width of the spatula. And you have already made incisions at the extremities of each separate parts, where you have the threads.
Then add each one subtly under what is overflowing from the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the pipes of each part with a strong ligature, and leave it for some days, so that the thread by the constriction will die and be rejected and will fall out by itself when you remove the ligature.
More quickly if it is delayed, then cut the torment with the tongs, and promptly cure the wound until it is healed.
Therefore when it is congealed, the eyelid is lifted and the skin does not puncture.
And this is the shape of two canulas which you will make according to this form: and it has the quantity of the length and of the width neither more nor less.
Chapter twelve.
About the lifting of puncturing skin on the wound with a needle where the skin is hard.
When the skin is unnatural, hard and rough and punctures the wounds, then the operation on it is that you take a fine needle and place it in a thin vein of goat and lion, and promptly adjust the extremities and anoint each one with a very subtle ointment. And let the length of the threads be of the quantity of a palm.
And then you join another fine thread to it in short fashion, and anoint the extremities of that one if you want to.
And then place the patient's sick head in its proper place, and let it be near the window so that your work may be declared, for this is a subtle and minor operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the adjusted pelvis where it is necessary to inject, and make that penetrate into the festinating palate until you extract it from beneath the natural skin.
And then pull the skin inside out and insert that into the hip joint, and let the skins be one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand with it inside so that the skin is turned out at the hip joint in the festering wound on the natural skin of the pelvis.
More if the hip joint is strained and the skin of the pelvis is not turned out, you will strain the hip joint at the separations of the faith that you have composed with it, inside which there is straining of the joint above the flaw.
And apply that to the vision of the wound, for then you will turn out the hip joint and the faith, and wrap each one and close the wound, and leave the closure for two days or three, until the skin adheres to its own place and grows over it with good flesh.
And if the skin of the pelvis is too short, then adjust a long skin of the natural skins to it, and elevate it with that, or let it be until it is lengthened in a suitable space, and then elevate it.
Chapter thirteen.
On the treatment of the disease which affects the lower eyelid.
When it occurs in the eyelid, it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on its own, either to the right or to the left side, due to poor healing of a wound or of a cut or of a cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this contraction can be natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor healing of a wound or of cuts or of cauterizations, or by bad treatment.
Make the manipulation of the operation on it so that you sew up the consolidation and that you separate the lips of it, and put between them a piece of cloth, and tie them together until they are healed.
And do not think that you should use the treatment for it of the causes that dry out and constrict, because if you do that, it will return to being ulcerated worse than before, at no time will there be healing.
Use for that cause things that soften, such as fenugrec, and anoint with the water in which they are cooked and a sixth part of it, or diaquilon ointment, which should be liquefied on top of the olis, and submerge the piece in it, and cure with it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with a tool that is not consolidated according to the form that was established at the beginning.
And this operation that we have spoken of, is nothing but a rectification of the dislocation that does not restore the shape of the place as it was beforehand.
Chapter 14.
On the cure of dislocation which is done on the eyelid.
This dislocation which is done on the eyelid, which is properly named dislocation; and it is of two kinds: one natural, the other accidental.
The accidental one is caused by a blow or by a cut or by a cautery or by other similar things.
And the way of performing it is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread appears at the two extremities of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh to the separated parts, and sew that with the needle, and cut it with a spatulum abundantly. And thus if the shape of the eyelid returns to what it should be, that's good; and if not, take the thread and pass it through the cleft figure, and with that turn the eyelid, and make two fissures on the edge of the eyelid.
And if the extremities of the two fissures of two angles of the incision are where they converge, and let there be made an angle between them, when they gather, a figure is formed from them.
And this figure is called Greek letter: lambda.
Then place the flesh of that area according to the quantity that is the width of the needle, what is called the eyelid.
And then join the separated parts and sew them with the thread of flax; and then heal them with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices, so that it is sanated.
And if it is necessary to make an incision by fissure or suture or cautery, then it is advisable that you make a flat fissure on the skin of the eyelid as has been previously stated. And then separate it with a poultice between two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the sermon on the cure of sciatica when it is on the back or hip, that runs in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of sciatica, and this is in the form of diverse motives.
And the skilled artisan always prepares a device in each manner, which is possible for it to make the figure return to its natural form, or close to it, and that patient according to what is convenient for him of the operation and of the instruments in the best dispositions.
Chapter fifteen.
On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to some men in such a way that the eyelid becomes solidified with the white of the eye, and is prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural functions, then it is necessary that you intervene with the extremity of the eyelid, and lift it up, or stretch it to the corner.
And then you cut the adherence with a subtle spatula, which should not be sharpened to the point of cutting, having obtained a small opening so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remaining with the spatula so as not to touch the eye with its sharpness.
And let your incision be such that it excises that adherence with ease, so that the eyelid is returned to its natural shape and all the adherence is healed.
And then put in the eye salt water with which you rinse it; or distill from juniper dissolved in water.
And then separate the eyelid from the eye with a decoction of it, and apply on the eye a woolen cloth soaked in white of egg, and then for three days use consolidative remedies until it is healed.
Chapter sixteen.
On the incision of the nail and the prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
It is known that the nail is affected in two ways, either it is nervous, and resembles a hard subtle callus; or it is non-nervous, resembling a white condensed humidity, which when touched by iron, if it is forced to take it on, it is separated and the iron is not fixed to it.
And both species do not begin except from the large tear duct, which enters little by little and covers the sight, and prohibits light and the movement of tears.
The best way to operate in the incision of it is that the patient should hold their head back, and then open their eyelids, and elevate the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail with the iron of little duplication and extend it to the separated parts. And then take a needle and insert into it a thread of horse or of goat or of cow, or of similar ones, or strong wire, or double the extremity of the needle little by little and put it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with the thread; and extend it to the separated parts, and extract from the thread the humor that is in the pupil. And thus you follow that which enters into the skin from the back of it.
And then you incise the remainder in the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula or with small forceps, and release the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that by incision of that there does not develop a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail with the sole of the foot extended or with wire, as we have said, and then it is scraped with a spatula the claw of which this is the shape of it:
And beware that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and that there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then make an incision in the wound a little of salt tartar or two fingers made from signs, and let that enter into the other day; and then treat it with water that covers until it is healed.
And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot put the needle, nor is it fixed on that joint, then this type of nail is treated with medicines, and is healed thus as it was and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you open the wound of the patient and take a subtle spatula of sharp iron according to this shape: I am subtle. And if it happens that the thing is refined and condensed and inserted into the vein, then distill it from your hour in the tube of clear glass made to filter or with clear pipe or with salt dissolved, and strain the liquid through the other day.
Then return immediately to the operation until all that is of it is removed, unless on the contrary an abscess forms in the tube, for then you will leave it, and cure the beginning of the abscess until it is healed.
Then return to your operation on that thing with reason until it is healed.
The protrusion of the tear-producing flesh, if it bothers in the eye with great nuisance, should be suspended with a lancet; and cut that one part, and do not push the cutting so that you do not cut the flows of tears.
Then distill in the tear duct a clear pipe or a filtering device until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
On the incision of the gum and that which is born from the adjusted flesh in the eye.
In the eyes of some people, red flesh is born, and it is placed over the pupil, or it approaches or presses on the eyelids and forces them to shut the eyelids at the outer corner and it resembles the beak of a pomegranate.
During the operation on the patient, keep their head still in a bandage; and take the flesh of that area and collect all the meat with a convenient onion to that, and put it in a forceps or in a chest; and then cut the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the incision, and beware of the vein so that it does not escape during your operation.
And let your incision be with the tool that you use to cut those things or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forked instruments with which you collect the abscess according to the shape of the area in question, as described in this chapter.
When your incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then fill the vein with trussed salt, or apply a powder of roasted and ground medicinal corrosives, and place on the wound a dressing made from egg whites until it is ensured that there will be no aposteme or cauterized area.
And if there remains some cause of gangrene and it is cauterized with a hot iron, and you fear aposteme or cauterization, then wash the wound and treat that aposteme with the thing that caused the aposteme, and apply it on the area where the operation was done until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which adheres to the wound of this condition.
More than emperor you should take total care of the patient's free will by natural means or by accidental means, working with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is sufficient for the operation.
Chapter 18.
On the collection of sweat from the body.
Sweat that comes from veins is what is collected on the body and obstructs its functioning, and delivers the body with length of days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the body in which sweat is, is strong and in it there is no other illness except sweat, then you collect that sweat.
And it is that you command the patient to raise their sick head, and you suspend those veins with a needle or with two according to your prudence; and let that needle be of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two needles gradually in a body according to this form:
And then you will collect those veins with subtle forks, with subtlety, and you will evacuate the blood at one hour or another hour, until you see those veins being emptied of the body and being evacuated.
And be careful that you do not injure the veins at the extremities of the spatium; and if your operation is in the middle of the day under the sun, and be very firm in your operation so as not to cut except those veins.
And when you have completed, then distill in the vein clear water or rosewater so that with its acidity it cuts away what is remaining of the corruption.
But if that is not possible for you to collect at that hour, then apply a plaster with what alleviates the pain of it, and let it be for several days until the pain is calmed and until it is assured that there will be no abscess or cauterization.
And then proceed over it according to the method that the matter requires until it is healed.
And this is the form of the fractures:
Chapter nineteen.
On the reduction of fracture of the nose.
When you treat a fracture with a cauterization or with sharp medicine according to what is prescribed by the narration of it and it is not healed, then do not put anything in it except that you apply a bandage on the abscess until the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and from the pus until the bone is exposed.
And then when the bone and sometimes the corrupted or blackened part is discovered, then you will use a instrument of which this is the form:
It is called a rough head, and it should be made of iron, and the head should be rounded so that it can be made pointed by filing or with a file for subtle puncturing (just as it is in the following figure).
And apply that to the corrupted area of the bone, and then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand gently so that you can feel whether the corruption is superficial.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent remedies.
Then if the area is consolidated and it has grown good flesh and it has separated from the body of the wound and stayed for forty days, and it does not get worse and it is not inflamed and there are no accidents, then you should know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is not in the skill but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: which is that you discover with iron or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take three teeth according to this form:
Let the exteriority of the iron triangle be, and the thrust of it be primarily extended into the extremity in the same way as many times as necessary.
And then stop that on the bone, and it should be near the tear duct; and move your hand a little from the hole, and then turn your hand around the drill that penetrates all of the bone, and the patient feels it as such that it opens up a passage for air to come out.
Then restore the place with medicines that dry and constrict, just as you were instructed.
Then when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter that flows to the partitions of the forehead returns to the nose, therefore it is easier to put on the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the prominence of the hole.
When the hole protrudes in its entirety and does not cause any discomfort or diminishment, then it is good to laxate the patient, and then to follow them, and then to make scarifications on the neck with good suction; and then to apply a liniment on the hole made from acacia and aloe and resin and sarcocolla, and then to strengthen the plaster over the hole with many powders.
The handling of the poultices is that you take cloths of linen cloth, and each cloth should be folded in four layers; and make from those cloths.
And then place one of them on the other according to the quantity of which the wound has need. And then stretch over them a hard cloth with strong binding; and apply the cups with suction through scarification; and then remove the cups and dress the wound tightly by day and by night.
More often if the ligament is softened, it is good that it be tightly bound.
And then dress the ligament by day and night as we have said.
And if the wound has already been reduced, that's good, and if not, then apply the plaster with poultices and binding and cups until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
Of the incision of the prominence of the tunic of the uvea (possibly referring to a part of the eye, with "uvea" being related to
When there is disruption in the tunic of the uvea, and it is prominent and protrudes out of the eyelids like a grain of rice, and its shape is that of a man for this reason, and you want to cut into it, then the operation on it is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle at the root of the uvea on the lower part and also put the other needle which has double thread of the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate and let go the first needle according to its disposition; and then cut the place of the double thread and lift with that the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and bind it tightly.
And then extract the needle and pause on the woolen cloth infused in white album of glue, and release that which holds the thread in the wound.
Then heal the wound with what comforts it so that the plague is healed.
And some bandages gather the entire wound with a circle of cloth around the wound, and then it should be perforated with a subtle spatula that comes to the surface of the wound, and clear the albugineous humidity, and descend the wound and enter as much.
And then strengthen it so that it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of swollen glands.
This illness that is called alconati is nothing but a cyst which is joined to the wound resembling descending water and it is not that.
More, the manner of operating on it is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and upright seat, and then take the head in your hands from both sides, and move it so that you see the cyst coming to the lower parts, and then it should be dried and not descend, and the lumen should be stopped, and the patient sees the causes thus as they are seen.
And if it does not go down, know that it is water.
But if the descent is not prepared at the healthy one with the water that we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take subtle spit and put it on the outer corner of the eye where the conjunctiva meets the cornea (in the location of the lacrimal punctum), until the healthy one is ejected.
Then when it is ejected, you distill in a tube hot water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then let it be cured with the other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of the descending water of the eye.
We have already spoken of the species of the water in the division and what it is convenient to pierce with serum, then declare that according to the health.
Then make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and lift their healthy eye, with a tight bandage.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of the healthy eye, if the eye with water is the left eye; or your right hand, if it is the right eye.
And then take your right hand to grasp the left one, if the pain is on the left; or take your left hand, if the pain is on the right.
And then stop the extremity of the left hand near the crown due to the thickness of the vein in the white of the painful eye from the side of the tear duct, and press the thumb of the left hand with force and turn your hand towards it.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the left hand has already been introduced for an empty cause.
And take the measure of the left hand to grasp the measurement of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the crown of the eye; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then stop the left hand inside the place where the water is, and lift your arm up to another level, and thus if the water descends immediately, then the patient will see above that which they were looking at before, and the left hand in their other eye.
And then rest for a little while; thus if the water has descended, then you will place another layer of cloth that is more than the left hand was previously.
And then when it is sitting and not descending, then extract the almond with ease, and stir in that hand little by little, and dissolve in water a small amount of clear salt of gem and with that wash the hollow tooth; and then put on the hollow tooth a cotton plug or a stopper or flannel infused in oil of rose and white of egg and bind it with that to the tooth.
Many of us, and those who are of our time, put on that which is ground with white of egg.
And if it does not obey your almond to the entrance of the tooth because of its hardness  for there are some men whose tooth is hard as stone , then take the spatula which is called alberin, of which this is the form:
And then pierce that conjunction, and do not put your hand in the hole, and it is not that you should make a way to the almond place subtly.
And then insert the almond as we have said.
And give the complement of your work, let the patient sleep in a prepared place, made in such a way that they sleep on their back in a dark house, and be prohibited from all movement.
And put in the nature of it that which is suitable so that its nature be clean, and do not move the head to the right or left side at all.
And let the ligament follow its natural position into the third day.
And then dislodge that from the dark and hidden place and cleanse the foul vision, and make the veins see some causes, and then return the ligament into the seventh day.
And do not attempt to do this at the hour of the purifications or unless the infusion is near. Be careful that you administer this so that the water may pass gently and with great and vehement regard.
If apostema abscess occurs, then be careful that you undo the vein before the seventh day, and correct that with this which will cause the abscess to fall.
Then you will absolve the vision of it and place upon the face of its mouth for which will be ruled the evacuation of it, it having existed in the dark place for some days.
And then let it be extracted from that place gradually and treated according to its causes.
And know that in this case the disciple of vision is not excused from certain watchings, and then you will be careful about the operation.
And it has reached us from some of those who are at the Artach, and some say that fire is made in the Ayraic cave, which is perforated with what the water flows through.
Maybe the emperor or someone of high rank has not seen it in our land, which would have perfected this, nor is it read in any of the books of the ancient authors; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of illnesses for which there exists a remedy for those who ignore them:
And they are made of iron or of steel properly, and their extremities are sharp with this subtle triangular fineness, the pointed extremity thus as that is the form.
Chapter 24.
On the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose there are born diverse flesh growths, from which some cause is assembled like a tail of a fat worm, or a polyp of fish; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that represented fish tail. And from it is cancerous flesh, of a dark color; and from it is flesh that is not of a dark color.
Therefore in that which is in these non-cancerous and non-deceptive flesh, it is good to make the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and breathe into their nostrils, and prick the tendon once in those flesh. And then extract that from the divided parts of the pus, and examine what you have understood from those wounds with subtle spatula of one part, so that you know that all the flesh is already gone; if there remains some cause for which removal is possible, then use one of the subtle instruments with ease to remove the cause. But if it is a painful or acidic postema, then stop the flow of what flows; or if it is one of the malignant postemas, then touch and cauterize that so that the sane and the wounds are all opened.
And then let it be put in the nose with incision of vinegar or sharp water. But if the nose is opened and humidity from it proceeds to the palate, then know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then know that within there is dead flesh in the purulent pus of the nasal bones to which removal has not reached.
Then it follows that a thread is passed through the eye to which some thickness belongs, and knots are made in the word knots, and between each knot the quantity of the said or measure, and anoint the patient and pass one end of the thread into the nose with a needle or other instrument by which it is possible.
And when that aura is made, which attracts the mucus from inside so that it passes into the channels of the nostrils, and is expelled over the mucus's receptacle, because repeated evacuations seem to do this action to the children in the schools, and it is a legitimate cause for one who wants to do it.
And then pause with the two extremities of the vein, one extremity that goes over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a tight closure of flesh at the nostrils that are in the vein, and make it enter so that you know that the flesh is already at the nostrils of the vein.
And then extract the vein, and pause in the nose with the abstraction of a blood vessel, and make it for three days or more until the poultice corrupts all that is rotten from the flesh.
And then at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a tube of lead for several hours until it is healed.
More if there are needs of cure that are urgent, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument to be used for purging, in which are distilled oils and medicines into the nostrils:
Make it of silver or of iron, which is similar to a small covered lamp, thus as a small shell, and the middle similarly.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument is to be made with a flat, uncovered tip; on which you should put a handle at the back, with which you hold that which you extract from it, or that which you want from the juices and subjacent causes.
Chapter 25.
Of the nerves born in the extreme parts of the nose.
Many nerves are born in the extreme parts of the nose, and it is magnified and mentioned in certain days when the regard of it is treated.
And for this reason you should note that which appears at the beginning of its appearance, and inherit all that. Then apply a cauterization or medicine burning on the place where it was, to treat the area.
If the incision is delayed until it becomes large, then consider if it is hard, of dark color and of little feeling, do not touch that iron tool which is an ulcerous aposteme; because many times it appears to one who has cut this aposteme with great evil on the one on whom it had.
And if the aposteme is of a fiery touch and not of dark color, and at times when incision is possible on all that, then evacuate the patient and cut without fear, and treat the area with what exudes and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of the suture of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by a wound or by similarities.
Be aware that when there is a loss of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer success in that operation except for some men.
Therefore, when you come upon some cause of these, consider if it is a fresh wound with healthy tissue, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and closely treat that until it is healed.
And if the lips of the loss of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is advisable that you excavate each part of its underlying flesh until healthy tissue appears. And then adjust the two lips of the wound to the suture and strengthen them, and on top of them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and crushed plant, and apply a plaster made from plaster of Paris or another consolidating plaster, and leave that dressing on for two days or three, and then remove it and replace it with new plaster, and leave it on until the wound is scarred, and then treat the inner wound with an ointment so that it heals.
The best way to do the suture is that you add a solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity to the thread as you were taught.
Chapter 27.
Of extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided teeth.
Some visible ulcers appear in the divided teeth of their lips, some aposthems similar to a bunch of grass, and some of them are minor and some are major.
Therefore, you should convert the lips and wounds each one of those hardnesses into a whole part, and then with the abscess cleans the place with tritted blood so that it is restrained, and then wash it with warm water and treat the place with what is stipulated, until it is healed.
Chapter twenty-eight.
On the incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Gather the nearby veins above the adjusted gum flesh, which the ancients call Albulus, and note that you must suspend or hold that vein with forceps and incisions to remove its origin, and let the blood flow or the wound.
And then apply a poultice on the wounded place, either astringent powders or excitative ones.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, for applying the cautery will prevent its return.
Chapter twenty-nine.
On the root of teeth with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the divided parts and those of the mouth and between the adjusted gums, rough, black, and certain veins are blackened and made citrine or green within which the gum is seen to be corrupted and the loose teeth are decayed.
And then it is necessary that you sit the patient between your knees and support their head on your thigh, and examine the teeth in which those roughnesses and causes of blackness appear, within which from them no corruption remains, and this makes the blackness and citrinity and other things to be modified.
Therefore, if the obstruction is in the beginning of the passage of the intestine, then it is so; and if not, then you will move the intestine over those areas on the second and third day until it comes to the last statement that you desire.
And know that the teeth have need of various forms of mortars and of many figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And because the razor with which the tooth is scraped from the part of the teeth is different from the razor with which it is scraped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors must be prepared by you, whichever ones you will see are necessary:
Chapter thirty.
Of the extraction of teeth.
When you treat the tooth for its pain with all ingenuity and delay in the entire extraction of it, because there is no single cause that should hasten the evacuation of it when it is extracted, because it is a sublime substance involved in the evacuation during the extraction of it.
But when the patient asks that this tooth be extracted, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, because many evacuations deceive the patient and make it seem like it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this happen through operation of the barbers.
Therefore, since you must certify what the aching tooth is, and what you know to be good, then investigate so that you scrape in the circuit of the tooth with spatulum where some virtue may be dissolved from the tooth of the gum of the entire affected part, and apply this to the teeth or to subtle forked instruments for commencement little by little until that congeals.
And apply it to the strong teeth with good speech or strong structure, and hold the head of the patient between your teeth so that you hold them firm that they do not move, and pull the tooth according to the correct technique so that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
And therefore if it is not forced out, then take one of those instruments, and put it under the affected part with ease and effort, facilitating the removal of it, so that it is done from the beginning.
If the tooth is fractured or decayed, then investigate that you fill with thread that fracture and tighten it at the extremity of a subtle wire so that it is not broken in the hour of your construction over it, holding it firm.
And investigate that you work carefully with scraping in the circuit of the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it and rend asundered part of it, and return to the patient for the malice that is less than the first pain of it.
And beware that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their boasting and arrogance about the eradication of it, which they do not administer as we have recommended; because many treated cases bring great illnesses upon men, which are more difficult to cure, and the roots of them are all or some of them, or extracting that one with some bones of the jaw, as many treated cases have testified.
And for the eradication of it, let the mouth be washed with six or eight tablespoons of salt.
And if there is an outflow of blood because of it, as many treated cases have done, then sprinkle a certain quantity of barley and ashes on the wound, and if that barley does not work, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and tongs should be subtle with which the tooth is extracted at the beginning being of long extraction, short handle and thick, so that they are not doubled when you have to operate with them.
And let them be as many times thick in the handle so that when you grasp them with those they are not doubled, being short in the extremities.
And let them be made of Indian steel decently made with extremities of teeth, and on the extremities of those let there be teeth that one goes into the other and holds by strong construction, and some treated extremities of those are in the shape of a parrot's beak, which is called ciconia, and it is said to be of strong construction.
Chapter 21.
Of the eradication of teeth and extraction of the bones of the fractured jaws.
When you need to eradicate a tooth that is fractured for some reason, then it is advisable that you apply a poultice on the area with warm water for a day or two until the area becomes softened; and then insert the tongs or pincers through the extremities of which are assembled at the beak of a tool called ciconia or guanta, the shape of the forceps:
The extremities of them should be made like fine files or pincers.
And if it does not obey to your attempts with these forceps or pincers, then it is advisable that you make an incision on the root and scrape away all the flesh and insert the instrument which has the name atali, whose shape is like a small lever, the form of which is this:
And let it be with a short, thick extremity, not too thin so that it doesn't break.
Therefore, if with that the root is excavated, it's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular with an extremity in which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a subtle pointed extremity.
And thus help yourself with this instrument having two edges, of which this is the appropriate shape for the following: and with other instruments that I will prescribe in the scraping of teeth; because usually it is made with this instrument which is assembled to a large nail, and this is the shape:
of the triangular extremity twisted or short, which should be some thickness, and not be sharpened so that it is not jagged.
And you should know that the instruments for the teeth are moved thus and similarly the other instruments.
More skilled and subtle artisans in the art will find for themselves, according to what it means for them the operation and various ailments; because there are some ailments for which the ancients did not design or provide a proper instrument, due to the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is jagged or fractured, then weigh and consider carefully on that location with what is convenient for the instruments and the forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help yourself with the gesture of which this is the shape:
And if there is a small swelling in the alcune, it should be constricted or held in the mouth so that it does not burst out, and then restore the area with medicines suitable for that purpose.
If there is a small hole in the bone, then take away that part of the decay and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of teeth that protrude over the others.
When the teeth protrude not according to their natural body shape for them the form is faulty, and especially when it happens to women, and even more so to venerable old ladies; therefore consider this: if a tooth is not close to another tooth, and there is no possible suture or ligament of it, then remove that root; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it should be made from Indian steel of extreme sharpness, like a pig's bite.
And let your incision be the one with which you cut it, in several days, because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it not be confused or mixed with other teeth.
And if it is an exposed protruding tooth to filing, then file it with a steel file from India of which this is the shape:
And let it be all of iron from India and marginally; and let it be with pointed tips, just like a file, on which the teeth are sharpened little by little over many days with ease, so that there is not another tooth as hardened and hooked. And then smear that on the ends, and give it to them to chew thoroughly.
And if it is a tooth from which a piece is broken and the tongue is wounded, then it is necessary that you smooth out the edge so that the sharpness of that fraction is removed and swallowed, and pressed down so that the tongue does not lick it nor the word be corrupted.
Chapter thirty-three.
Of the restoration of damaged teeth with wire of gold or silver.
When the front teeth clash due to concussion and displacement by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated it with styptic medications, and your treatment has not been effective, then so that they do not gorge themselves on those that are strengthened with gold wire and not silver, because silver is turned green and immediately spoils, but gold in no way is changed.
And let the wire be of such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the method of the reception is that you take the wire and double it between two healthy teeth, and then increase it with two twists of the wire between two damaged ones, or one or many, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then insert the instrument into the partition of which you began, and hold your hand with facility and wisdom inside so that it is not injured.
And let your grip be on that which holds the thread of the veins, so that the roots of the teeth do not get damaged.
And then cut the superfluous extremities of the thread with the forceps or tongs, and put those in each place in gestures, and turn those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the injured tooth, so that it does not harm the tongue. And then release that thing thus stretched like a rope.
If it is loose or broken, hold it or them with another thread in such a manner for all its time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two injured teeth, thus as these things bound:
And when it happens that one tooth or two return to their place in their respective locations, and are re-attached thus as we have recounted, and that they heal.
And do not do this unless you are skilled and wise.
And some remedies are made from the bones of a cow, and are shaped like a tooth, and are placed in the location where the tooth is lacking, and are held thus as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Chapter 94.
About the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which comes in the tongue sometimes is natural with man, or it is accidental and happens by a wound which has already consolidated.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, their head existing in a raised position; and elevate their tongue, and then incise the nervous ligament according to the width by which the tongue is freed from its restraint.
But if there is any hardness or knot in it, and this has come from consolidation of the wound, then you apply oil and cut through the width by which you have previously incised the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And beware that there not be made a fissure in the press of the flesh and that you do not cut into the artery and vein, causing a flow of blood.
And then let the remains of the incision be washed with vinegar or green wine or cold water; and then apply a poultice on the tongue; this is a remedy which holds the patient's tongue in each night so that another knot does not form.
More often if there is an excess of blood, put a bandage on the affected area with triturated vertirol; more often if the blood comes out, then cauterize the area with a cautery iron that suits the condition. And then treat it with other remedies according to what is suitable for healing.
Chapter thirty-five.
On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Certain growths occur on the tongue with an abscess resembling a small lump, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function; and it is enlarged to the point where it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth widely in front of a candle and examine the abscess.
And if you see it is of a dark or black color, hard, to which the patient has no sensation, then do not touch that part which is cancerous.
And if it declines to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then put the instrument on it, and cut it with a subtle spatula, and cut all around; and if blood comes out during your operation, then apply above it a bandage triturated with vertirol, so that the blood is restrained.
And then return to the work you have begun with the patient, after having treated them with a complement of vinegar and salt; and cure that with another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter thirty-six.
On the extraction of abscesses from behind the ears and of that which is born in the throat and of other abscesses.
When there is a swelling in the throat, these are glands that have gathered together, which previously were hidden and are called the ears, which when you treat them with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron because of the flow of blood; let it be until it becomes ripe, and then you will treat it, or it will burst by itself.
And if it is of white color, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what should be pierced.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already been treated with a completed or incomplete treatment; and then make the patient sit down, and their head be in a high place, and open the mouth of theirs, and a servant holding between their hands the tongue of theirs, and prepare an instrument of noble metal, of which this is the form:
Let it be made of silver or iron, and let it be subtle as a knife.
Therefore, when you press on that tongue and the abscess is shown to you, and you cut above that bad vein, then take eleven and put it in the amulet, and pull it towards the outside parts as much as you can. Another thing that you will remove from some cause of the tunics, and then cut with an instrument of which this is the shape:
Another thing that you will remove from some cause of the tunics, and then cut with an instrument of which this is the shape: and it is assembled with forceps, although the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one of them is in the end of the other, with sharp points, which should be of iron and sharp.
But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then cut it with a spatula of which this is the shape of it: let one side be sharp, and not sharp on the other side.
And after you have cut one side, cut the other according to this same method of cutting, and then give the patient a gargle of cold water.
But if there is an efflux of blood, gargle with water from the decoction of seeds of millet or of leaves of mint and similar to that for the causes styptic, so that the flow of blood is restrained, and then treat it so that it becomes healthy.
And in some cases, the swelling appears on the other knee or other places, and incisions are made according to what was said and written in the description of the treatment of gout.
And already a woman was treated for an abscess that had formed on her knee, the abscess was of a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed her knee, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and had been warned that she would be near death if she stayed in this state for one or two days.
And the abscess had already pushed so much that it had made two openings between which the pus flowed out through two holes.
Then I made an incision in the form of a fistula and placed it in one of the holes, and pulled it out, and a large amount of pus came out, and then I made an incision to comprehend the other hole, and then I forced open its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then I placed the hole in that abscess.
And then I cut out a large part of it, and not much blood flowed from it except for a little. So the knee of that woman was absolved, and she began to drink water, and then took a diet, so I didn't need to make many incisions on that abscess for a long time, and another abscess succeeded in its place, which was prolonged by the incision that was made.
Then you should put a hot iron and cauterize the patient's ankle, then anoint with medication; and then you should walk around and not let anyone know that God has helped with this treatment.
Chapter 37.
Of the incision of the uvea when it is inflamed.
When there is a flow of mucus to the uvea, and it is inflamed and prolonged, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part, then it is called bubo.
More often when it is cured with the treatment that we have mentioned in the division, and do not confuse your cure, and also many times that the aposteme is hidden and subtle, then beware that you cut into the round aggregated; and if it is to its length, and it is bloody, of dark color or black, and does not belong to him, then beware that you touch the incision of it, for in it there is fear regarding the patient.
And when you see it according to the method that you have been told of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit and press the tongue with an instrument which shapes its form and then put the nail in the new moon, and pull it downwards and cut it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of the two lips.
And beware that you do not insert anything except what is adjusted according to the natural term of the disease, for if you insert into the patient's urine, it will reveal the disease's speech.
And then the insertion, use for that which we have recommended in the insertion of two claws, and cure it until it is healed.
If the patient is frightened by the insertion, beware that you use ingenuity in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manipulation of the cautery on it is not but with sharp water, and it is that you hold the head of the patient in your teeth, and then press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have mentioned, and then take from the water which we have spoken of in the chapter on cauterization, and congeal this living cause, and pour this not thick nor subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Let the extremity of the cavity in which the medicine is poured be like the cavity of a scorpion's tail, and pour the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient will spit over the shoulder so that saliva or mucus from their mouth comes out for the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend from that same cause into the throat of the patient and that it will spit out.
And then put your hand on the medicine, and express that onto the uvula for half an hour until it becomes negated and soothed by the absorption of the medicine.
And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the vein, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the vein into the cloth in a pipe until the cloth adheres to it, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the vein, and then leave it alone for three or four days.
And if you indicate that the medicine should be repeated, repeat it, and then the cauterization is applied to the circuit of the vein with cloth dipped in emollient, and clean what is in the circuit of the vein from the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat the wound with an embrocation, and heal by gargling until it is sanitized.
And this type of cure is more safe than incision and less fearful.
Certain times the uvula is cured with something that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with subfumigation in this manner: take calament, ysop, origanum, rue, arabic scammony, camomile, and similar to those of herbs, and mix all these causes, or some of them, into a wool, and let them be submerged in vinegar and boiled; and the wool should be washed decently, and there should be in the middle of the wool a pipe, on which an instrument made of silver or metal is placed according to this manner; it should be made of silver or metal.
And let the extremity be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula on the tonsil, until the uvula is sufficiently moistened.
And then spread it over those moistened places until it's dry, and beware that you don't perform this treatment at the onset of an abscess, for it would be too severe on the abscess, and it's not suitable for you to do this, but rather you should declare the abscess of the patient.
But if this instrument is not at your present, then take a cane and place a knot in the extremity of it, so that the mouth of the patient is obstructed, for the knot of the cane prevents the vapor from reaching the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter 38.
Of the extraction of thorns and of that which adheres to the gullet and of other causes.
Moistened places have adherence to the gullet or foot spine or some other cause.
Therefore it is necessary that you extract that which is apparent from those things, on which the sight falls, because you press the tongue with an instrument between the teeth, so that it may be declared to you what is in the throat.
And if that which does not appear is hidden in the throat, then make the patient vomit by inducing them to drink a concoction to purge their stomach, because the cause of the obstruction in the throat will be expelled through vomiting; or give the patient a piece of soap made from nap or root of laytuga or a dry biscuit; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and tie it strongly with a thread, and give it to the patient to swallow, so that when it reaches the place where the obstruction is located, it will be expelled. And take a cord and tie it strongly around the arm, and let it be left there for a while and then removed; or take a tube and insert it into the bladder and leave it in for a time.
But if not expelled by these means that we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in the following form:
And let it be thick enough to fit a small rod, and at its end have a cavity which you insert into the throat with ease.
And raise the patient's chin upwards, and beware lest the bone of the throat or jaw touch, so that it does not injure the bone or spine, or that the doctor puts their hand on it.
More than the emperor, the disease that is hidden within is revealed by the knowledge of the place of the cause and the surrounding area, and pulls the hand with the instrument on it, all according to the quantity that has been prepared beforehand so that it can be extracted.
Chapter 39.
Of the extraction of blood associated with the knee.
When the knee is treated with medicine as we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and not with confectures, consider then on the knee of the patient to the sun, since you have compressed the tongue of it with an instrument that you have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the blood vessel, extract it with a small tool or with subtle gestures decently.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the knee of the patient, and put in the cavity of the cannula an ignited iron, and do this as many times (until the blood vessel is dead and removed from the knee) and abstain the patient from water for the whole day.
And then take a full vessel of cold water, and put the mouth of it in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow any of this cause, but hold the water for an hour with your hand, because the blood vessel feels the water most when it is at rest.
More often if the patient is not previously prepared with what we have recommended, then subject the patient to a mixture of cypress or absinthe through the instrument that we have recommended in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Make this, then in four days.
And there is another manner of operation in the suffumigation of that, which you take a bowl in which are ignited coals and the bowl is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole, and the extremity of the instrument is composed in that hole; and apply it from below to the suffumigation; and put the patient's mouth on the extremity of the tube, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not expelled until you know that the suffumigation has reached the blood, because the blood then will discharge.
And if it does not descend, then repeat the suffumigation many times, and restrain the patient from drinking, and have them eat salty and bitter foods, and do not drink water, and it is necessary that with this treatment the suffumigation be expelled.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood of the throat is treated when it is visible; and it resembles a pair of pincers thus many times, except that it is in the alcove curved: Which is placed in the groin area, and the extremity of it resembles a beak of a stork, that is called gout, in which there is an accumulation of lime, for this reason, when we press any cause, it does not release.
Chapter 40.
In which there is the sum of the serum in collection of abscesses and in section of their discharge.
The abscesses are moved with special treatments, with various methods, according to the memory of them, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and discharge of them through two methods, of which one is for the species of abscesses in themselves being treated; and for that which we press out of the humidity.
And the second method is proper for the places in which accidents of the body occur, because the abscess that happens in the head is different from the abscess that happens in the buttocks; and the abscess in the fleshy place is different from the abscess in the joint; and each of them is judged by operation.
And more of the abscesses are such that it is preferable that they not be perforated but rather have maturation of the blood in them or completion of it.
So other abscesses which are supposed to be pierced when they are ripe, and not matured according to their completion, just like abscesses that are applied to the joints, for an abscess that is near a joint, its being from it is prolonged until it reaches the purulent matter that is in the circuit of it, and for this reason the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, by which it is made cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess proper to a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is matured near the principal member; or it is proper to the anus, therefore perforate the unripe one; and it is not necessary to pierce the raw, undigested one, but only that which is proper to the anus, so that it does not press the rectum of it and is elongated to the parts divided from the anus, and a fistula is made, or that which is made in the term of it which is not sanated. It is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess, and also it is when it is matured.
And know that it is matured when there is a decrease in pain and a cessation of fever, and also a reduction in swelling and in pulse, and a sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And where there is a cavity, you should know that the perforation creates a hole in the place of the abscess and of the pus coming from the treatment of the swelling.
And the perforation should be done through the length of the flesh or of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or of the feet, and in the place of the veins, of the nerve cords, of the arteries; and, finally, in all hidden places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use perforation according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to delay the perforation until digestion is confirmed according to the humor, as we have said; because if you perforate then, it prolongs the body of the pus and of foul matter, and forces out the lips of the wound which become hardened and the depth of it.
But some abscesses should be perforated according to the width of the flesh or of the body as necessity dictates, or according to that which the affected member indicates.
And it is necessary to administer small perforations, and in large abscesses a large and wide perforation or several incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And other times the apostemas are in those places where it is necessary that the abscess be opened and drained, when it is made thus as a poultice and made in term that has already suppurated, thus like that which falls into drops of pus and boils.
And of those that are cut with a section having three angles; and of those it is in which is incised thus as the figure of a leaf of mint, thus like the apostemas of the anginas.
And of them it is in those where a round section and a crescent-shaped section are administered, and similar to these.
More, that one which is not capable thus as are the superficial abscesses of the lion, where you should make a superficial perforation, or plane only.
And where the abscess is large and has collected much pus, that you should perforate it and not be concerned that you extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted from it a portion, and then apply a plaster to the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger portion, and then make many evacuations according to the degree to which it is evacuated.
And especially if the patient is of frail virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit is greatly resolved with the egress of the pus, and hardly dies the patient, and you operate them.
Keep this chapter with great caution, and return your attention to the perforation in which you will make an incision, considering that you will clean the wounds and see if the wound of the abscess is small, or a flat cut, then you administer remedies of oil or anti-inflammatory ointment; and if the abscess is large, and the cracks of the perforation are many, then consider that you put a dressing on each wound so that they heal together.
And if in the abscess a part of the skin is separated or has formed a cavity, then consider that you fill it with a lot of soft cloth or yarn made from linen thread, as when you treat wounds or roots, its humidity; and apply this for three days; and then remove it and cure the area with what is necessary to heal the injuries.
But if there is an outflow of blood during the time of your operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in which you soak a linen cloth, and place it over the area of the profusely bleeding wounds.
But if the bleeding persists, then consider that you administer treatment and cure with powders which have been recommended in many places of our book and division.
More so if it is in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of nervous movements, then it is good that you apply poultices made with wine and oil, and put them on those areas.
And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then it is good that you apply poultices soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all that is applied should be cooled so that it is the third day, as we have said, and then it is good that you lance the abscess and cleanse it and administer to it the cure that is convenient for it.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the way of distinction I have already spoken of all abscesses in whatever manner is the way of the cure of them by chapters singularly.
Chapter twelve.
Of the section on abscesses that occur in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck small abscesses form, and they are species of knots that contain tunics that are adherent to them; and the species of them are movable.
And some of them are cysts, and of those there are ones that contain humidity resembling slime. And of those which contain moisture similar to dust, and gather it; and of those which are muddy, rough.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, since you must not make the extraction of those cause irritation to the arteries.
And the operation in section of those is that you squeeze those with an instrument the shape of which goes near to them, which is called entromes, so that you know what they contain.
For if what it contains is moisture, then separate it in section according to the length by superficial section according to this form:
And begin in the section from line B to line G. Then when the moisture is evacuated, then you excise that which contains the moisture, and do not leave any of that cause of all, for if many times seen it returns, if it remains from that cause.
And then submerge the cot (knot or wound) in Egyptian gum, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with that the wound and let it be until another day, for the corrosion of all that is made from that membrane.
And then apply on that wound the Egyptian gum secondly and thirdly if it is indicated for it, until you are confident that no longer is any cause of that membrane; then cure the wound with gum until it is healed.
And if there is an abscess with fatty nodes, then you insert the needle in this manner: I have made an incision in the shape of a cross, and placed forceps between the two lips of the incision and scraped out the entire affected area, and exerted my virtue in extracting the tunic which contains it.
More often if your bowels make counter-pressure, then do what you have previously recounted as primary.
And similarly do in the abscess of incision and cure according to what you have said; and an incision over a fatty abscess is considered lighter, because it is of little blood and little humidity.
And some times there are abscesses in the head of some men in whom there is absolutely no humidity; the cause of which is that I have incised over an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess to be hard, rough, white, and dull, which could not be drained, and if I had struck it with a pustule, it would have burst.
But in other accidental abscesses on the head this is not the chapter, such as the abscesses that come to the heads of infants and from the roots of the ears, but the incision of all these should be superficial.
Stop the flow of those things from the lowest part of their body so that the body of the blood is alleviated to the lower parts.
And properly treat those with what is convenient for that cure.
Chapter 42.
Of the section of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Many times we have seen these apostems appear in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin area; and some times they occur in the other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and many are engendered between them, and all of these scrofulas have their own proper tunic, and just as with the nodes and apostems of the head, just as we have recommended.
And the species of these scrofulas are many, for some of them are gouty, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey cure.
Then in that one which you find with good disposition in the Touching, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the codena, and it is moved to all part, and it is not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not deep, so that you make an incision with a superficial scalpel from the upper part to the lower part of the body of the line G to the line B, and cut that entire part, and stretch two lips of the codena to one ounce, or to many ounces if you have need of them, just as we have said in the apostems of the head, and extract that little by little.
It is of greater caution that the vein or nerve is not injured.
And let the spatula not be pointed, so it does not injure your hand with incision, or disturb the patient, and only incise what is necessary to incise; for if you were to incise a vein or artery and prohibited from your operation, then apply on the wound some powdered vitriol or other powders which stop flux of blood, and tighten the wound, and let that which has been rested relieve the acidity of the aposteme and be softened the wound and begin to be purged. When the blood is separated.
Then return to your operation which you have begun.
And then investigate with your finger if there is a rupture of any of the other small scrofula, therefore incise those and clean those.
And if there is in the root of the scrofula a large vein, beware that you do not incise that scrofula from its root. Be careful that you tie it with a strong and doubled thread, and that you leave it so that it falls by itself without hindrance.
And then fill the wound with old oil which you have already mixed with Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you cut out the entire scrophula, then it is necessary that you adjust the edges of the wound and cauterize as much pus as possible so that no excess remains.
But if you see that excess has remained due to the size of the scrofula, it is necessary that you understand how to cut out the root of that, and extract it, and apply a suture, which is what is called.
And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation where it appears to you the place of maturation, and stop the perforation of that which is the lowest pus of the body, as we have said.
Then apply a perforation, heat up a plaster and apply it to those areas, so that it cuts away the rotten part of the corruption. And then when you see the wound is already cleaned, then treat it with a plaster of generated flesh so that it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the section of the pill of the aposteme, accidentally taken by the apothecary.
The ancients said that this section was in the pill, and it was not seen by any man in our land that this had been done.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
More often in men there is a tendency to avoid the extraction of the stone, since it is not done gently, for which all the veins and main [blood vessels] of the patient are affected.
But in those who have abscesses or cuts in the mouth or throat or two ears, when the illness is not in the cane, it is advisable to use the section of the stone to flee the loss which is made by perforation.
Therefore it is advisable when we want to make an incision, that we cut the stone with three circles of the stone's circles, or four with a small section for the width in the one that is between two circles by quantity, so that the incision is in the cartilage-free area, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for incision, because it is deprived of flesh and the veins of blood from it are few.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is advisable that he extends the ligature of the throat with an onion, and then ties the ligature so that it comes to the canal, but avoids the blood vessels if any of them are visible for some reason.
Then incise the kidney as we have recommended; and it is indicated on the section of the canal by the weakness which is of that exit with what is of its disruption and by the abscessation of the mouth.
Elevate the wound that has been opened for some time.
Then when the hour is reached in which the perforation is feared, apply two lips of the gauze to the edge of the wound, and sew only that with the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow so that it may be healed.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended is not an exposition but rather to show that some of these apostems have already oppressed the throat of the patient, and the patient has come near death, and his life is in between, and some are about to obstruct the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the place of the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
And therefore I command to leave the open wound until the evil of the disease is consumed; and its evil lasts for three days; and then I command to dress the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And this that I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and put it in the throat and cut out a part of the vein of the lung, and I was called to its cure, and I touched the mucus as it is customary for the dead, and I uncovered the wound and I found the blood which had come out of the small wound.
Therefore, it was confessed that a vein or ligament had not been injured, and the wound was from the plague, and they cured it before the focus became infected.
And do not hasten to serve if it does not arrive at the desired time, and then return after some days to the improvement of their conditions.
And now I say that in the removal of the splinter there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
Of the incision regarding the aposthema which occurs in the throat before, and it is called throat hernia.
This apostema called throat hernia is a large aposthema according to the body's coloring, and it is common in women.
And it is said in two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
And the natural one is not worthy of a cure.
And the accidental one is said in two ways, of which one is similar to fat knots, and the other way is similar to an aposthema which is made by knotting of an artery, and in that one there is fear. And it does not happen that a presumption is made to him with an iron except in the case where it is small. And you probe that and investigate it with the said, and if you find something similar to fat knots, and it is not suspended on any of the veins, then you cut it in the same way as the knots, and extract it from what contains the pus and abscess; and if not, then all the blood is pressed out, and then treat the place with what is suitable for a cure until it becomes healthy.
Chapter twelve.
Of the section of the species of knots.
Of the knots, many species and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
And I recommend that you recount thus the difference between a knot and an abscess with certain doubtlessness.
Therefore I say that with an abscess there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the surplus is sedated; and it is a completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, the pain and the heat.
But with a knot there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that pus which is in its own sac.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cyst and is made thus as a vacuity, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, which are either fat or contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I have said in the division.
Therefore I say, when you come to the cure of a knot, that you expel that and inquire into its beginning with an instrument which is called an intrument, as will be seen in the chapter which is next.
And it is the method of inquiry into abscesses and all knots, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the humid place which you find in the abscess, and you will turn the threads of the needle little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the kernel.
And then put your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and extract the entrails and consider what is coming out from the remains of it.
And if the flowing humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you dry it with a superficial drying according to what has been said about other abscesses.
And if from the remains of the entrails there is no humidity, then you should know that it is fat.
And dry on it with drying having the shape of a cross according to this shape: thus as you have been taught, and suspend that which is excessive, and scratch the crust from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sack, if you can, over that and extract that blood from the knot.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that blood, and many times it happens that this occurs, and then you extract it by pieces until none of it remains.
For if some of it remains for any reason, a little or too much, the knot returns according to the worse.
And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and apply a cauterized dressing on the area where the abscess was, and cure that with another treatment until it is healed.
And if it is a large knot, then kiss the patient's lips and cure that which grows in the flesh.
If the pulse is rapid in the patient, or slow, then touch and fill the place of the third finger with a poultice made from vitriol and apply it for two or three days until the plague disappears and the swelling of the blood subsides; and then return to cut away that which is rotten from the knot.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those are the forms of the introducers, and they are of three species, one is large, one is medium, and one is small.
The form of the large introducer is this:
The form of the small introducer is this:
Made of iron, of awl-file, with well-sharpened extremities, so that they make a good instrument for the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are named after their inventors, and one of them is called Berid.
It is from three species, of which one is great, another medium, and the third small.
The shape of the great experience, the form of it:
The shape of the middle experience, the form of it:
The shape of the small experience, the form of it:
It is suitable that they are for those abscesses and exits and fistulas and boils, so that among them there are some of the bones and other causes.
And they are made from threads, thick, of flax, or of wool, as with large needles on which the silks are sewn, and they are made of copper wire, or of iron, or of silver, And the best ones are those made of copper wire.
And they are made from black lead, which is suited for those such that the fistulas in the cavity of which there are reflections, are reflected with their lightness to those reflections.
And it is from three species, of which some are long, and others are medium, and others are short, according to the quantity of the size of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Shape of the large plaster.
Shape of the medium plaster.
Shape of a small lead experience or possibly "Form of a tiny piece of lead" or more likely in a
The forms of the ankles are of special motives, for some of them are simple ulcers, to which there is only a curvature, and they are of three species: large, small, and medium.
And of their ankles are orphaned or dropped, and they are of three species.
And of those which are ankles having two curvatures, and they are of three species.
And of them there are some that have three curvatures, and they are of three species.
And all those things are necessary in their place.
Shape of a small simple ankle, shape of it:
Shape of a large ankle having two curvatures: Shape of a medium ankle having two curvatures: Shape of a small ankle having two curvatures:
Shape of a large ankle having three curvatures:
Form of an ankle joint having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and the abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three species, one of which is large, medium, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of the medium scalpel:
Shape of the small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and not placed in such a manner, but rather so that it can be done gently in the scraping of the nodes, the fear of incision of a vein or of a nerve, and for this reason the patient is comforted and regains tranquility for a little while, which they obtain from the excoriacion of the abscess.
And these are the forms of the emollients, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
They are made of wool and resemble a net in which something is sifted.
And it is in the outer layer of the skin where the pointed cautery is hidden and in that area the parts are divided and defined, when you wish, thus as you see.
The forms of swellings, which are hidden between the fingers due to the perforation of the abscesses and do not perceptibly affect the patients, are of three species: large, medium and small. And these are the forms of those things:
The forms of tumors in which the flow of blood is diverted, and they are of three species: large, medium and small; the forms of it:
They are made of yellow wax, round with some length, and they are subtle.
And it is seen that these species of tumors are yours, large, medium and small, because through them the flow of blood is diverted with speed when necessary, and then when at first it is not medicine.
However, do not use them to divert blood in every part of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places, such as in the joints of the legs and thighs, and in the joints of the arms, and on the breasts and belly and groin, and similar to these fleshy and humid joints.
And certain surgical procedures are made with those small instruments, others resembling scissors or forceps, according to this form; through which the blood is separated when it is done by venesection, or by incision of a vein or artery.
And certain surgical procedures are made roundly according to this form:
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of men's breasts which are similar to women's.
Certain men have swollen breasts which are caused by excessive sleep and poor diet, and as a result their breasts become swollen and similar to women's, and it is considered shameful.
And to the one who has this condition, it is necessary to make an incision on the breast in the lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then remove all the excess flesh, and fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and sew the two lips of the wound together with stitches, and heal the one inside until they are cured.
But if the breast declines to the sides and is softened by its size, similar to that of women, then it should be divided into two parts, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, each one contained in the other up to the end of each, so that the larger section contains the smaller one according to this form, from line B to line G. And then remove the flesh that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the excess fat, and administer what we have said about the stitches and powders, whatever is necessary for the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of what must be cut due to the anxiety of the patient, and because of an outflow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a submersed plaster in a corrosive ointment and lay on that which corrodes the rot of the fracture, and properly cure that which is affected by the disease.
Chapter 48.
Of the perforation of abscesses that come out at the nipple.
These abscesses that come out at the nipple are of the species of scrofula, and tumors, which contain a skin that is sacred.
And of those some that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity it is necessary to cut with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess has been evacuated, then fill the wound with a warm poultice and apply it to the other side.
And then let the wound be dressed and treated with a suitable ointment for that, so that it may be healed.
And if the abscess is of the species of knots and of scrofula, then you should proceed as we have said in the section concerning scrofula treatments.
When the wound has grown so large that it becomes putrid, then administer to him the cautery as we have previously mentioned.
Chapter 49.
On the section of abscesses that occur by acridity or by vein.
When the artery is broken, and the vein is consolidated which is above it, then putrid abscesses are suspected, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscesses are from the artery or from the vein: for when an abscess is from the artery it is long and accumulated in the thorax of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor in the vein.
And that which is from the vein is round at the surface of the body.
And a section about this abscess is an error, especially in that which is near the shoulders, and in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very bad, therefore it is necessary that its treatment be avoided with iron, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, it is necessary that it be avoided.
More about that which is from the flow due to inflammation of the arterial orifice, incision in the vein section in the long; and then make an incision with knives and then reveal the artery, and removal of the tunics until it be discovered.
And then put the needle on that thread and make it penetrate between the other sides, and tighten the ligature with double fidelity in two places,  which causes you to extract the excess humors from the temples.
And then touch the place which is between two ligaments with spatula so that the blood comes out from it, and let the abscess be dissolved.
And then administer the cure in which pus is generated until the ligaments fall; and treat that with a suitable ointment for that, so that it will be healed.
And if it is an abscess due to a cut vein, then take care that you hold with your hand the thing that is nearest to the abscess on the side of the body, and put the needle in the place where you have held your hand, and make it penetrate; and let it be in the double thread by which you extract from one side, and tie the abscess with a good ligature as I have told you in the ligature of the uva, on two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then put the thread in the needle before all the abscess goes out of the first incision, and tighten the threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle place of the entry that when it comes out what is in it, afterwards you cut the excess of the quiver, and let out what is bound to it.
And apply a poultice on it that has been submerged in wine and oil, and administer the cure that is made with warm compresses and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter one of the abscess which occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Thus as the abscess occurs in the artery and in the vein, similarly the abscess occurs in the nerves when it occurs due to their percussion or when it occurs from excessive effort, and from similarities.
And it is made worse by it in the places of the joints or of the ankle, or in any place where the articulations are flexed.
And it is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it is in the worst of its conditions six of them and when it is constrained with inflammation, it seems to the patient similar to stupidity.
And it is not an abscess that gathers in the front of the body, and for this reason the quiver is applied, and it is increased on one side and does not go to the sides either from the front or from the back.
Therefore, it is not suitable for those who have joint pain to be treated with iron, because the treatment would cause a strong contraction.
Pain in the head or forehead is treated with a plaster. If it is a mild abscess, then apply warmth and separate that which is putrid from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and excavate that, and apply an ointment to that; and adjust the wound with a suture, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 51.
On the section of abscesses that occur in the spleen which occur near the belly.
We find in some men fatty growths in the bellies of those and in other parts of the body of those that have spleens which are called fungal due to similarity with fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head is thick; and already the lips of those are turned, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are very magnified.
And I have already seen one, and in the belly of it there were two spleens which were more similar to fungal growths, and there was no difference between those whites, of minimal root.
And already the lips of those were turned inward and were split, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Then I inserted a probe into them and inserted one in the foot with eighteen threads, and another with six threads.
And the operation on the incision of them is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the tissue is white, humid, with subtle roots; then you insert a spatula in the wound, and have cauteries in the focus, for four to six times the section of it will expel its humor; and if the humor comes out, cauterize that.
And if the patient is pale and fearful, guard yourself from incision with iron; but then take a piece of fresh lead, and apply it to that tissue, the handling of which is what we have said; and leave it for two days.
And then adjust in the constriction of the thread of lead; thus, do not cease to apply the large lead plaster on the tissue, until it is absorbed and falls off by itself with its own effort.
But if the tissue is of coarse root, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in that which is in the belly.
It is possible that you must incise the mattress of them, and then cauterize that which does not return.
And then heal that which is inside so that the wound may be healed.
And beware that you do not attempt to incise the one which is of dark color, of little feeling, of light regard, for that is a cancerous abscess.
And I will come to the memory of the sick person with a remedy afterwards.
Chapter twelve.
On the treatment of the swelling of the navel.
Swelling of the navel is caused by many reasons; either by fissures of the ciphac which is above the belly, and from it the tissue or intestine protrudes according to the other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery as it has been said before, or by constricted inflammation within it.
But if it is due to a fissure of the ciphac and by protrusion of the tissue, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is less painful, and then appears with diverse symptoms. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the situation of that with it is what we have recounted before, of much more violent diversity, and when you press on that with your fingers it is hidden, and then returns; and it is foul-smelling and it is magnified by many movements of vomiting and violent turmoil.
More often because of humidity, it is evident and not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it believed.
And if it is due to blood, then with this symptom the abscess appears on the declining blackish area.
More often if it is from flesh alone, then the abscess is serious, thick and hard, and the liver is affected according to a quantity.
More often if it is due to flatulence, then the touch on him is evident.
And the operation on him is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of the liver, or of a vein, or from flatulence; then beware that you are prohibited from the cure of it, for in that there is fear and dread, as it is taught to you in the chapter in which I have spoken about the abscesses from the liver and from a vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or from the membrane, then beware that you order the patient to hold his legs up, and be standing stretched out; and then sew with a thread around the entire navel, and then order him to stand bent between your hands on his back, and then circle with a spatula flat in the area of the navel over the place where you have sewn with the thread; and then stretch the majority of the abscess to the lower parts down with a large needle; and then tie in the area with a strong or thin thread and the handle of the thread decently.
And then return the edge of the abscess that is extended over the ligament and introduce the mentioned tool into that indicated place and search for the intestine; and if you have found or guarded it by the ligament, then extract it carefully and push the intestine to the divided parts of the belly.
And if you have found the membrane, then take it with a pinch; and cut away the excesses of it.
But if it is opposite to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads and introduce two needles in the circle you have made around the abscess in a cross-like manner, which should penetrate; and then tie the abscess into four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area where the extended flesh may scab over and fall by itself; or cut away what becomes thin and falls off, and then treat that wound with a poultice that is suitable for the ulcers until it is healed.
And if the elevation of the navel is due to nothing but flesh or humidity, then it is necessary that you conquer the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and then treat it with a suitable remedy that consolidates the area.
Chapter three.
Of the cure of cancer.
We have said, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner it is via to the cure of it with medicine, and that it is necessary in the cure to use iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that cancer is engendered in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
And they said that the ancients that some excavated cancers are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, thus like those on the breast or in the thigh and its similar members allocated to extract all that, and especially when it is commencing small.
More when it is ancient and grave, it is not good that you appropriate it for yourself, because I have not been able to heal from that or any other, nor have I seen anyone else who has succeeded in this.
And the operation on it is when it is allocated as we have said, that you should precede and prepare the patient and purge them of black bile, some excavated cancers, and then apply a sponge to that, if it is an atrabiated or manifest plethora.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which it is located for operation, and then prohibit on the trunk certain things that are suitable for this; and then concave all parts of the body so that there is a good purging between them so that no cause of the roots of it remains. Let the blood flow, and do not stop that purging, and squeeze the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument, whichever is most convenient of the available instruments.
If you find opposition from thick blood due to an incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that which stops the flow of blood, and immediately treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter five.
On the treatment of dropsy.
We have already discussed, in the division, the species of dropsy and their symptoms, and the treatment of them with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is not except the species of altitudes alone, and it is not close to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hyposarca, because that is deadly.
And when you have medicated this species of dropsy called tympanites with medicines and do not confirm your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already achieved debility, or if there is another illness besides this dropsy, such as if it is in the chest or belly and similar to these, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, for fear is about that.
If you see that the patient has an excess of vertut, and it is not another disease but rather just dropsy, and they are neither infant nor elderly, then the manner of the operation is that you raise the patient between your hands, and place your hand on the navel of theirs with your thumb, injecting water into the part of the intestine, and apply a spinal plaster according to this method:
It should be of two sharp parts, with a pointed extremity like a plaster; but however it should be brief in the patient's alcove, little by little, so that during the operation you do not enter into the intestine, and that you release that one.
And consider if the generation of dropsy is from the part of the intestines, for it is necessary that you cut with the section near the navel for the quantity of three fingers to the lower parts, on the right side of theirs above the intestine.
If the generation of dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then your cut should be on the left of the navel for three fingers.
And if the generation of it is due to the bladder, then your cut should be on the right side.
And it is not suitable that your section be on the side where you want to treat the patient for which the excesses do not flow to that cold location.
Then properly perforate the entire tube with the instrument, and insert it into that section, and raise your hand with the spatula between the tube and the siphon, and you will extract that; and if the quantity is of a fingernail or around it.
Then properly perforate the siphon so that the spatula reaches the empty location, which is the place of the water. And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the shape: and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or tinned iron, on which in the lower part there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other; and the end of it is shaped like the feather of a pen, thus:
And on the uppermost end of it there is a handle, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that water rises above the instrument, thus evacuating from the water to the mouth the same quantity, because if you evacuate more than what is suitable in an hour, it can kill the patient due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or bring on them the quintessence which is approaching death.
Purge that quantity of the virtues of it according to what the disposition of the patient indicates regarding the virtue of its pulse and its goodness.
And then extract the instrument, and hold back the water which causes it to be so retained by the coding, which holds the tube that is on the navel of which it is recommended to you that you perform in that manner according to that method.
And then insert the instrument on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and extract from the water a small quantity, and do this for several days without fear, and beware of error lest not much of the water remains.
But if you fear for the patient, and a large quantity of water is released, then treat that one as if in a warm sand bath, and move them to a warm bath, and have them wait under the sun for a long time; and treat them with desiccative medicines until they are healed.
And cauterize the stomach, and the middle and the liver after the extraction of the water, as it has been recounted to you in what has preceded.
Chapter 54 or Chapter LV (55), possibly
On the treatment of children whose urine holes are not perforated.
Some infants are born with a hole in their mother's womb and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or is tightly closed or is not in its place).
Therefore, we must consider the perforation of it as soon as it is born with subtle movement according to this form:
And then stop up the hole with a thin lead clip and tie it, and keep it for three days or for four.
And when he wants to urinate it should be uncovered and urine allowed to flow; and then cover it again.
And if you do not stop the flow with lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area will not close the opening.
More, that which has a tight hole should be treated with a lead clip, as we have said, for many days until it is widened.
But those in whom the hole is not in its place, are deformed, for which reason there are some who are born with the hole of the penis at the end of the head of the member, so that they cannot urinate properly, until they lift the member to their mother's parts above; and it is not due to generation, because the sperm cannot reach the womb according to nature, and it is a very bad disease.
And the manner of the operation on them is that the patient should be placed on their back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with vehement extraction, and make an incision at the head of the penis at the place of the perineum with a sharp spatula, as if it were an incision of a feather, or so that you do not touch any part, so that the middle of the vein seems like the head of the penis and the tract falls in the middle place according to need.
And beware that in your operation of blood flow, many things can go wrong; and be careful with them that you abscess the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 6.
Of the treatment for what is done on the prepuce at the head of the penis and of the corruption and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Many times this treatment is done on the penis and it is an excess of flesh growth.
And one of them is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, it is necessary to suspend with a thin thread and cut that out until it all falls off; and then apply a poultice of submirgit, an Egyptian ointment, on the affected area; and then, treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, with a bad color, then it is advisable that you apply cautery near the edge of it and the root of it.
Moreover if the ulcer is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then it is advisable that you remove the ulcer that is inside first until it is healed; and then you treat the outside one, because when you treat both at the same time, it is not certain that it will not be painful.
And also examine the genital area and the blackened and corrupted foreskin, then it is advisable that you remove all that which is already decayed and that which is about to rot or has already rotted; and apply a liniment on that area made with honey, which is mixed with flour of wheat and of crushed and ground herbs.
And then treat the one with the other cure until it is healthy.
Moreover if there is an abundance of bloody flux, then administer lunar cautery in this manner:
for juvenile cautery is of two dispositions at the same time, one is for the flux of blood and the other is for the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed entirely at that time, then it is necessary that you insert into the middle of the foreskin a lead tube so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in one whose foreskin is its own, and for whom circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to a wound or an abscess) it is necessary that you scrape away the spatula until it is dissolved, the ligament is broken, and the head of the penis is freed from all that binds it.
And if it is difficult to distinguish them thoroughly, then it is necessary that you scrape with the spatula some cause of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and thus it happens that the foreskin, when it is subtle, is perforated by its subtlety effortlessly.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a subtle instrument, which has been soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then let it be treated with a strict styptic so that it is consolidated.
Chapter 48.
Of the purification of children and the treatment of that which occurs to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity problems: however, since it is of our operation and will, and its results are especially in children, it is necessary that we assign the best operation and way to lose weight to achieve health.
Thus, I say that the ancients did not recommend circumcision for their free men, because they didn't use it in their laws, and it's not because we have acquired it through experience, which is why most of the artisans and barbers have found that using circumcision and purification with a new knife and with tongs; and they use ligatures with thread and with needle.
And I have already forbidden all these methods and I do not find better purification with the fork, with ligature or with thread than purification with the nail, because many times the skin escapes from above, because the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and one layer is removed, and for the other it is necessary to make another incision and painful stitching. And in the purification that is done by the barbers, and it's digital, which the surgeons use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secured, because the foreskin enters into the hole of it.
More in the operation on the nail, the iron instrument breaks and corrupts the entire operation. And the child's bowel is short by nature, and many times seen in such a manner that there is no need for modification, and I have seen it.
More from the modification that is done with sutures and ligaments of the vein, the goodness, experiment reveals to me, that the sutures are of proportional incision, because the sharpness that is above is as the sharpness that is below; and thus when you press your hand proportionally on both sharps, and incise according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the vein in a figure containing the intestine of the entire affected part, with which there is no error.
And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child stay still if it is one of those who understand a little, that you should not do but rather you put the vein on its thigh only so much, and that you lift it up into the other day.
And then do this cheering in all that manner which is at your possibility, according to what receives its intelligence. And then be between your hands, prepared and upright, and do not let it be seen; and hide the sutures in your hand or place them under your foot, so that the child does not see those nor any of the other instruments.
Then insert your hand into the patient's vagina and blow into the womb, and pull out what is stuck in the neck of the womb, and immediately cleanse that which has accumulated there due to rot.
The shape of the purging instruments for cleansing, this is the shape:
Some of the extremities are not-cut and the others are cut, so that the branch of the nail is not visible, and the length of the two fingers is as the length of two wrists together.
The greatest mistake in cleansing is when you strongly pull out the entire womb or part of it through the incision.
Therefore, it is advisable that you extend your finger from your hand against the abscess of the place and that you press according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook and press it.
But if three days have passed, and the matter that is inflated under the infected wound has not been discharged, then let it be that the aposteme is cut with caution, and excavate it with facility, and press it according to what you have prepared.
And beware of the head of the wound, lest it become worse for him.
Therefore, treat it with the same remedy that consolidates the wound from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is pressed on the bowel excessively, and the parts are separated from each other, this does not harm him.
And thus treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 53.
Of the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stone or by congealed blood, or by polypus or by flesh, and it resembles those things that we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with the water that we have mentioned, then the cause is violently made on the patient, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction of it with an instrument that is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and the tube should be subtle, like a feather quill, or a reed cane in subtlety of a long straw, similar to half a palm, on which there is a subtle hole at the end.
And the handling of the injection of urine with it is that you take the thread doubled and tie it at the extremity of the wool or cloth for a good ligature; and insert the extremities of the thread into the back part of the syringe, and cut with scissors if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, but insert more into the tube violently. And then attach the syringe to the vein and to the humerus.
Make the patient lie on their side, and wrap the bladder of theirs and the rod with towels or cloths, and anoint them with olive oil and vinegar.
And then insert the sound into the facilitation so that it reaches to the root of the rod; and then double the rod upwards towards the division of the navel; and then press the sound inside that; and then press that until it reaches the bladder, and that makes the patient be reached by the desired cause, and it is not done thus according to this order, but as the case goes to tortuousness.
And then stretch the vein with the wool slowly, so that the urine touches the wool.
Then extract that and do for the cure of urine, and use a sound, do not cease doing that and use a sound until the bladder is evacuated and the patient receives relief.
Chapter 49.
On the quality of injection into the bladder through a funnel and similar instruments which are suitable for this purpose.
When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or it is obstructed by pus, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it should be done with an instrument which is called a funnel, and this is its form:
But rather that in the extremity of it, it is numb, and thus closed. And in that one there are three holes: two from one side, as many times.
In the beginning it is a concave place, in which there is that which is injected, and it is according to the quantity that oppresses that one, until when some cause is pulled from the humidity, it is pulled, and when it is expelled, with it being pulled, and when it is expelled for a long time, according as it makes clampcedra, with which naphta is fixed in the battles of the sea.
Therefore when you want to project humidity in the bladder, insert the extremity of clampcedra into the humidity, and pull with it that which is injected to the lower parts, so that the humidity is pulled into the cavity of clampcedra.
And then insert the extremity of clampcedra into the rod according to what we have recommended in the circling; and then inject the humidity with that which you inject, so that that humidity reaches the bladder as much as possible, and the patient feels it.
Shape of the subtle bladder channel in which the bladder is channeled, and this is the shape:
And let it be made of silver or of gold, from which the head is formed in a manner similar to a small plum, and give them the cane with a gentle handle.
And take the bladder of motion, and pause in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and bind it between two strong ligatures with double thread, and evaporate that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the extremity of the crystalizer into the rod.
And then tighten your hand over the bladder with the humidity and strict structure, so that it enters into the patient's sense that the humidity has already passed into the bladder.
But if the bladder is not present to you, then take a piece of bladder membrane and make a circle from it; and perforate that with all its thickness; and then insert a strong thread into those channels, so that they are turned inside out; and then tie the circle in such a way that it is tied also by the fascia, because you put in that water that you want to drain, along with the humors and liquids.
And then tie that to the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand that the humidity enters into the bladder.
Chapter Twelve
Of the extraction of stones.
We have already spoken in the division of the species of stones and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and its symptoms.
And we have said which stone requires surgical operation on it, and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that one which is fixed in the bladder.
And I will now narrate to him with clear explanation and abbreviation.
Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly goes to children; and of its symptoms is that the urine which is excreted from the bladder seems like water in its thinness, and sand appears in it; and the patient rubs his penis, and many times a thread comes out, and then it is dressed; and with this he has pain in the anus, in many of these cases.
And it is rare for children under fourteen years to achieve healing; and it is a difficult cure in the elderly. But in young people, it is moderate because that is between the two.
And concerning one whose stone is larger and the cure is easier; if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this, it is advisable at the beginning to cleanse the patient with a crucible which draws out all the wound which is in their intestines; because this wound, by certain prohibitions, prevents the penetration of the medicine into the intestine.
And then take hold of the patient with their feet elevated and constricted, and massage them in such a way that the medicine descends to the pressure of the bladder, or jumps from one place to another certain times.
And then make that which is prepared between your hands, and the hands of the patient are placed on their hips, so that the whole bladder is made to decline towards the parts below.
And then massage thoroughly that and the entire affected area.
Therefore, if you feel the medicine in the space, then you will be satisfied as long as it is dry on them.
And if it does not touch all of the thigh, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil the inner side of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the right hand if they are a young adult, and insert this into their anus. And massage the medicine until it reaches inside where your finger touches. Turn that small one little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And press firmly on that with the aforementioned tool, and extract it from the divided parts before the area where you made the incision.
Command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant with their right hand to pull apart the thighs to the divided parts below, and with their other hand to hold back the cod (or intestine) which is near the thighs, away from the area where the incision is made.
And then insert the spatula to make an incision of which this is the shape: And cut in it what is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle place, but to the side of the left thigh; and let the incision be above that stone and the aforementioned tool be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the incision before is wide and the depth according to the quantity that the stone has grown to be possible, and not larger, because the tool would compress the stone which is in the anus, and it is forgotten with difficulty.
And know that there is some part of the stone to which are attached angles and margins, because the extraction of it is made difficult by this.
And of that water, there is a tumor similar to a gland, and it is round, and it is made from the lighter excrement.
Then if it is the one which has edges and margin, adjust it in the cleft.
And if it is not thus outwardly protruding, then you should put your hands on that, or you should bind around that with decent gesture, the extremity of which is thus like a file on which you bind to the stone, and does not escape from it; or you insert the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you cannot operate on that, then you widen the hole a little, and if you see a flow of blood, bind it with a string treated with vitriol.
But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you apply the hand to the mouth of the bladder, and immediately you cut into it; and immediately you apply a little water; and similarly you do if there are many stones.
And if it is a very large stone, then ignorance is that you cut into it with a large incision, for you bring to the patient one of two causes: either death or that it impedes the flow of urine, because of which the area is not completely consolidated.
May administer expulsion of what is retained inside, or apply a poultice to the fracture in the area of the foot where it extrudes the pus in the flesh.
Then when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with poultices of aloe and dragon's blood, and tighten that. And place on it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rosated oil and cold water, so that the postema may be alleviated.
And then raise the patient on their back, and do not untie the dressing for three days.
And when that is untied, wash the area with water and warm oil, and then treat it with a gentle ointment called diafinicon and a special ointment called diabazilicon until it is healed.
May it happen that in the wound an aposteme, a fever and a corrosion, occur, and it seems as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the excretion of blood with urine), then anoint the said ointment on the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it provokes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar and water, and apply an opposite treatment to all species, according to what is convenient for the cure of the disease.
And take in the hours of all the treatment that you apply both to the thighs and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the bladder, and is stuck in it, and urination is difficult, then treat that with what you have recommended before, because many times this treatment has been accused of causing retention; and now take a iron perforator, whose form is this:
of triangular extraction, pointed, stuck in a wooden handle.
And then take a thread, and tie it to the bladder and to the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating with ease until the perforator reaches that stone. And turn the perforator with your hand on that small stone, little by little, and you make the perforation of it until you make the other part penetrate; because the urine is then freed.
And then press your hand on that which is broken from the stone of the partition of the flow of the urine, because it is pierced, and it is outside with the urine, and the patient is healed.
If this cure is not suited to you for some reason that prohibits it, then apply a thread below the stone, and another thread above the stone. And then bind around the stone on that member between two ligatures. And then extract it. And then dissolve the ligament and purify the congealed blood, which is formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to have a ligament of thread below the stone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligament above, because when the thread is dissolved, the cord immediately returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for this reason it is necessary when you tighten the thread above, that you elevate the cord to the upper parts, or that it returns to give you the suitable complement, and covers the wound as we have said.
Chapter 61.
On the extraction of stone from women.
Pain in the women's thighs is rarely generated.
If pain appears in some of those areas, then the treatment of it is difficult, and it is forbidden by many manners.
One of them is when the woman has strong thighs.
And the second is when you do not find a woman with knowledge to describe to the doctor what is cast, or it is from women having been married.
The third is when you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the incision near the pain in the women's thighs is far from the place of the pain, for which a deep incision is indicated, and in this there is fear.
But if necessity calls you to that, then take a woman doctor who is knowledgeable, and she is rarely found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek a doctor who is skilled and subtle, or present a female midwife who is experienced in the care of women, or a woman who has a share of knowledge in this art.
Then make that one present, and command her to do all that you order her, from the examination of the pain to the beginning of treatment; which thing is that you examine if the woman is strong, then put your finger in her buttocks and touch the pain.
Therefore, if you take that away, cut it from the diseased part, and then command someone to write on it.
But if it is not a vein, then command the midwife to insert the diseased part into the womb of the patient and inquire about the stone, because she will place her left hand on the bladder, and squeeze it with good compression.
Therefore, if you take that away, then it is good that it gradually draws the stone from the orifice of the bladder to the divisions of the urine with the sum of its virtue entering so that it comes to the root of the thigh.
And then write on that application of the matrix of the womb towards the root of the thigh from whichever part it may be to the bladder, and cut the stone in that division, so that the stone is not returned by the bladder, cutting it from the urine.
And let the section be small at the beginning; and then insert the tool into that section, and if you feel the bladder, then adjust in the section according to the quantity which you know the bladder will be emptied of it.
And you should know that the species of bladder stones are many: for some of them are small and large, and rough and sharp, and long and round, and having roots.
Therefore you should know how many species are of it for that which you signify about that which you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust on the spot a veterinary tourniquet and leave it for an hour until the blood is stopped, then return to your operation while the stone is expelled.
And make that you prepare for yourself the instruments which are said in the extraction of stone in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is cut, then you apply powder on the spot and bind it with cloths and tight bandage, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because soon the patient will die. And then heal the wound.
Therefore when the flow of blood has ceased, then clean the spot, and return to your operation while the stone is expelled.
Chapter 62.
Of section concerning hernia treatment.
Hernia is nothing but an accumulation of humidity in the white drop which is behind the membrane of the genitals containing the seed, and it is called a drop.
And certain times it is in the proper pancreatic location where nature prepares it in the part of the belly, until it is said that another belly is needed; and this is the code for the genital area between the white ciphac which we have mentioned, and it is not that but tart.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genitals, because in those with debility this matter is poured out, and sometimes it happens due to a percussion made on the genitals.
And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it is inclining to citrine or sanguine, or red, or is black and feculent, or is whitish and watery, and that which is the worst.
And the signs by which it is known that there is this accumulation of water are these: for if it is in the white ciphac which we have mentioned, then the apostema is a little red and inclined to longitude like the figure of a belly, and the genital appears, because the humidity touches everything.
And if the humidity is in the proper pancreatic location, then the apostema is red at the part of the belly and by this it is estimated that there is another belly.
And if the humidity is between the genital code and the white ciphac, then it cuts off the feeling.
And when you want to recognize the color of the humidity, then you express the color of the humidity in the posthumous abscess with intertwined cartilage from which the form is preceded; and according to what is exited in the vestiges of the intestine, judge that which is detained inside it.
Therefore when we come to the treatment of him with iron, then it is advisable that we command the patient to be bled if it is possible for them, and at times touch the body of the patient.
And then let it be raised above the seat on some occasion or another, and place your hands under the patient's armpits.
And then sit at the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to follow on the right side of them, which extends their arm between the two hips to the crotch of the genitals and to the division of the navel of the belly.
And then take a spatula and divide the crotch of the genitals at the middle place for the length between the navel and the perineum.
And let the section be made according to a straight measurement distant from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white hip, including.
And scrape that, and observe, and be careful so that you do not cut into it; and your scraping with which you scrape the affected part should be suspended in the mouth of the more subtle and scrutinized according to the quantity as much as possible.
And then perforate the spleen full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate the two lips of the wound with forceps, and pull the spleen apart from the surrounding parts; and do not touch the ligaments that hold it, and insert the spleen in whatever manner is possible for you. And insert it in its entirety or in pieces, and especially the subtle sieve, because if you do not examine the insertion of it with great care, it is not done securely so that the water does not return.
But if the wound proceeds from that defect of its ligament during the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the spleen, return inside, and then adjust the two lips of the ligament with a suture, and then cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the wound corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you ligate the vessels which suspend it, and extract the wound, and then cure it with the same method that we have said.
But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then know that these are the hernias; therefore insert that part according to what you have done on the other side; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
Then return the blood, and insert the woolen cloth submerged in oil or in roasted oil; and remove the dressings from another cloth which you had submerged in wine and oil, and spread that over two genital areas and the navel of the belly; and remove the double sheets and powders, and tie those over with a bandage according to this form:
And then press two sheets and fill them with cambray wool according to this likeness; and make extremities with which you press the cot or wet wool, and add them to the structure of the pants, and one of the extremities take from the crotch between the two, and the second take at the division of the perineum, and two extremities over two hips of the patient, and two other extremities over two ankles, and all the structure be adjusted in the pants.
And some times this hernia is medicated artificially with a cautery in place of a section with iron; and it is that you take a thin cutting cautery and that you write on the codon of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until it is discovered the white siphus containing the water, and then you take the cautery according to this form: It is assembled with Greek letter.
And then pierce that bile vessel, and ignite it so that all the humidity is driven out.
And then stretch the bile vessel with tongs, and scrape it with tongs, and scrape it with a subtle ignited cautery; and cut that part which is possible for you to remove all of it; and beware of the mucus so that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is more safe and less prone to flow of blood, and better than the operation with section.
But if you experience an adverse event with abscess during the time of section or during cautery, or flow of blood, then take care to cure the adverse condition that has occurred to you, with the cure that is convenient for it, according to what has been said.
But if the patient is poor, and does not await the second operation due to its horror, then administer the perforation as I have recommended; and it is when you are certain of this, for what we have said about the symptoms, that that hernia is painful.
Then take care to place the patient on some elevated seat, and pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a broad spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let there be a wide opening through which all the water flows.
Then put a stopper on that place and tie it and leave it, so that the remainder of the water runs. And then heal that which is inside where the wound is to be healed.
But if there is an obstruction to the flow of water at that time, you perforate it: and this is not done except for the reason that the white pancreatic tissue in the orifice of the wound causes obstruction and prevents the flow of water, then you should put into the wound a needle or instrument with which the water from the drops is extracted, the form of which is described; or adjust on the opening of the wound a small.
And you should know that the water returns, and is collected again in a few months or years; and as it is collected, then it should be perforated according to that measured manner, so that the patient will pass their days.
Chapter 63.
Of the section on fleshly hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section on this hernia there is a fearful loss of life in the greatest complications; because to me it seems that the dismissal of it and being saved by that which is better.
And you should remember the operation in that and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that the abscess is born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is made for many causes: either by acute sharp superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess follows the color of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And further, it is a hardened abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not give a sensation to it.
And some swellings are made by curvature of the arteries, and by inflammation of those, as has already been perceived, or by inflammation of the veins.
But that which is by inflammation of the arteries is recognized by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and do not touch that.
But that which is made by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by any cause except for compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that on this species incision is made and on the other flesh; and that you cut the cord of the genitals, and then stretch the skin to the divided parts, and extract that from the white ciphac, and loosen the suspensor of the vessels, and tie them, and cut the suspensor so that you loosen that entirely from all the divisions of the skin.
Therefore, if the humor has already consolidated in those fleshy parts, then it is advisable that you extract the humor and make incisions.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause in the spleen area, or between that which is between the ribs, then it is advisable that you release all that adhesion and make a round incision.
More, if there is a growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then it is advisable that you cut out all that belongs to it, and extract the humor as we have already said.
Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in heated oil and wine; and then take care of it with another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of hernia that is of the intestine.
Vit is an apostema enveloped by some envelopment resembling a bruise with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult the exercise of movement and walking for the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, it is with fear for that which is preceded by remembrance.
However, we must say operation according to what the first ones did.
I say that it is good to place the patient on an elevated seat; and then push the suspensors of the testicles towards the separated thighs; and also take the cord of the genitals with the fingers, specifically at the places that are prone to injury by the penis; and hold those other servants that you have, and extend those with extension vehemently.
And then cut into the spatium, beside the acute wound by cross-section in the right of the veins, until the veins are uncovered.
And then scratch the entire affected area thus as you have said in extraction of arthritis, which is in the temples.
And then put in those a needle in which there is double thread, and tie that at the beginning of the places where you cut, and tie the other end in the back of it. And then cut into those in the middle place by right section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated from the foul, corrupt, and fetid humors.
And then heal the wound with a cure for the other wounds in which you want to be careful not to let the veins fall that are born from one of the two testicles, because it is not bad for that.
Mainly if vitality affects all the intestines, then it is good that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for this reason are removed from the intestines, so that they are deprived of all nutrition through the excision of the intestines, and that they are evacuated, or that this is done so that there is no junction with those.
Chapter 65.
On the cure of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that involves the diaphragm extended over the belly from the region of the navel of the miracle of the belly, so that by saying the intestines of that rupture go to some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of its excursion, and these two species occur for many causes: either by percussion, or by fall, or by shouting, or by elevation of some heavy cause, or by similarity.
And the sign of this thing, when it is due to extension of the diaphragm, is that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess that forms between the intestine and the navel so that the diaphragm compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is due to section of the diaphragm, because at the beginning it makes a vehement pain happen suddenly; and it is a diverse abscess appearing with the intestine protruding outside, and this is due to exit of the intestine, and the body of it to the parts below the diaphragm.
And sometimes the intestine bursts through the abdominal wall, and this condition is called intestinal hernia or bulging.
And sometimes it is caused by flatulence, and sometimes it runs into the intestinal fold, and here it is retained, and this is a great danger to the patient, and sometimes it becomes painful and worse when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the species of this disease with iron there is fear, because it is necessary that the evacuation be avoided in that case.
And the manner of the operation of this is that we command the patient to return the intestine with their hand to the inner parts of its own cavity if it obeys its return, and then it is enveloped over its neck between your hands, and the legs are elevated.
And then stitch the ligature which is the ligature of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the ligature of the testicles throughout the length; and then place in both lips of the wound stitches as indicated to close the wound with those.
And if the wound, according to the quantity that is possible for you, from which the intestine has burst through.
And then scrub away that cyst which is placed on the scrotum of the testicles, until the white hard lump of each part is exposed.
Then insert the pointed instrument into that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white lump, which is placed on the scrotum of the testicle, and between the second lump, and dissolve with it the adherence that is in the part behind the testicle.
And then bring the hand to the scrotum of the testicles to the front parts, and with it extend the white lump in its place with the left hand, and lift the testicle with the lump to the part of the incision; and command the assistant to extend the testicle upwards and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with a complex solution.
And search with the pointed instruments whether there is any cause of the intestine being wrapped in the hard white lump. But if you find on him any cause, then push it to the belly from behind.
And then cut in the part where the cord of the testicles is, by a section through which blood and pus can run, as we have recommended in what we have said before.
And then administer the flaxseed soaked in oil, and apply it to the wound; and apply the ligature that we recommended (and if the white of the scrotum is cauterized, which we said concerning the incision of the vein of blood flow, because many times this happens) and loosen the ligature so that it does not fall off.
But if the falling of the testicle is delayed, then let warm water be applied, and place it on that spot so that it falls as we have said.
And then treat the wound with another cure for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter sixty-six.
Of bloated or windy hernia.
In this hernia, nothing is seen that has been confined under the cure of it with iron.
And the first ones said that it is made thus as we have recommended in the hernia with the vein; which is that you lift the vessels near the section above the one with facilitated flow; and lift the section in the middle place around the abscess with what obstructs it, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter sixty-seven.
Of the disturbance that occurs in the ankle joints.
Some swellings show rupture in the ankle joints as we have said, and bulge out the place.
And they do not tell the genital area any cause of the intestine to the genitals; and if they do, it is little; and it returns in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with this, there is adjusted a fissure in the hip until the intestine goes out in the hip; and this happens through the extension of the hip which is in the ankle joints as we have said, which cause is why the hip is stretched, and then it becomes mollified and the place becomes abscessed and bulges.
The cure of it is with a cautery thus that is preceded by the narration of it.
And some wounds are cured with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on their back between their thighs, and then dry the area of the rupture of the apostems with a scalpel by width according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white spleen that is under the rib cage until it becomes uncovered.
And then take the bladder and place it on the prominent area of the spleen, and press it against the pressure of the belly.
And then sew the two prominent areas on the extremity of the bladder of the spleen, and adjust with a suture one to the other.
And then extract the extremity of the bladder, and do not injure the spleen at all, nor extend the hole, nor another cause thus that you know how to proceed in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the treatment of wounds, and when you injure the veins, clean that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the spleen is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And a cautery is better in this place, because it is more suitable for health.
Chapter 68.
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
When the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, it is softened by fat, because the flesh that is between it is softened, and its treatment is similar.
It is necessary for the one who takes care of him to make the patient urinate according to his custom, and let all the skin that has been softened above the natural skin; and then adjust the two lips to the suture.
And if you want, cut in the beginning the excess of the softened skin with three stitches or four and with a firm suture.
And then cut between the stitches; and then cure by treating the other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall out.
Chapter 69.
On Castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but for a reason it is legitimate for me to remind you of it in this book; and the reminder of it is not necessary except for two manners, one of which is that it be in the science of the doctor when he is expert in it, so that he knows the treatment of it to whom it happens; and the other manner is that we often have need of castration of other animals for our use, such as of many, and of oxen, and of pigs, and of similar ones to the animals.
And therefore I say that cauterization is performed in two ways: either by burning or by making an incision.
More so in that which is done by burning, the way of the operation is that we make the beast sit in hot water until its genitals are softened and loosened and hang. And then take them with your hand so that they are relaxed and do not appear to be touched.
But in cauterization done by incision, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the suspender, and make an incision above each testicle with a cut so that two testicles are separated.
And then cut those parts which have been excessively corrupted. And do not leave on the siphac any cause, except for a thin layer of skin which is over the veins.
And this method of cauterization is better than that which is done by burning, because burning strongly leaves some cause for the testicles whereby the beast desires to mate.
And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter twenty.
On the cure of hermaphrodism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two manners: one is when it appears in that which occupies the space in the scrotum of testicles, in which there is a figure of a woman's womb between the two testicles.
And some come out with urine from that hole which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
More in women is another species: it is that the womb of the woman on the perineum is similar to two testicles of a man, a little bit smaller and divided into two parts like the perineum of a man and two testicles.
And the treatment is of three species: of two in men and of one species in women. And it is that you should remove those adjusted carnifications so that the excess of that thing escapes, and then you will cure them with the treatment of the other wounds.
And in the second species of men from which urine is emitted, which is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is neither treatment nor operation for it.
Chapter twenty-one.
On protruding lips and flesh due to causes in women.
The ligature is strongly adjusted over natural causes within which it is tightened and made to secure the bandage; and some women are admired for it as much as men, in such a way that it is boasted about just like among men and is considered a virtue in the act.
Then remove the excess of ligature with your hand or with scissors and clippers.
And do not cut too much, especially in the region of the vein, so that it does not provoke a flow of blood.
Then take care of that wound with the cure of the wounds until it is healed.
Bad flesh is flesh that is born in the horror of the mother within which it fills, and strongly it is ejected to the divisions of the body following the likeness of a tumor (and for this reason some first call it "boiled disease"); therefore remove that we cut thus as we cut ligatures, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the treatment of gout.
Gout is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or the hole is small. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to illness which has preceded it, and that is caused by flesh not being adjusted or by a subtle or thin hip.
It is made in the groin of the mother, or in her ribs, or in the upper part of her, or in the lower part of her, and prohibited from coitus and from impregnation and from swelling, and strengthen the prohibitions with medicines.
And the diagnosis of that is made by examination of the matrix, if the obstruction is apparent, it is proclaimed; but if it is not apparent, then you search for that with your fingers or at the side.
But if the obstruction is due to a subtle cyst, and it is proclaimed to the two lips, then you touch and disrupt that.
And it is that you apply poultices on the two lips, and then you touch the fingers indicating both hands to the affected areas.
And the woman should be on her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two lips with force so that the subtle cyst is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take a woolen cloth and wet it in oil and apply it to the area, and keep it there all day so that the wound is not consolidated.
But if the cyst is large and thick, then you should cut it with a spatula or with a knife of myrtle.
More pain is suspended if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that with an ointment, and cut into that.
And put on them the medicines that make stop the flow of blood with emollients, such as aloe, and dragon's blood, and essences, adjusted with white of egg.
Then administer a wide lead tube so that the wound is not consolidated too lightly.
And hold that for several days and administer a bath of warm water to dry it.
And then it will be cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And some fat tissues are born in the mother nature of other flesh, and then it is necessary to cut them according to this method. But if it is due to cancerous apostemas, for the cancerous apostema which is in the matrix let there not be made a counter-irritation with iron in any manner.
Chapter 23.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that occurs in the cleft of women.
Hemorrhoids are an appreciation of the orifices of many veins until from which the corrupted blood flows continually; and as they are antiquated hemorrhoids, they are made into tails.
And already said in the division of the species of those and the signs of those, I say thus which ones receive treatment and which ones do not receive treatment.
Therefore I say that ulcers and hernias when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to the feeling, then in those cases treatment should not be done with iron.
More of those which are in the orifice of the mother, on which a catheter is placed, are those that can be cured.
And it is good that you put the woman in a cold massage and then extend the thigh to the holes, or with a rough cloth, and cut those things at the roots.
And then powder on those wounds the flow of blood with one of the incisive powders that is mordication, thus as cassia and similar to those.
And then soak the feet in water for an hour, and then pause that one in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make that one sit in a decoction of mugwort and roots of millet and flowers and similar things.
And then take flour of wheat and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster and apply it to the back of the patient.
If the blood is separated, it's good; and if not, make adhere to the two vents, and to the breasts an scarification.
And then take wool and soak it in juice of colicandle or in juice of arnagloza or in juice of guarravier that has been mixed with five medications, and make adhere to the area; and then heal the area with an ointment until it is healthy.
And heal it until it is healthy.
Chapter 74.
Of the perforation of an accidental wound in the matrix.
Various species of accidental abscesses in the matrix, such as cancer and aposteme lampidense and ulcers and adhesive and eroded tumours and fistulous haemorrhoids and painful fluxions and thyl and other apostemes. And I have already spoken of these diseases and the species of those and the signs of those and the cures for them in the division.
And it is necessary that I speak in this treatise of abscesses about the one that appears in the matrix when it is one of the abscesses that collects healthy blood, and if you want to know in what manner the operation with iron is done.
Therefore consider if the pain of the abscess in the beginning is sharp with percussion and inflammation and fever, and sometimes that swelling occurs and if it settles on the sentiment, then do not hesitate with perforation of it, and treat it with what helps to reduce the inflammation until the acuteness of the accidents subsides.
And then make the woman lie on a chair that has two chairs; and recline her back against the partition of the belly, and adjust her two feet to the part below the navel, and her thighs should be spread apart, and place her two arms below her shoulders, and tie each one with a ligament in a convenient way.
Then the midwife takes hold of the right thigh and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the matrix is opened, the shape of which will be described in those cases that will be made next.
And then when you want to administer this instrument, insert the point of it into the womb of the woman, and what part of the instrument enters the womb should not be larger than the womb itself and suitable for the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the womb, then make sure to place pouices on the texture of the womb so that the entrance of any instrument into the womb is prohibited.
And when you place the vertebrae that run in the instrument of the side, above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertebrae until the orifice of the mother is opened.
And when the excoria appears, and it is touched with the hand and is soft and moist, then it is necessary that you separate that which is on the head of the patient with a spatula.
And when the blood is evacuated, then it is necessary that you apply on the wound a cloth submerged in oil of rose or green oil in which there is some astringency; and apply the chalk in the section in the womb of the mother.
And put forthwith on the mother and on the navel a clean cloth submerged in water in which are boiled mallows.
And then it will be cured, for two days with an ointment that is convenient to apply until it is healed.
And some times the womb and the wound are washed with water and honey, and then with water in which is boiled root of iris or aristology, and then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is deeply embedded in the womb, then it is necessary that you be prohibited from the cure of it with iron, but rather cure it with that which we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To instruct midwives in what manner the unborn babies should be treated as medicine when they are born prematurely, according to unnatural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes in the beginning the figure of the natural childbirth by signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman expel air during labor and desires to smell it, and above all she is relieved by what is above her, from the birth, and hastens the ejection of the embryo, then know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it is the ejection of it over the pubic bone, and the second one is either suspended or pending from the navel.
Therefore when you see these signs, then it is necessary that the belly of the woman be compressed so that the embryo descends gently as when it descends over the pubic bone, it descends to it the secondine, and it is freed from those superfluous things with good purification.
But that which is other than this birth is unnatural and not praiseworthy, for when the embryo is ejected on its feet and the body of the woman is ejected before her head and her feet, or one hand of hers, or at her foot, or her head and her hand, or at her belly, and forcibly it is turned over the pubic neck, and similar to the figures of unnatural births.
A necessary cause for the midwife is that she be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
And she shows the entire figure of those things, and what device is in those things so that it is signified by them and is established upon them.
When the fever is situated on the head due to natural reckoning, and it is vehement on the woman and made in a difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of the already debilitated liver, then make this remedy, or that women have it, and evaporate the congealed humor with warm and humid fumigations.
And then the midwife inserts her hand between the woman's thighs, a small spatula, and cuts with it the second [labia], or touches that with her nail in order to scrape out what is in it of humidity. And press the woman's belly so that the fetus comes out.
But if it does not come out, then it is necessary that the woman be anointed with a plaster of opium and a plaster of warm dung to stimulate.
And then command her, and anoint her with the plaster, that it be compressed and make her sneeze with condiments; and stop her mouth and her nose for one hour, so that the fetus will be forced out as soon as possible.
And if the two thighs of the patient are extremely weakened at the beginning, then it is advisable that you reduce them with facility little by little. If it does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a chair and raise her feet above her, and return the chair to the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall from the concussion.
And if the thighs are not torn apart and the foot dies, then cut those and extract the broken part of the foot or tie the body to the hand of the patient with a cloth and extract that one equally, because that will be weakened.
When the foot is placed on the two feet, then it is advisable that you press those upwards, and return the foot to its place, and see to it, and take one of them and stretch those little by little.
But when they have exited between the thighs, then you command it to him who assists, and make that one extend with condition, because it will be weakened if God wills it.
And if it is not weakened with what we have recommended, then you return the foot little by little until it assumes its natural figure, because then it will be weakened with easy descent.
And if it is forbidden to apply all that we have recommended, then take the mucus of the high part and the dissolved gum, and strike everything in the mortar with a good blow, and return the stick to the woman's thigh, or the lower part of her abdomen. Then make that mixture in lukewarm water, until it achieves the desired effects on the hypochondrium.
And as many times as the patient's parts are softened, then make for them a sub-fumigation of myrtle and apply that under their feet. And when you have given the sub-fumigation for one hour, then make a mixture on a chair, and return to make them sneeze and clear their mouth, and raise them from that, and press the lowest part of their abdomen with a gentle compression, so that the flatulence may be expelled.
The position of the fetus is felt with the hand during the delivery. Let it be put in reduction by the hand, but if you cannot reduce that, then elevate the woman and make her go to the bathroom.
And if going to the bathroom is not possible, then make her sit on the edge, and strike the thighs with violent shock, and gently administer to them those things that cut and reduce swellings.
And if the birth is imminent, then have her sit on a chair, and attend to the reduction of the hand, and deliver the fetus according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to push until it is turned outward.
We should take a sitting position over the bed with expanded hands and the surface of their feet towards the two sides of their mother. Let the midwife hold the hand of the one who is giving birth and gently turn that small one little by little, and let that make it easier.
And when it is and how much it is narrowed, then pause on the edge of the one that we have recommended to anoint with oil and poultices.
And command her that she vomits little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sit on a chair and command her to lean on the right side, and also command her to be compressed; and make her throw up with condition. The prepared fetus exits over the side.
When you inspect the horror of the mother in this manner, consider, and then you insert your finger into the second one to evacuate the humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the one, then you inspect that of the navel, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then insert the fetus into the divided parts inside so that it pauses according to what is necessary, and send the woman to compress some times, and it will be thrown out with a gentle movement, if God or nature wills.
Outflow of twins or abundance of fetuses. It is known that some women give birth to twins, and some even to three or four, but this is strange and rare; however, I will explain the natural causes, and it is not unheard of.
And concerning those, it is already known that they are multiple, a second growth, and they are separated by a membrane, distinguishing them between the ligament in the navel of each of them. And some women are born with a natural fissure, so that it seems like a miracle of nature, and some women are born with an unnatural fissure, as we have already recounted.
And if they are difficult to deliver, it is necessary for the midwife to proceed with what we have said about unnatural births, then you will treat them in the same way that we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with facility and subtlety, and with slowness, and is ingenious according to the entire figure as it has been prepared by the art leading to health.
Remembering what is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Some women are formed with one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more, and it is necessary for me to verify that a woman aborts nine, and another ten, all formed, which thing was made by the measurement of the glorious wise men.
And all this shows that it is in the science of midwifery that one must hold firmly to that small part which seems insignificant, and thus one holds onto it as if it were a precious thing.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with the method we have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not an emergency, and you are not forced to use operation, then consider if the woman is of good virtue and not at risk for accidents by which there would be danger to her.
Then it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back on a seat or chair, with her head inclined downwards and her thighs elevated.
And the operator should hold the woman's two parts or tie her to the seat so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
And immediately anoint the mouth of the matrix (womb) with oils, mucus, and extracts of wormwood, fenugreek, and sesame.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucus, and then inserts her hand with ease into the womb, and then feels for the place where the fetus is stuck.
And place conveniently in that: then consider if the foot is prepared that you will put on the head, and then you fix the nails in the heels of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or give the beard, or in the throat of it, or in the proper places of the ribs, or give the hips.
More if the putting is on the feet of it, then in the knee, or in the middle of the ribs.
And take that you hold the nail with your right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and introduce the hand with ease and put the nail in some of those places that we have said, until it reaches the hollow cause.
And then pause and put on the application of it another nail, or the third if it is necessary, so that it be equally attracted, and not extended according to its straightness just as much.
Until the hand is moved to the entire affected part, so that the weight of it be alleviated thus as it is done in two ways for the eradication of it.
And take in that which is between them that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then take that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and introduces them skillfully and stirs with those fingers in that place that is retained.
Therefore, if the part of the foot is forgotten, then the ankles should be anointed with a remedy to be put in that place; and do so until the entire foot is treated.
But if the hand is stuck to the other, and it's not possible to reduce it by constriction, then it's necessary that a bandage be wrapped around it; and carefully extract it until it's all treated, and incise it either in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
And do the same on the other hand and on the two feet.
But if the head of the foot is large, or adheres to the constriction in the extremity, or is at the head of the water adjusted, then it's necessary that an intermediate spatula be inserted between the toes and the head be opened and the water extracted, or that it be scraped with an instrument called alundat, the shape of which will be described along with the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter that is appropriate to this.
And do the same if the foot has a naturally large head: then it's necessary that it be incised with a chisel, or that it be scraped with an alundat as we have said; and carefully extract the bones with the forceps.
And if the head is elevated and constricted by the armpit, then it should be cut open so that the humidity which is in the chest can be expelled.
More or less, if it's not complicated, nor does it obstruct breathing, then you should raise the head as much as is possible for you.
And if the abdomen is swollen with abscesses or it is dropsical, then it is necessary that you perforate that area through which the humidity that is in it can flow.
More or less, if the fetus is positioned above the two feet, then its attraction is to the left and its direction to the mouth of the womb is to the left.
More or less, if it is constricted by the abdomen and chest, then it is necessary that you extract that which is wrapped in a cloth, which you have placed over your hand, and that you cut open the abdomen and chest so that what is in them can flow out.
More or less, if the other members are stopped and the head is turned, then the midwife inserts her left hand; more or less, if the mouth of the womb is open, then she inserts her hand into the middle of the womb, and pulls towards herself the head, and draws that which is with the fingers into the mouth of the womb, and inserts in it one or two inches, and draws it towards herself.
And if the mouth of the matrix is constricted by a posthumous cauterization which adheres to the urine, then it is good that there not be trouble upon it; moreover it is good to administer an infusion of humid and fatty causes. Then administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fever is on the sixth day, then if possible, it should be pricked: and there should be administered what we have said in the case of the living liver.
And if that is not possible, then let it be cut into slices, and extracted.
And it is good that no cause of the interior be left in the secondine ( likely referring to a part of the body or an organ).
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure in the aposthems (or abscesses) that adhere to the matrix.
And if there is an issue of bloody flux, then dip in astringent waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in whose belly was a dead fetus, and then upon that womb another conceived and pregnant one, and the dead fetus is the other. It happens to him that for a long time an abscess forms in his sick intestine; and it becomes inflamed inside where the focus is opened, and begins to take arms.
And he was called to his cure, and treated for a long time, and the wound is not consolidated.
Then he applied to him from several causes a plaster of strong attraction, and extracted from him a bone, and then passed through his intestines, and extracted another bone; and it was greatly marveled, since in the belly there is not a bone.
And then he thought that they were bones of a dead fetus.
Then he probed the wound, and extracted from it many bones, a woman existing in her intestines with thousands of dispositions, and already lived in such a manner for a long time, correcting from him a little arm.
And he did not find it strange, but rather that in this there is science and help to him who the doctor artificially makes by hand for the purpose of cure.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Shape of a vertebra in which the matrix is opened:
This is the shape of a holder in which the liberties are wrapped, to which wrapping two vertebrae are joined at both extremities of two thighs. May the emperor grant this virtue with what is subtly drawn from the strictor, and made either of ebony or of beechwood.
And the width of each staff is two fingers and the thickness of each one is a finger, and the length of each one is a palm and a half; and in the middle place of two staffs there are two adjustments of the same wood, which are already fixed, of which the length is a little more than half a palm, and the width of each one is two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions will be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is open to those when you administer the two prescribed virtues.
Make another similar form to that one, but more subtle and lighter:
Let it be made of ebony or beechwood staffs according to the similarity of the forces. May the emperor have at the extremity of it two additions thus many times, and the length of these additions is about a palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with these, then you will make the woman raise her legs, hanging them from the bed, opening that which is between her thighs. And then take your hand with the instrument in such a way that you make an incision according to the quantity that you want of the thickness of the mouth of the matrix, until the meter makes what you want.
The form of vertigo which the ancients called:
Form of inflammation by which the foot is swollen:
Form of friendship by which the big head is congested
And it is assembled with forceps to which the teeth are in the extremity, like scissors, and some times it is made long like forceps according to this form, like scissors, to which the teeth are like teeth of rescue on which it has been incised and congested. Form of small friendship:
Form of a wound having a spine:
Form of a wound having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two extremities, on which the head is cut off:
Form of two broad spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when they are multiplied, the species of that one are prepared by the artisans, as much as it is easier for their operation and more useful to men because of their quantity.
And do not think that those instruments are yours to wield, for the necessity of them is not an excuse.
Of the extraction of the secondine (or possibly "the afterbirth").
When the afterbirth is retained, you must command the patient to retain it, and make her throw up with condiments, and hold your hand over her mouth and nostrils, and if by doing so it does not come out, well.
And if not, then take a woolen cloth and perforate in the cover a hole and put on that opening of the mouth of the matrix, thus as calamint and rue and anise and chamomile and aristolian and cassia wood and holy tree. Soak all these herbs or some of them in water in the cloth, and place that over the womb.
And then put a cane tube in the mouth of the matrix, and hold it there until the vapor comes to the cavity of the matrix.
And make her throw up as we have said, and the afterbirth will be expelled with speed.
But if this cure is not effective, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of juniper or in extract of wormwood, and then insert it into the womb and search for the afterbirth, and when she has found it, then take it out piece by piece. But if it is stuck in the matrix's perineum, then insert the hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the afterbirth, extract it little by little according to the rule so that the matrix does not fall into vehement pain. Above all, it is desirable that the right and left costs be permeated with ease.
And if the mouth of the matrix is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with purging and medication of the bile with herbs.
But if it is not forgotten for all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not perform on that in iteration of abstraction, but rather it is desirable that what is excreted from it to the mouth of the matrix lies at the thigh of the woman, and then anoint that with gum and tetrapharmacon; because that will make her purge for several days and it will be dissolved and it will be forgotten.
But when it is purged, it rises from it to the head and to the stomach, and that torments the patient; and then it is desirable that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered to it.
But some of the Ancients already used a sub-fumigation of dried nasal roots and of dried fig leaves.
Form of an instrument with which the woman is fumigated for the retention of menses and of the afterbirth:
It must be made from a vein or artery.
And let the thin extremity be placed in the pot and the wider extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation be placed on the arms of the fire.
And hold that in until the sub-fumigation is consumed and another one is put in its place.
On the treatment of the navel of an unperforated infant.
Many infants are born and their navels are not perforated, which have a thin and closed cicatrix. Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce with a needle that navel, and if not, she should pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the liver.
And immediately apply on that place a flannel cloth soaked in wine and oil; and treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is closed, then insert a small tube into the navel for many days, and block it when the infant needs to cry.
And if there is closure of the navel due to consolidation of a wound or an abscess; then it is necessary that this consolidation be cut, and immediately treated with what we have said about the treatment and the plaster.
About the cure of fistulas that occur in the eyes.
The fistulas that appear in the lower part of the eye are a sign of a bad and gross tumor, which appears near the anus or in the space of one side.
And it is a fistula or many tumors.
And when that tumor is old and rotten from the moist whitish or subtle decay, and some of these fistulas are seen to be penetrating.
And those penetrating ones are known by what is exiting from them through discharge and flatulence; and some times the patient uses the discharge, and it is forced out of them with worms.
And some of these fistulas are seen to be penetrating in the space, entering into the bladder, and entering into the flesh of the penis; and some of these penetrations enter into the joint of the thigh and into the nut of the scrotum.
And that in which a penetrating fistula is recognized entering into the anus and non-penetrating, is that you put your finger inside the anus, and you insert a thin thread of wool or iron into the fistula when it is not suppurating.
But if there is suppuration in it, then insert into it a thin thread of lead or horsehair that you feel with your finger.
And if you do not feel the whole of it nor any process of the gut causing any expulsion or worm or gas, thus as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then hasten to the cure.
When the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is emission of urine from that and prohibition of it to such an extent that the place be consolidated with medicine.
More so if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and increases pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the tendon is perforated inside here if there isn't fracture inside the bone, and increase of pain in the circuit of the affected part; and that of it is purulent discharge; and that it doesn't respond to medication, nor is consolidated with plaster.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure for everything, and the cure of those is labor and vainness of the foolish doctors regarding which they boast.
But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, health with iron is hoped for, according to what you have recommended, and that which has already been tried and proven.
And it is that the patient goes between your hands over the back of theirs and raises their legs inside them, the thighs bent to their belly, and then insert a probe of lead, or of iron if there is fracture in the fistula, so that you can feel the place where the tendon is perforated.
And if that sense of the patient turns around the neck, then it is necessary that you insert your finger inside the neck.
And if you feel with your finger the tendon already exposed and uncovered to penetrate, or what you feel between the tendon and that sinew or flesh, then be certain that this is the penetrating one; and do not work on that, because it is not in that place the healing, as we have said.
More often doctors say that there are healthy parts in some men's thighs.
And for the treatment by which healing is hoped for, you should make a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that ignited thing into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then turn it two or three times until you know that all those adjusted flesh, formed into fistulas, are adhered, resembling a feather of a bird.
And then treat that wound with bandages wrapped in gauze until all the adjusted flesh is united, and then treat it with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it heals, well; and if not, then it is not healed in a suitable time for another treatment.
And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate into the intestine of the said thing which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is a thin piece of flesh or of tissue, and sometimes the fistula in what is the surface of the codena, then cut the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you will have cut with the probe, and it will be in the fistula until the section reaches the place where the extremity of the probe appears, and through the probe it is liberated and extracted.
Then carefully clean those fistulated flesh wounds which are assembled to the channel of the needle and do not break any of those channels for fear that it may cause complications.
More often if there is a flow of blood or pus that comes between you and your operation when you dissect those flesh wounds, then the milk that will be is from the instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts good habits: it is adjustment of those adjusted flesh, and removal of the bloody excretion of humidity.
And then heal that wound which is covered in bandages or in dressings within the place where the arm is, and then heal the wound with gum or with hard flesh that generates and consolidates.
And thus medications are applied in which there is stipulation and purging; when the hour is restored it is already healed and you do not fear relapse.
More often if the fistula has passed into the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert the finger into the anus and ask about that.
And then if you feel the tension and between you and it is a veil of skin or of flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then it is not an operation on it but rather a way of trust and of hope.
This cause is to administer in it one of three manners: either that you cauterize it thus as we have said; or that you purge it within until you achieve its cavity so that it is possible for you to insert the instruments and the prepared cure; and do not proceed with more purging than necessary so that you do not irritate the containing lacert, and that you act above the patient's will; and then treat it with what we have said before, since it will be strong; or that you extend this veil and remove the pus that you purge within near the anus, thus as we have said, either with the finger or with another sharp instrument, and then cleanse those fistulized flesh which are in the purged area where you can perforate; and then strive to make the restoration of the entire wound with purging, and if the underlying pus is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, it will be easier for the patient. And certain fistulas are finished in this manner: it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is in the flesh of the buttocks around the surface of the body with the cod and in the margin of the buttocks, then take the tent of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the orifices according to this form:
and insert it into that vein wrapped with five veins or around those; and then insert the tent into the vein in the fistula until it achieves the cavity of it.
More if it is penetrating the margin of the buttocks deeply, then you extract the vein from that hole so that you insert your finger in the buttocks; and extract the extremity of the vein and adjust the two extremities together, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or for two, and when you press the vein into the flesh, tighten both until those fleshes are pressed which are between the two extremities of the vein and which fall.
And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
More if the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate, in whatever manner you are prepared, but let it be moved by the groin, for it is not for you to do this so that the lacert does not press; and then do this until it is healed.
The form of the spatula is spiked at the end where the fistula is divided: its curvature is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not insert unnecessarily, thus as needed.
Of suture of hemorrhoids in which runs blood in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are according to two methods, either between the buttocks or what is of carbuncles, or if those are with fat of rushes. And of those are small and large, and the blood runs from those tumors and it is one, and very painful, and outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
Worse are those that are outside the anus according to the measure of little humidity, from which runs yellow water or a little blood with continuous flow, and according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is next to the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to press inside so that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take and suspend with force or you hold those with your fingernail, and then you cut those according to their roots.
If the ulcers are not held in those places by the humidity and softening of them, then take those with a coarse cloth or with a cotton swab or with a flannel of wool, and extract those with the fingers, and return to put on top of them some powders, dusting over them some cauterizing powders near the incision, so that they are held in place of a cautery; or cauterize those as it was explained in the chapter about cauterization. And then heal those with another cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey to evacuation, then anoint the patient with a cluster in which there is a mild purging, and let it be washed with that water which is in the basin and which will make the anus evacuate more easily when the patient strains.
If the hemorrhoids are very painful in the anus, then the cause of them is the easiest to cure, and it is that you take those with your fingernail, or that you take those with a needle, and insert those, and then heal those with the water that we have mentioned until they are healed.
And for the one that has an incision, it is necessary to administer a suture of them in this manner: take thread and pass it through the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from the divisions above, and make that penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap the two extractions of the thread around the division behind the needle, and longitudinally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong structure, and then knot the thread and extract the needle.
Make a cut in that area, and let out one of those, but not the marrow, so that the excess blood from that vein may flow.
Then place a poultice made from rose oil or wax on the buttocks, and put that on the anus, and command the patient to rest. And let it enter into that wound; and when it is digested, treat those with an ointment or with another cure so that they may be healed.
And since they are old and of no value in that medicine, it is fitting that you treat those with the application of spit or with your nail into which moisture is made, and let the dirty pus be expelled from them, which prevents them from consolidating; and then treat those so that they may be consolidated.
Then apply those with a violent purging that the first one enters much blood and they are scraped off; and then treat those so that they may be healed.
It is known that the ulcers of the nostrils are clear, and not otherwise, unless noted by a redness according to the color of the body resembling a head of nails, and it is made in all the body and especially in the parts below the feet and the toes, and it comes from those joint pains.
And then it is necessary that what has grown in the circuit of the claw be taken hold of with the tongs or with an iron clamp, and be eradicated from its root; and then treat that.
And if you want, cauterize the second one that is mentioned in the following chapter.
More precisely, a wart is a small, rough, rounded, and fistulated protrusion on the surface of the body, and similar growths appear on the hands of children.
And the treatment for it is to stretch or cut that out, or to tighten that with a thread or a probe that fits inside. And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
More precisely, ringworm is a small, fuzzy, or fistulated thick growth on the surface of the body, especially on the thigh, and when it touches that it seems to be inflamed in the likeness of an ulceration of ringworm, and it is found around the body.
And the treatment for it is to take a needle of cotton thread or of wool thread, and let it be strong, and pass it over the ringworm until it contains the circle of the thread with the parts that surround it; and then insert your hand with the needle into the area surrounding the ringworm, and push that into the thigh of the flesh, and eradicate the ringworm from its root.
And if you want, make this with a cane of brass or iron according to this form:
Let the part of the cane that penetrates have subtlety, be blunt (that is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that on the said thing the absorption of it is alleviated and the revolution of that.
And if you want, cauterize the ant hill according to what is stated in the cauterization of the sore in the chapter on cauterization.
Of the form of the instruments that are administered to give relief.
Some poultices are made of silver or gold or melted or beaten brass; and some poultices are made from those small and large instruments according to those for which they are administered, because that which is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are cold or painful, their poultices should be small.
The form of large and few poultices:
The head of the cane where the bag is tied should be wide in this manner; and let the distinction be where the bag is tied, thus many times.
And the extremity of the part that is inserted in the buttocks, which is penetrating, should be blunt (that is not pointed), smooth to subtlety; and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and let the width of the hole be according to the thickness of the rods and a little thicker.
And let the bag be in which are placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of skin of sheep, and its size be a palm.
And let it be perforated by many holes thus as it is rolled up; and if the space which is between the holes is the thickness of the said.
And then insert into those holes a strong and crude filament which should be of twelve filaments, or wrap around those; and adjust to it the bag; and when the bag is placed on it, let it be tight at the head of the patient between two distinguishing strengths with forced constriction, and then constrict each hole: The quality of constricting for that is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it not be too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be raised on their back, and lift their legs up and place under them a cushion on which are already the men or a plank; and anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with white of egg or with mucus of fenugreek or of similar things; and then insert that into the anus with facility, and then the minister takes the bag and expresses it with two fingers and strongly with violence until everything that is in the gut is evacuated from the bowel; and then remove the gut and the patient lifts their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces out the excess, hold it in as much as possible; and if you sleep on it for an entire night, it is more beneficial in treatment.
More so if you treat it in diseases of abdominal discharge and its evacuation, then you will apply the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are painful hemorrhoids or abscesses, then let the treatment be subtle and gentle, of the treatments with which the children are treated.
On the treatment of wounds.
I have already spoken in the division of the treatment of wounds what is suitable for the free, and I say thus the treatment of those with medicine according to the complement.
Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the place where the wound occurs.
And the causes by which many wounds are made are like this: a blow with a stone, or a cut with a sword, or with a knife, or a hit with a lance, or with a fist, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
More wounds that are in the places of the body are like this: a wound on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar to those of the limbs.
And thus we recommend the treatment of certain wounds for which we pause this reasoning and rule over other wounds.
And we will begin with the simple head wounds, for the discussion of the composite ones will come to the commentary of the third chapter.
Thus I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a blow from a stone or something similar, and the skin has only been scratched and it is a large wound and you fear the onset of an apostemic infection, then you should be cautious and perform a cephalic bloodletting at once, and do not delay; and extract from that vein according to the quantity of the virtue needed by the patient, unless there is some prohibitive cause for bloodletting, especially if the blood that exits from the wound is scarce.
And let the bloodletting be on the opposite side of the wounded part; and protect the patient from replenishment and from wine and from coarse foods.
But if some cause prohibits minor bloodletting, then let it be reduced from the diet and not approached with meat nor wine.
And apply to the wound, if an apostemic infection occurs, cotton soaked in rose oil or in wine in which is added a styptic.
More surely if it is secure to apply a hot poultice, then pause on the wound, if it is recent with blood and the air has not altered that powder which you will recommend to apply in a small amount.
And if the air has already changed it, then pause on other soothing ointments until it is healed.
More if the wound is large or is by incision of tissue and of similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted by threads, then adjust them with a suture as you will recommend from the suture of others.
More if the wound has already exposed the bone and flesh, and it is not retained by them but only a small suspensor, then incise that and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of decayed tissue, and command the patient to abstain from foods in which there is coarseness: cabbage and beans and similar things to them, until it is healed.
And if you find in the decayed tissue putridness and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that rotten part and throw it away, and treat the area.
More if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which a flow of blood can come, and it is not stopped by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find it uncut, then cut it with a spatula, or tie it; and if necessity provokes that what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is an ulceration; thus you should powder over those wounds a powdered substance, which consolidates and heals them before the air touches them.
And the method of the powder is this: take oil of iris one part, dragon's blood two parts, and unslaked lime three parts; grind everything together and crush it, and fill the wound with it, and constrain it with a good bandage so that it stays on the affected area, and coagulate it with the blood.
Then tightly bind the dressing with pulvils and leave it, and do not remove it while it is like this so that it does not become infected, for the medicine is not eradicated from it until it is healed.
And sometimes this sole treatment is enough, when you have at hand iris and dragon's blood.
And this medical operation is performed on large wounds when it is convenient to place it on them and they are constrained, and also on recent wounds with their own blood, which the air has not yet altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially in summer, then it is not suitable for the application of this powder, but rather cure them with what we have said, so that you apply on them some digestive ointments, or apply on them powders made from wheat flour mixed with water and honey until they form a paste; and then cure them with another treatment until they are healed.
Mainly if the fracture occurs in the bone and is small, then you extract it with gestures.
And I will describe the treatment of head fractures in that which is poisonous.
Of the sores of the neck.
Mainly if the sore occurs on the neck, then it is not different in medication, and between the sore of the head when it is simple.
Mainly if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in the remedy but rather the treatment should be avoided with that which causes vehement constriction, thus as to say and to warn that it is poison and similar to their destruction because it harms the nerves and contradicts them. And do not put anything on the sore that causes total freezing, because the substance of the nerves is fragile and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest of all members.
And if it is treated with light medicines, such as being washed with warm water, some ointment rubbed in oil or not-rubbed, and turpentine when it is washed with warm water and the other dressings made according to this manner, and anointed with humid.
If the wound is large, then administer a suture, or sew up the lips of it, and immediately cure that with powders so that it may be healed.
If the wound has depth or reaches to the lowest part of the body, then perforate it in the place most depressed.
If an artery has already been cut in the wound and a flow of blood is obtained, then stop it or ligate it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
If the tendons of the shoulder or all have been cut, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the wound with suture on the edge of the shoulder and do not touch that; afterwards put it back in its natural shape, and immediately strengthen it with a decent dressing, and leave it for several days; and immediately cure it with an ointment in which there is stimulation and excitation so that it may be healed.
If the wound has already formed a scab on the bone, then pierce it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all that you can; and what you cannot remove, leave it until the wound becomes purulent, and it will be separated and the pressure of it will be alleviated.
And if the wound is recent, then powder on that powder which is recommended to you. More so if in the wound there is made a fistula, then cure it with that which memory will bring back to the seventh chapter.
If it is a piercing of a lance or of a knife, and observe its depth, then consider more so if from the wound comes foulness when the patient urinates; then know that the wound is mortal.
And if in it there is no depth and the wound is recent to the seventh blood, then you put on it at the first hour powder, and do not remove that which is not retained by the blood in the depth of it and which returns to the heart and which helps the patient, more put on it a attracting plaster, and apply those two remedies seen the day.
And if the plaster is not at your presence, then put on the orifice of the wound a cotton cloth by which it sucks what comes from the humidities; and make that the patient sleeps on the wound so that what is in it adjusted runs.
If the plague has already passed three days or more and does not affect the patient with spasms or tremors of the heart, nor with strictures of the gut, and other good dispositions of it, then know that the plague is salvageable; and therefore treat that one with warmth and with another cure until it is healed.
If the healing of it is hindered, and a long time has passed, then know that a fistula has been made; therefore treat that through the sixth chapter.
And if the wound is by a cut of a sword or a knife, and is simple on the surface of the foot or the back, then treat that with water that is followed by stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If a judgment has already been made on the bone, and its incisions are deep, then twist the wound and cut to extract those splinters, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound suppurates, so that their extraction is facilitated.
And for other accidental wounds in the other limbs, the cure for youth is the same as what we have said regarding water.
Of the ailments of the belly.
The indisposition that occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or moderate.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another hand, and thus it is that the reduction of them is more difficult, if not done with care regarding the disruption of them to their place at first, because the intestine swells and becomes inflamed, for which the intrusion of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is moderate, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
And you should know that the suture of the belly is according to four methods, but two sutures are common which are also suitable for sutures of the other ailments of the body.
And two other sutures are specific and relate to the other ailments, but however they are more specific in the suture of the belly.
And I have recommended to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the intestine through that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either due to lack of rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has come inflammation from the coldness of the air.
And so when it is thus, then it is good that you make a poultice in this way: that you submerge a sponge or cloth humid in warm water alone, or that you take cypress, and spikenard, and embroideries in water, and apply them to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And some women do it in a way where they have stipulated, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
And so when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which is cooked altea and mallows, because by this the inward part of it is alleviated with little cause.
But if the inward part of it is excused from this cure, then you should make a small incision with an instrument by which the swollen and inflamed parts are cut.
And the first cure is better, when it is proper that there is no cutting, and it is not necessary to cut, except in case of necessity and defect.
Of the instrument, know the shape of it:
One part of it is sharp-edged, and the other part not-edged, and the extremity is subtle, and it should not be as subtle as a spatulum, but rather somewhat blunt.
And then when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is outside, it is good that its reduction be according to the natural form, in its own proper place, if possible above it, which is better.
More often when the rupture is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, it is good that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs up higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place their head and chest higher than the lower parts.
And similarly if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then put your attention and consideration into balance so that the part in which the wound is, is higher than the other.
And thus it is good that you administer this in severe wounds and in moderate wounds.
And in small wounds, put what you have prepared, and see to it that the minister be among your most trusted ones, who will hold the rupture with their hand and adjust the lips of it, and carefully uncover from that one to that which is the suture for some other cause or another.
And this is the common method of suturing: one that takes the needle, or counts the threads according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and then sews the thread on the extremity of the disruption of the said ankle, and pulls the needle once, without putting fiber in the two extremities of the codena, but rather in the two extremities of the siphac that is behind the codena of the separated parts, until you make that part penetrate; and you have already added the two extremities of the codena and the two extremities of the siphac, and thus makes four orders.
And then pull with a double thread in the circuit of the needle, and some times pass through both parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound for decent addition; and then sew the thickness of the said and fix another needle in it, and then tie that with a thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be moderate between thickness and subtlety, for the subtle needles easily enter the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to introduce into the codena, and therefore it is good that they are moderate in subtlety and thickness.
And it is not advisable that the needle be inserted in both extremities of the codena, so that the flesh is not excessively damaged and the wound closes before its consolidation.
And they should not be prolonged with stitching so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And then cut the ends of the threads so that the patient does not feel them during sleep; and you will place expansive powders on the entire suture, which hold the ends of the threads; and leave them there until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this type of stitching with needles is more conveniently used on small wounds, for which the stitching of one or two threads around them is sufficient.
But the second stitching is communal: and it is that you administer with stitching the four extremities, of the skin and two extremities of the navel, in one way, with a needle in which is wrapped thread both in subtlety and thickness.
And then when you have with the needle penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that middle part where it began, so that the thread is pulled back from the deepest part to the wound, so that the stitching is like stitching of cloth in which the cloths are tightened.
And stop between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the said finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And in such a suture I have treated the wound which was inflicted on a man in his lower abdomen, which had been wounded by a knife, and the disruption of the wound was more than a palm in length, and it was exiting from the intestines around two palms from the middle intestine, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I have returned that which the intestine had come out of the wound for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and I cured him and he is healed; then I have visited him for many years, and he has conversed in his own faculties.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and it was a miracle, because I did not cure him with an ointment, because it was in a place where ointment was of no use, but instead I applied to the wound a warm double dressing twice a day and assiduous washing with honey water until he was healed.
But I would say two special kinds of suture, proper according to the narrative of Galen.
And it is that you begin with the stitching of the tendon, and insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
And thus with the needle penetrating the tendon and in that doctor's hand, according to rectitude and length of the whole body, and leave the extremity of the suture in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate the other extremity from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the thread.
And when you have made that penetrate, then make it penetrate again in the same extremity of the thread from the front part to the back part; and leave the extremity of the suture which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate the other extremity from the back part to the front part.
And make it penetrate with your penetration, with which you make it penetrate the suture, in the extremity of the thread, which is in the part of it within, so that all that penetrates.
And then begin with this doctor's stitch and sew with the extremity that is of the suture on the other side, and pull out the needle from the tendon which penetrated, and then put it back in that tendon and sew the extremity of the suture which is on the other side with this extremity of the thread; and pull out that one from the tendon which is on the part of it.
And make one dressing and another, and make one dressing adjacent to another dressing between which you press all that is deformed according to that example.
And the sum of this method of sewing is that you press with a sewing of pellicies on which you sew the skins, in such a way that you press one dressing on the part of the extremity of the codena, and that you leave another dressing between which you have it complicated.
More, the second species of proper sewing, which Galen specifically calls, and this is to be recommended by him and for him, is that you press the second similarity with which all medical doctors sew, in such a way that they join the entire affected part to its corresponding unaffected part, conveniently by nature; and they apply the extremity of one to the extremity of the other, and this is done according to what has been recommended to you.
Take the needle and insert it at the extremity of the mirror to your own proportion of the deformed part, and make it penetrate the internal part in that sole, and leave two extremities of the ciphac; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two extremities of the ciphac.
And then return the rolled bandages, and make each of them penetrate from the outer part into the inner part through two extremities of the mirror-like areas that are on the opposite sides.
And this manner of stitching is better than the common stitching, and it is the stitching of which I mentioned previously in remembrance.
This is the sermon of Gualia
And more I said to you, the stitching of the belly is corrected with two needles, so that you insert in these each a thread, and start with the insertion of the needle from that which you have beside you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the stitching of those who sew together the entrails.
And you should know that when disruption is in the middle place of the belly, then the stitching of it is more difficult than that of the other places of the belly.
More the judgment of the treatment of a wound is a judgment of the other wounds.
Which thing is because when you touch the recent wound with your blood, it alters that, and reduces the swelling, and sews it, and adapts it properly, then put on it a powder that promotes flesh growth.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply a plaster on that ulcer, which you will press between your fingers to make a hard crust and cauterize the veins, and consolidate and treat it; and cure that wound just as you would the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
But if you are not present with the medicines, then apply to that tumor, since it begins to throw out arm and cut away the dead skin, and change the dressing twice a day, just as you have instructed, until it is healed, because you do not need another medication in most cases when the wounds are simple.
But if you suspect that the wound will communicate with a lesion to the main limbs, then take a woolen cloth and submerge it in oil of tempered quality, or in rose oil, and apply it to the circuit of the areas that are between the joints and give relief to the affected areas.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestinal pouches, because many times it becomes inflamed, then anoint it with a black topical plaster, and more so if the pus has spread to the intestine and made an ulcer that penetrates into its cavity.
It is known that the one related to the large intestine is of more sluggish healing than the one in the subtle intestines.
And it is of difficult healing because the intestine that is called "gijunum" does not receive healing from a wound that falls on it completely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and the magnitude of them that are in those, and the subtlety of the body of that one, and the proximity of that one to the nature of nerves.
Moreover if what proceeds from the wound is the tissue, and you treat that recent one, return it according to your rectitude with which you return the intestines to their place.
But if it has passed to the space and already is made into a green or black color, then you apply a faithful dressing on the place that is discolored, so that there come flows of blood, because in the tissue there are veins and arteries.
And then cut that which is another ligament, and place two extremities of the dressing hanging from the part of the wound, so that on you be alleviated the attraction of it, and by the fall of the tissue and emission of the arm of the wound.
Remembrance of wounds when they occur in the intestine.
When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is pierced, then it is possible that it can be restored in some homes, for example when I saw that which had been afflicted with a wound from a thrust of a lance and was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, and there was an increase of gases and bloating.
Afterwards I began to ensure the cure of what had already been done so that it would not be compromised in the healing process, but rather I proceeded with subtlety on the inside where the wound was healed and the area is consolidated.
And I had placed on the patient a dressing to cover the area where the injury was in the stomach; and I did not find any relief from that evil accident and I remained with various dispositions eating and drinking, and then I entered into a bath and it is exercised by its own words.
And I have described some experiments that when a wound is in the intestine and it is pierced, then it should be treated in this manner: take firm grips of large clamps; and adjust the two lips of the wound and place one grip of those that has its mouth open over the two lips of the wound; thus when you press on these and tighten their mouth, the head of the clamp is separated, which adheres and does not dissolve.
And then stop putting another poultice on the first one, and do not cease to make other poultices according to the quantity of the entire wound.
And then reduce that and dress the wound; and break those adjacent capsule-like things in the intestine so that the intestine is healed; and do not cause harm to the patient with discomfort.
And it is possible that the intestine is tied with a thin string which is made from the intestine of a beast attached to it, because it is sharper than a needle; and it is that you take the end of these strings of intestine, and it is very delicate, and then tie the end of it with a string of wax, wrapped, and then insert this string into needles and sew it to the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this manner of sewing with poultices is not but according to a way of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then it is not a remedy but a subtlety, and it is not a complete healing of it.
Of the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Know that every wound and abscess which becomes inflamed and old, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and taken a long time and is not separated, however, in any member it may be, universally it is named fistula and we call it ulcer.
Fistula according to truth is a nodulated, hard, white tumor in which there is no pain and for which there is conquest or relief, just as there is conquest of the pain of ausel; and for this reason it is called by that name, that is, painful tumor.
And it is in some men a humid (tumor), which discharges pus; and soon the humidity is cut off in some hours. And some times this humidity is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
It shows all those causes, and the signs of those and the cure of them with medicine in the division.
And it is suitable that you know the treatment of fistula, which is made by means of operation with the hand.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for some of those are fistulas that affect the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the liver, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the joints composed by composition as well as the hand and the foot; and some of those are near the main member and of similar things.
And therefore one of these fistulas that is according to this method is of the illnesses of difficult healing, and does not receive treatment, and its occupation is labor and ignorance.
And if one of the fistulas is of such depth that it does not reach to these places that have been said, and you hope and trust in its treatment, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or of bronze, and if the fistula follows straightly, and you inquire about it with it.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that with a thin lead probe, for the lightness of the lead on the body alleviates and cures the twisting.
And if the fistula has caused horrible movements, it is not possible for you to mark on it with the probe.
Therefore, purify the orifice through its orifices, for the humidity by which you purify that goes from the other orifices and corrects their flow.
And inquire meticulously, according to which manner it is possible for you to recognize if there are bones or nerves here, and it is the concavity of the fistula being long or short, or it is a fistula with many openings and this is on top of all your strength, in your penetration, in which you penetrate the patient, and the invention of pain by your compression on the area, and appearance of signs and causes accidental to the abscess.
And when you have established yourself on all those causes in a verified station, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near the place of salt, or a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places which you have told and said.
Then you dry the fistula according to what is said in the narration of it, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the excrements and of similar things, and cure that entry until it is healed.
If the fistula is of long and profound depth, and it is according to the rectitude, then you try to insert that in the perineum as much as you can, and then clean that from all its corrupted flesh; and then administer warm poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with the iron.
And do that until some seen results come, so that the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
And then restore it with ointments which produce healthy flesh, until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is a bone and it is necessary to certify that, then you inquire into it and dry it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prevent any cause of vein or of nerve or of principal member, as we have said.
If the bone is discovered and there is corruption or blackness in it, then you must remove all the corrupted parts; and then treat that area with a remedy so that the flesh may be healed.
And if it is not healed and the arm is still as it was, then you know that you have not fully eradicated the corruption; and therefore you discover again with great care and diligence the reason for it and the purification of it with the last strong treatment, and then restore it.
And then if it is healed, that's good; and if not, you know that the corruption is in the deep inner part of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore in this case it is not ingenuity but laziness to leave that untreated.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible to extract it, then you extract it with subtle forces that are suitable for this.
And if there are many bones, then carefully make the extraction of all those, and do not leave any of them behind for any reason due to your weakness.
If you find opposition due to some cause of humidity, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then cut through those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and release the bones.
More than if you do not prepare the hour to reset the bones of your operation, then place a poultice on the wound that promotes healing of that wound, and let it in among the bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and the section that you have made in your operation is constrained.
Having, if you fear, place on the wound a plaster submerged in warm oil, or a plaster submerged in Egyptian gum, or in juice of green plants, because when those ligaments are purified, and the bones are separated from the abscess, and from that attraction the alleviation is eased.
More if it is a large bone like the bone of the leg or thigh or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface, then scrape that with a rasping tool as much as possible within so that the blackness and corruption is removed, and then restore the wound.
More if that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to cut out that and to make an incision in the place where the corruption has invaded, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you go to a man in his thigh where you place that and an assistant to aid in your operation.
There is a young man of about thirty years of age, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and from the parts divided above the material said of the body into which the material has come to the thigh, it is a matter of abscess or great abscess, and not due to an external cause.
And then the time is prolonged for that because of the error of doctors until the abscess has opened, and a gathering of foul matter, and its cure is delayed until the leg becomes fistulated, and there are made in the foul mouth sores which completely eliminated putridity and humidity from the body.
And then many doctors treated him for about two years, and he was not cured by their knowledge but by art, until I was called.
And I saw his leg and the matters that flowed from it through those foul sores with great violence; and already the body of that man was completely corrupted and the color of it was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those sores and advanced the probe to the bone.
And then you scrutinize and probe all the orifices and investigate those that penetrate to them from all parts of the leg.
And then you cut and dissect above one of the orifices those that enter where I discovered a part of the bone, and I found that corrupted, and it was rotten and corrupted and discolored; and a part of the leg was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then you scrub that which to me was discovered and prepared from the uncovered bone.
And you recognize that it is not in the bone but that corruption which I excised and scrubbed, and already had evacuated.
And then I applied the restoration of the wound with medicine consolidatives for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
And then you returned and dissected above the bone secondly above the first discovery, and I found continued corruption with the bone.
And I scrubbed that which appeared to me as that corruption, and then it was perforated in order to make the cure of it and restoration, and it is not restored.
And then I discovered on the other side and did not cease to cut the small bone little by little particularly and perforate the restoration of it, and it is not restored until I cut around a palm of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it is consolidated lightly and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on them except for the preparation of their bowel and due to the scarcity of their tolerance and fear of death, because acidity occurs in them at all hours due to an excess of evacuation without a healthy digestion.
And so it heals by complete healing, and there is nothing in place of hard flesh; and good disposition is made for them in their body and their strength returns; and it is established in their dispositions and does not cause discomfort in walking nor harm in any cause.
More often if there is a prominent bone in the body already wounded, then it is necessary that you cut that bone in this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and stretch it at the end of that prominent bone, and tell someone to extend it with their hands; and take a coarse woolen thread thicker than the first thread; and apply that thread over the flesh that is beside the bone, and pull the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts beside, and you cut the flesh in the area where you want to make an incision so that the incision does not harm the flesh.
And place a wooden or bone splint beside the bone properly, because when you do this it is not prohibited that the saw does not cut the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the closure occurs on the corrupted area little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and the corruption does not appear in its appearance to sensation, then force the closure of the other side.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, often one part is connected to the other, and the corruption is in the middle area or in a part of it, then you discover all the flesh of each part; and place your hand under the thighs, and close the first part where the corruption is until the closure of the other part is continuous.
And let the closure be according to the area of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut out that corrupted joint, and close the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
And if the corruption is in the connection of two joints, then it is not in reason but in injury.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or of the foot, it is most difficult; however, it is necessary that you investigate the corruption in whatever manner it appears to you, and that you open that, and show that according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with caution injury be rectified by you, when it does not cause discomfort or numbness.
And you should know that the fracture of these bones is dependent on the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that it is necessary to prepare all sorts of convenient instruments for that operation.
And you should know that this operation refers to your expertise in the specific instrument that you need; for you have great study and knowledge and understanding of the methods of this art, and testimony of methods of diseases, for which you already have them through your experience, what is convenient for each disease with all instruments.
And then you will be formed at the end of this chapter with the names of the instruments which you will handle simply, and with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment on the others. Shape of a saw:
Shape of yet another saw:
Shape of a large saw:
Shape of a razor or a blade: Let the head of this razor be in the shape of the head of a star-shaped key, and its points be in the shape of the points of a three-pronged fork.
It does not suit unless with those constricted joints when they are corrupted, or it is the large and wide mouth.
Form of lesser erosion:
Form of lateral erosion:
Form of another properly made saw: make an arch of the iron above and the sharpness of the iron, and the member of the instrument of the file decently made. Shape of it:
Form of erosion in which there is a hollow:
Form of another subtle erosion:
Form of another erosion with a curved extremity:
Form of small erosion resembling a clamp:
Form of another smaller cutter:
Form of another incision tool; this one resembling a rasp, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the erosion of the bones:
Form of rasp that suits the erosion of that which is perforated by the bones:
And its extremity is triangular and of sharp extremity.
It is made from iron of India, and similarly it covers all the causes that we have spoken of regarding gnawing and cutting and sawing.
Of incision of extremities and of the sawing of the bones.
The extremities are putrefied either by an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or when you apply medicine to that corruption for the cure of those medicines and the cure does not help, or sometimes the corruption goes up to the member which is not perceived by any cause, then it is necessary that you cut that member within that bone where the corruption has reached, so that the disease escapes through that of death or gangrene which is a greater defect of the member.
And the signal of that which happens, is that the member becomes black within until it seems that fire has already consumed it, or it is covered with blackness within until the putrefaction reaches into that member which is next to it and which takes everything in the body; and thus you will know that you should cut that member.
And similarly if the cause of the corruption is a puncture by some venomous causes, such as that of the sea scorpion or of the viper or of the rue or of similar things.
And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the said, then you insert the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the hand.
And similarly if it happens to the hand, then you insert that from the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the forearm.
And if it swells, then insert the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond and the swelling reaches the elbow, then in that case it is death for the patient; and to administer another cause or treatment in that circumstance is a matter of quantity of virtue.
And similarly do to the foot when corruption swells the toe of the foot, then you insert it up to one of the ankles.
And if it takes hold in the sole of the foot, then you insert the entire foot. More so if it reaches inside the tooth, then you insert the leg up to the joint of the tooth.
And if the corruption has already spread over the tooth, then in him it is not a cure but rather dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the technique of cutting or severing it is that you stretch the ligament in the partition where you want to cut, and stretch another ligament on the spot; and extend the minister one ligament to the partitions where you want to cut, and extend the minister another ligament on top; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that the spatula can enter and all the flesh be exposed; and then it is cut or severed.
And cover that a cloth of linen is placed on all the partitions so that it does not touch the spot itself, and let the adjusted poultice with cauterized paste come to the lesion.
But if there is an excessive flow of blood when you operate, then you cauterize the spot gently, or apply to it some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then tie the wounded limb with a bandage in a convenient way, and cure it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his sixth foot, this doctor's accident which I and you have recommended, which is why the blackness occurs in the sixth foot with adjustment that was assembled from combustion of fire.
And this corruption occurs primarily in the sieve-like intestine that holds the whole foot.
And then that man prepares himself for the cure by going to the member with the violence of the one that provokes pain and adjustment of it, and it happens that the foot goes into the joint, and thus heals.
Long time does it take for this corrupt condition to occur in the said part of the hand.
And then comes to me, and I have thoroughly examined the excess that I placed on the hand of the medicines, near the purification of the body of it; and it is not excessive and begins to go to the other part inside which begins in the hand.
And it happened that I had to operate on the hand of it, and I did not want to do this operation above the excessive reaction, and more than I feared the incision of the death of the hand, because the virtue of the patient was in a state of decay.
And since he was cured by me, he returned to his land and it came to me that that man prepared and operated on his whole hand, and is healed.
And this narrative has not been joined except to be helpful regarding what is extracted from this disease, and that it be significance for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
Of the cure of sins and the quality of purging with medicines.
When abscesses occur in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of blood, and then it is broken and perforated, and the blood comes out, and the place is washed with hot water as if it were a vessel, and the dressing that is applied on top of it is like a subtle cloth, and it does not lead to further corruption, and it does not impress upon the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and not a fistula.
But if the space is prolonged until the corruption affects some member, then it is called a fistula and not an abscess.
And the cure of it is that a dressing is applied, like one that is turned and wrapped around, especially when it is made subtle and done with cloth, and bandages that do not stick to the place because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the dressing will adhere and that the corruption will not have advanced by further consequence, then your cure is to apply a purging cluster.
And consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you put in has a foul smell, then administer a cluster with an Egyptian medicine which is made of oil and bitter vinegar and ginger, receiving equal portions, and adjust them in a vessel, and cook them over the fire until the medicine becomes soft and penetrates to the depth of the honey.
And then take the water that is necessary and mix it with water and honey; and introduce an enema into their anus, and cleanse their orifice, and administer the medicine to them for a duration of two hours.
And then extract that with a spoon; and do this for as many days until the anus is purified and the bad smell is eliminated.
And sometimes it is administered with water of ash, when this medication is not present; and that is to take the ashes of vines, and put them in water; and then mix that and administer it as an enema until you are convinced that the anus is relieved.
And if the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medication or the water of ash, then administer an enema with water and honey mixed with ground ginger, and also administer it with wine and honey, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleans, and the wine makes the anus adhere, especially when the wine has been treated to remove its excess acidity and dryness.
And when you do this sometimes and are convinced that the anus is already cleaned, then administer an enema with water that makes flesh grow in it.
It is that you take an ointment of dissolution and dissolve it with olive oil and vinegar; or that you administer a suppository with certain medications and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifice of the anus is narrow and the canal of the suppository is not received, then you widen it with a small iron instrument little by little, and place in the warm water wrapped in Egyptian ointment or in basilicon ointment until it is widened.
And similarly if the orifice is large, then you bring together the lips of the wound with a suture and adjust the quantity in which the suppository is introduced.
And if the orifice of that from which the arm is elevated to the separated parts above, then dry that in the pus at the lowest place where it is near the passage through which the arm runs, for when the arm is constricted in the depth of the sinus, the flesh will be engendered there.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus through the passage of the pus below as you wish, then you should perforate so that you prepare the member with preparation for which the arm runs freely according to how it is apparelled and that no cause of retention of the arm remains.
More, that which is on the orifice of the wound, which you change every hour so that it becomes adjusted to the arm. And to know if what comes out of the arm is a lot or a little, or is digested, or not digested.
And then you consider the place of that wound, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is an abscess.
And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the material that is thrown on the orifice of the wound already adhered, or takes adherence, then you can dressing it on the third day, and when you dress the wound, then change the cloth for another and renew the plaster.
More often if the sinus is approached with a subtle and gentle touch, do not despair of its adhesion, because the healing of it is appropriate, since in some cases delayed generation of flesh in the wounded areas occurs, and in those same cases the opposite of that is done.
And if the sinus is touched by moving days and bad indigestion, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is a prolonged cause, then you adjust with desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus as an ointment of diafinicon, when there is adjusted superflluity of addition of zeal.
And the best remedy by which it is cured, is that you take an ointment of diafinicon and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it on the wound with antique gum in its substance, and confirm this on him, and use it for him.
And it seems similar in that action, when there is no bad indigestion, ointment of diafinicon, as much as it is cooked until it is thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and ashes, and triturate all and pulverize over the honey when it is on the fire, and apply this on a cloth and tie it around the sinus; and apply that with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and pulverize on a cloth and tie it.
And sometimes the aristolochia plant's long root and celestial lily (which is the celestial lily) and powder of centaury, and use of those simple or adjusted things, triturate them and pulverize over the honey which has been recommended; and use its juice.
And if the sore is prolonged, and it's not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the patient's abdomen, and has already made its way into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you will cure it with a fistular treatment, as has been said before.
Of the treatment of wounded soles and rubbed-away nails and the cutting of added fingers and division.
A panarici is an apostema which arises from the nail of the thumb or big toe of the hand or foot, and it appears in other fingers, and when it's prolonged its treatment is less prized, or it's cauterized with a hot iron, or it's corrupted, and it throws out a greenish matter that corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts entirely, and it perforates its corruption to the bone within which is to it a foul odor, and it makes the extremity of the said member, and its color becomes dark.
And then when you have that tool which we mentioned in the division and do not confuse your treatment, it is good that you remove all the excess that remains from the nail and cauterize the wound properly with that tool, for cauterization is beneficial in this case.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already begun to compress the flesh at the edges, and they start to prick and cause pain, then it is good that you apply a subtle paste under the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push it upwards and cut that flesh with ease, and apply on top of that which remains from the corrosive medicines until it be completely removed; and properly treat that area with ointment until it be healed.
But if the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then it is good that you cut out the bone and extract it, for no time will heal the corrupted bone.
And if the decay and corruption reach to the finger, then you cut it out in one of the joints according to where the sensation is most affected, and properly treat that area until it be healed.
But if the nail receives a blow or injury, and it causes violent pain, then it is good that you start by applying flebotomy to the patient, and properly cut the nail with a sharp spatula, cutting transversely downwards, and beware that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh that is beneath the nail, for you will cause the patient violent pain, and it will be a cause of excessive scar tissue formation in the area; and properly treat that area with what calms the pain.
More said adjusted, which is born in the hands of some men, strong and muscular all over, and strong it is in their bones, or strong it is in their nails.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the birthplace of them in some nodes of the said. More that which is born in some nodes of the said does not move badly, and this which is born in the joints is strongly moved.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is lighter, and it is that you should insert the root of it with a spatula to the side.
More of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of the amputation of it.
More in that which is born in the said nodes, it happens that you should insert at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then sew with one of those suitable needles for this, and then heal what is inside so that it is healthy.
More consolidation which occurs to the said nodes between their moved parts or by birth of man who is born thus, or by consolidation of a wound or by combustion of fire, or by resemblance, therefore it happens that you cut this consolidation so that the said nodes return to their natural form.
And then pause between the layers of the swollen limbs in oil roasted so that they are not consolidated awkwardly, and separate between them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated according to what is necessary.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of the palm's digits, then you dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapted to the shape of the limb.
From the incision of veins, there come varices.
Veins are varices, and they are thick, swollen veins full of melancholic superfluities that come in motion to the limbs of the body, and the greatest occurrence of them is in the thighs, especially in the thighs of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Therefore it is necessary that you administer purification of the body from black bile with some evacuations to forceful expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The cure of them with iron is according to two methods: one is that the incision is made and the black blood is attracted out, and the other method is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
The treatment of it is according to this method: wrap the beginning of the thigh with hot water until the thick blood is dissolved, which is filthy, and then tie the patient's thigh tightly at the upper part of the hip inside to the back of the knee with a bandage, and then make an incision in one place, or two, or three with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood with the hand from the back of the thigh within its confines, and from within outwards, until the amount of blood that you want is discharged and which satisfies the strength of the patient.
And then attach that, and command them to abstain from foods that engender black bile.
And the cure is achieved through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this does not harm the patient.
More elevation is achieved in this manner: you raise the patient's leg, if it is moved by them, and then put it in a bath and immerse the leg in hot water until it becomes red and the veins are filled; or it can be exercised through vigorous exercise, if a bath is not available, until the member is warmed up.
And then make an incision on the right of the vein for drainage in the loin or in the back of the knee, or at the lowest part of the knee, near the ankle.
And then uncover the cord with an incision and scrape the vein from every part until it becomes apparent to feeling, and it is necessary for the appearance of what seems to be a black vein declining to darkness.
And thus evacuate and from the cord you will find that white stuff which appears as a cord.
And then put your hand on the vein until it is elevated and emptied of the cord, and suspend it with an incision or a ligature.
And then dry another section and apply that section for three days, and then scrape off the crust from the top of the vein until it appears.
And then lift that and incise it in the last section of the heel, and then extract it and lift it until it is freed by the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
And do this until you extract it from the section that is most superior or highest of all sections, until everything is freed; then incise it.
And if it does not obey to be extracted and lifted, then insert a double-threaded strong needle and tie it and extract it, or insert the instrument and turn your hand in every direction until it is discharged. And beware that it is not incised, for if it is torn, it will be difficult for you to lift the mortality and it comes upon the patient due to that nuisance.
And when everything has been discharged, then apply on the place of the wound a woolen cloth soaked in wine and oil, both raw and refined, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vita is constricted having twisted the area where there is an enclosure of the partitions, and it's not according to rectitude as we have said, then it's necessary that you make a ligature on that entire partition of twisting and on the areas of enclosure, and return the suture upwards with a bend so that you elevate that entire area.
And beware that your section does not cut the vein and that it does not harm that area, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and preserve your caution in that.
Figure of the incision on which the vita is cut:
It is not suited to him to be pointed like the claws nor of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of coarse flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; but there is in it a superfluous coarseness as we have said.
Of the extraction of the curved vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in cold and damp lands, just as in the land of Arabia and in the dry and arid lands of little tenderness, and in which there are neither herb nor tree.
And the strength is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And the gestation of it is from putrefaction that comes from the gut, as when venomous things penetrate the body, such as snakes and worms and lice, generating between the gut and the flesh.
And the sign of the reception of its coming is from this vein that causes an inflamed swelling in the leg; and then the place becomes blistered; and then it starts to come out from the place of that blister, which seems to be a root of plant.
And then when the extremity appears, then take a piece of lead weighing one or two drachms, and tie it and let it hang suspended from the leg.
And as many times as there are causes of it coming out in the divisions of the body, wrap them in lead and tie them. And if the movement is prolonged, then cut a part of it and wrap the remainder; do not cut that which is rooted until it is completely removed, because if you cut it, it becomes contracted and enters into the flesh and causes to appear an aposteme and pus in the place and bad ulceration.
So that it can be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is removed from the back of the patient and no remainder of it stays in the body.
And from this vein exits in some men who are in their length of 5 palms and 10 fingers and it has already reached me that one exits at 20 palms.
And if it happens at the time of its medication, then introduce the needle into the hole of the patient and puncture that long hole in the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then treat that one with the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes moves upwards, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to the foot with many openings, and exits from each opening a branch.
And thus treat that one as we have said in the division with what has been said above.
Of the section concerning worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is named in some lands near us as bovine disease because many times worms are found in the intestines and it's a worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes throughout the body pushing and swelling, and shows itself to our feeling from member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
The generation of it is from the putrefaction of certain humors, just like when worms and serpents and intestinal parasites occur in the stomach.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and is elevated to the head, and it reaches the brain, then it strongly grips the man and enters and destroys the brain, and that causes many visible evils.
And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then do not proceed unless you have examined the sensation and appearance of it, and then consider what is above it and what is below it with binding and strong constriction, and apply heat above it and extract it.
And if it is deeply embedded in the flesh and you do not touch it, then apply a cautery with fire on the place where it resides, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
If it has reached the head near the brain, then apply a strong strictura on the eyebrow, and apply heat above it, and extract it; and consider that the patient use purging of their body with medicines that evacuate bad putrid humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
Of the cutting regarding the nausea.
This illness is called nausea in our land, and it is a pain that comes in various members, and then spreads from member to member.
And already I have seen that thing which I will recommend to you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after it had been rubbed for an hour, I saw that inflammation increase thus as if it were a worm growing, and more quickly than it would be if it were silver, thus as if you could see it run from place to place.
And then I put the needle in the pain of that place and fixed it into the muscle, and then I left it there for an hour.
And then I ran to the other side of the body until I reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to me that it circulated throughout the body according to what I had seen; and it was very marvelous of the transmutation of it and of the speed from member to member. And I had already seen this before in my wells in the same manner, however I have seen many cases where pain is transferred from limb to limb. More pain is seen in the heels as in the woman.
And it is not thought to be that, but rather it is because of that for which the woman was old, with dry body and uncovered veins, and in this appearance shows the distorted ventilation changed.
And it is necessary that it not appear according to this curvature in those who are delicate and have a humid body with covered veins.
And when you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear at the heel as we have said, but stretch over that and place a ligature and dryness on that until the distorted ventilation is constricted, and cauterize the area.
More often if you treat the heels, then cure that with excretion of the body and with that which expels windy humors, and purify those with foul-smelling pills and with pills of serpent and similar things.
Of extraction of arrowheads.
Arrowheads are diversified according to the species, and according to the locations of the body in which they lodge, for their diversity is that some of them have large points, and small ones, and concave, and blunt, so are solid; and of them some have three angles, and of those to which some have barbs; and of those to which some are tinned.
And of the signs of the wound it is when the arrow cuts into it, and penetrates the bone, and there comes out from the siphac, which is above the brain, because it happens through vehement sweating, and sciatica, and vertigo, and pain in the limbs, and inflammation and pain of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and the speech is greatly hindered and the voice is destroyed, and there comes out from the place of the wound a white humidity resembling pus, and it seems to be attached to the flesh.
And thus if this symptom appears to you, then abstain from the treatment and from the extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
More symptoms of the arrow when it is in the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and it seems that it has been fixed by a hard cause, and not a hollow one; and for this reason the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and the running of the black blood, and dry coldness, and sweating, and syncope; and thus you will know that death descends in two days.
And the symptoms when the arrow has wounded the lung are expectoration of foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels that are near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient is changed, and they exhale a great amount of foul breath, and demand cold fresh air.
And if the arrow is in the membrane which is in the chest, and the pain then is near the little ribs, and it is made with great and vehement pain and with sighing, and not all the limbs of the muscles are moved.
And if the arrow is in the stomach, then for this reason the eyes of the wound become bloody and somewhat indigestible matter comes out.
If the arrow is lodged in the belly, and it's fixed in him, there will be some wound or tear in the flesh, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope for a cure except by extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow is lodged in the bladder, and urine comes out of it, and some cause proceeds from it to the privy parts, and forthwith there is severe pain on the patient, then you should know that it is mortal.
More, the other members like the face, the neck, and the shoulder, and the shoulders and the arms, and the vertebrae of the back, and the armpit and the thigh, and their similar members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not touch vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I recommend to you that which I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand for yourself about their treatment.
This is the cause, for when an arrow struck one man in the tear duct of his eye at the root of the nose, and I extracted it from him through the other side, leaving the grey matter of the brain untouched, and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
To extract another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into his body in the thigh area, the eyelid was lifted and the arrow was already hidden and not found except for a small extremity to which it adhered to the flesh, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, made of iron on which there were no feathers.
And the Jew was happy, and it did not harm his thigh badly, the accident.
And he extracted another arrow from a Christian man, which had fallen into his shoulder, and it was an Arabic arrow, and this one had feathers; and then he cut around that between two guides, and it was already submerged in the shoulder of the man; and then he was very skilled with that, and carefully extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And he extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his lower abdomen, and they thought that he would die from it; but since after thirty days there was no change in him regarding any of the symptoms, he cut around the arrow and engineered around it, and he was healed, and the accident did not harm him badly.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and since he was about seven years old, the arrow reached the root of the hip.
I see a woman to whom an arrow was shot in her lower abdomen, and the wound is consolidated within her, and she does not change her natural dispositions in anything, and the woman does not suffer harm in some of her natural operations.
And I see another man to whom an arrow was shot in his face and the wound is consolidated, and the arrowhead remains, not causing much pain, and showing few symptoms of this.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes which was shot in the middle part of his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrowhead was hidden.
And I was called to his treatment after the shooting of the arrow within three days.
And then I found the wound of the arrow very tight; and then I searched for that with a subtle thread, and did not feel it; but when I touched his right ear, he felt pain, and then I suspected that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow.
And I applied a plaster to the place with an emplaster that has attractive and digestive virtues, trusting that the place would reveal to me where the arrowhead was, so that I could cut above it.
And it does not happen in the location of the significant accident that the arrow has reached that place; and you continue with the plaster on it for many days and it does not happen accidentally; and the wound is consolidated meanwhile, and the patient suffers from the extension of it for a space of many days until one day I feel the arrow inside my nose and recognize that I have it.
And then I apply medicine, acute corrosive, on the wound for many days until it is opened, and with the tent I have probed that, and extracted the end of the subtle arrow, which adheres to the wood.
And then I adjust in the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until it appears visibly to me the end of the arrow, and passes to my hands with it for the space of time until four months.
And then since the wound is enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I manipulate that, and do not obey excessively, then I do not cease to subtle and ingenious with various ingenious devices, until one day I hang them from the ceiling with a device of ingenious contraptions, according to the shape of those in the end of the chapter, until I extract it; and then I restore the wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and yet it is restored, and the wound is consolidated, and health is given to the patient through complete healing, and nothing remains in them for any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some sayings for which pauses this rule and significance about what has not been said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended with narration nor do they comprehend it freely.
And the wise artisan compares little to few; and what is present to what is absent; and finds new operation and new instrument for the descent of the strange causes of the art when accidents occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not extracted from the members in which they are fixed except in two ways: either by attraction of the place in which it enters; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is thrown by the place where it enters, or is an arrow proceeding to a fleshy place, and is attracted and extracted.
And if it does not obey the evacuation of the hour in which it is retained, then it is good that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes putrid, and the attraction of it and its egress are alleviated.
And similarly, if the condition is fixed in the bones and does not obey your treatment, then leave that for some days and repeat that with traction and massage each day, and already it has been driven out.
And if it does not obey your treatment for some days, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow on that bone of the entire affected part with a subtle taravel so that the area of the arrow is amplified, and then extract it.
If the arrow is already lodged in the part of the body, and it is lodged in the sentiment, then you inquire about that sensation, and if you feel that, then draw out that arrow with instruments suitable for the attraction of it.
And if you cannot operate on it due to the contraction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are neither bones nor nerves nor veins here, then make an incision on the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it has reached the ears on which it is held, then cut the flesh in which it is embedded with all the skill you can; and operate above that, if you cannot operate on the evacuation of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and twisting of those until it comes out.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it is, then use your hand with twisting and force on all parts until it makes that come out; and proceed with subtle subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and is made subject to your difficult attraction of it and its extraction.
And if you cannot operate on that at your hour, then leave it for several days until the parts that are in the area of it can be cleansed, and then return to that which has been alleviated. But if you find an opposing flow of blood, then administer what we have said about treatment in the previous chapter.
And beware of your skill in cutting veins or nerves, or cords, and administer with caution in every way possible to avoid the removal of the arrow; and do this with ease and tranquility and slowness and firmness, as you have been advised.
And therefore make the arrow contract so that the patient is in a position according to the figure according to which you must remove the arrow from them, for it is more advantageous. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But the arrows that are thrust out by the opposite part of the body, or that already proceed from one part to the outer parts, or that make swelling of the extremity of the arrow due to sensation of the part plus close to the adjacent region and many times that same painful spot; then you will cut above that; and let the incision be according to the quantity in which the forces take hold; and then pull out that, for it is made easier by sensation.
But if it is retained in the bone, then twist the iron according to the opposite direction that the arrow presses into the bone, and insert the tongs, and then extract that.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then insert a tube into where it will be.
And if the wooden part of the arrow is in it, then remove it with water.
More if the wooden part has fallen and you want to administer an injection, then introduce it, if it is narrow, push with a blunt instrument so that it enters the cavity of the arrow shaft and remove it with water.
But if the arrow is hollow, then push it out with a strong instrument entering into it, because the arrow is relieved by it.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then take out all the flesh in which it is, if it is possible for you, and then treat it with water that is suitable.
And if the arrow is lodged in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribcage, and it is near so that you can touch it with your fingers, and it is possible for you to feel it, then feel it carefully and beware of cutting a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then dress the wound if it is necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
Shape of the forces where the arrows are thrust:
Their extremities are like a bird's beak which are made with a saw when they grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And from those are made many special remedies, large, small, and moderate, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and of its poverty, and of the width of the wound, and of the constitution of the patient.
like a branch so that the entrance of it into the arrow's hollow is alleviated and it is implanted with that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins for phlebotomy, of which it is customary to perform phlebotomy, including: the two pulse veins that are near the ears, also known as temples; and two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of the eyes, called aspicientes; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the tip of the nose; and two guide strings that are at the neck; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and two veins that are on the upper lip;  these are the veins that are called algelic ; and there are two veins that are under the tongue. More veins that are called fleubotomadas in the arms are found; one of them is a cephalica, and it comes from the silvestre vein; and the people call it "la vena del cap", which is the middle vein, composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalica; the people name this vein "vena de tot le cors"; the basilica is the vein that is found in the domestic latz, and is named "citillar" by the commoners, who also call it "vena del ventre"; the funis of the arm is placed above the elbow, and appears manifestly above the poutz; there's also the salvatella, which is the vein between the auricular finger and the smallest finger, found in two ramps.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of them is the one that is behind the curve of the knee, coming from the silvestre vein; and the second is the sophena, which is found in the leg near the domestic vein; and there's also the sciatica vein, found in the leg near the silvestre vein; and in the leg there are other similar veins to these.
The junction of the veins that approach the ears is the cause of catarrhs, migraines, and sahaftias, as well as ulcers and wicked ancient afflictions of the head.
And the quality of applying those bandages is according to what you have recommended to me: that the head of the patient should be rubbed, and the head of the patient should be touched at the occipital bone where the two veins are, with a gentle massage; then tie the patient's neck with a bandage so that the ears and the places of their pain appear, and apply them to the two depressed areas of the head; and look for that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of that with your finger, then touch it gently.
Then take the surgical knife, and this is the one that is inserted, and then insert it into the vein in the area where the blood flows to the bone. And then elevate your hand with the vein and the area to the divided parts and cut the vein with an incision in an incising manner. And let the length of the incision be the amount of two fingers adjusted or around that, and let as much blood flow out as you wish.
And then tie with a poultice and bind it so that it heals.
And already in the beginning of the book, the incision of those things and their cauterization have been described.
More of the two arterial veins that are in the temples of youth, due to an old and poorly treated migration, is a disease of frequent and painful eyes and body with acute and flowing superfluities.
And the quality of performing that phlebotomy is as I recommend to you: constrain the patient, sit with their back straight so that the two veins appear at the sentiment for a visible and manifest demonstration, and then you will feel it with your finger.
And then you lift the skin over the vein to the parts of the thumb, and insert the phlebotomy needle, and raise the vein in its place; and cut that one just as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
And then release the constriction of the patient, and place your thumb over the vein for an hour, and then place a poultice on that spot and strengthen it with a strong bandage, and leave it until it is healed.
And already the memory of them has been preceded, and by those, the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the treatment.
Therefore the procedure of phlebotomy from the frontal vein is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient facial ailments and for migraines and painful and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is according to what you have recommended to you; thus it is that the patient stretches out the arm with a bandage on it so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, of which this is the form:
Place the pointed tip of the lancet at the head of the instrument on that vein and strike it with a pin or other device in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you want; and then release the pressure from the patient and hold it tight so that it is healed.
And some veins are opened with phlebotomy on the side, however it is not necessary that the phlebotomy be of the acute extremity like the others, but rather of the broad extremity, and perform the phlebotomy according to the transverse, because the bone is nearby and the ligament is strong in it, where the phlebotomy is subtle.
More specifically, the procedure of the two veins that are like the tear ducts of the eyes for the scabies of the eyes and for pain and pus in the eyes, and for facial ailments.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient should hold the vessel with a bandage, and approach the bloodletter to those, and you stand above the head of them.
And let bloodletting be done according to the crosswise length a little above the bloodletter a little, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the bloodletter is subtle, then the extremity of them is cut.
And let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and stop on that cut, and hold it with a bandage, and then release it.
More, the bloodletting of the vein of the nose is beneficial for acute fever and vehement cough, and for illnesses of the face and migraine and redness that occur on the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the bloodletting of them is that the patient should hold the vessel with the neck and approach your left hand to their nose, and take a subtle lancet and put it in the middle place of the nose according to the straightness, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and so the blood begins to flow at once.
Take care that you touch your hand to the bloodletting little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then tie it with a bandage, because it is restored lightly.
More often the treatment of phlebotomy of the arms leads to a restriction of flow and a commencement of scabies and a manifestation of various maladies and putrid infections and bad corrosive ulcers, like herpes.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient holds each one in their hand with a bandage; and let the artisan be above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
Then perform phlebotomy on the vein with a long, small, and ample needle, little by little; and extract blood in a tempered quantity or according to what is needed, as necessity dictates; and then perform a similar operation on the other vein.
And then release the bandage and hold both veins with a moderate pressure so that the patient is not suffocated, and let them enter their bed where the wound will be healed.
And the treatment of phlebotomy of the Algerian veins alleviates small aposthems and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the region of the anus.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck with a bandage, and then uncover their lips and examine both veins of which one is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of them, and moreover it is because in the region of those there are small black veins; and then you make an incision on each one by making a cut.
Mainly if doubt exists in you, and you do not know which of those is the case, then understand the most serious incision of those, and the most evident of those.
And make a likeness of the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mainly, of the two veins that are below the tongue, the procedure is close to the phlebotomy of the cephalic, for affections that are in the throat, to the sickness of the uvula, and to sicknesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that it follows the sickness between your hands in front of the patient, and raises the patient's tongue, and looks at the back of the tongue, on one side of the vein and on the other side of the vein, and the color of each one is declaring to black.
And then phlebotomize each one; and beware that you do not cut your hand while phlebotomizing those, because below those are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the body are in which it is customary for all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods: either they put on the phlebotomy knife or lancet a subtle thread; or they tie with the phlebotomy knife, and apply it if it cuts neatly, and this is its form:
It is necessary to cut the patient's vein several times, and it is convenient to open the concave full veins that appear gross, and also those that contain thick, turbulent blood.
And this bloodletting is of lesser latitude and of purer subtle extremity, and it is convenient to perform venesection on subtle veins that contain subtle, citrusy blood.
Most especially the youth of the venesection of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins:  it extracts the blood of illnesses that are left in the throat and the neck, and also that which descends to the chest and the abdomen.
And it is convenient for the bloodletter, when performing that venesection, to be careful with that and to be above fear of that, because if he misses and hits the artery during the puncture of the bloodletting, he will wound the artery and cause an outflow of blood, so that it is advisable not to perform that bloodletting with a piercing instrument, but rather with a cutting one, in the manner described.
And if the basilica does not appear through obvious manifestation, then it is advisable that you leave that one and move to another, or seek some other branch of it; or make an incision in place of the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and apply a poultice to that with an incision thus as we have said.
If you want to make an incision on the middle of the arm, then advise against constriction of the arm that touches the place where you join the place of the pulse, and apply a bandage on the thin part; and apply a ligature on the arm and make an incision with a concave section on the vein with a poultice thus as we have said; and beware that the percussion does not affect some space of the place of the artery.
And when you see, with the ligature still in place, inflammation on the spot where you applied the bandage, then that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore evacuate that.
And if you see the blood flowing in the incision like that of a child's urine, and the blood is thin and reddish, then know that it is arterial blood; and then touch and pause your finger on that spot for a long space; and apply pressure with your finger, and if the blood stops, because many times stopped blood is congealed, then tighten the arm and leave that.
Watch over the patient's urine, and be very careful with it and do not let them drink it for several days until they are healed.
If the blood does not stop, and you see that there is no medicine present to treat it, then you should cut the artery if it appears to you; because the limb is constricted and the blood is stopped; or you can use a tight bandage, and make a plaster, and take one cloth and bind it tightly over the area of the vein with strict ligature and with pulvils between the other day.
And then if the blood is stopped, it is good; and if not, then treat that with the treatment of which it has been previously mentioned in regard to the place of the powders that stop the flow of blood.
And stopping the blood from it is difficult in many cases due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of loosening of the arm.
From the black vein, phlebotomy is a procedure that removes blood from the upper part of the head and the right side of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
And warn the one who performs phlebotomy to be careful with it, because there is a nerve; and if they make an error in the puncture of the phlebotomy and hit the nerve, it will cause stupor to them, and it is difficult to heal, and perhaps they will not be completely healed. And this nerve appears many times to sensation; and if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and does not appear, then warn that you should make the phlebotomy with which you cut the vein of the one who has been injured, and avoid the nerve with your skillfulness.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then make an incision in the length of the vein.
The benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and relieves the ailments of the veins.
And consider this specifically, if you want to perform phlebotomy with an olive-shaped lancet or a myrtle-shaped one; because it is the safest of all veins, since it does not harm the artery nor nerve.
Moreover, it is often the case in some men, that when they are not phlebotomized on the primary percussion, there is no harm in that swelling.
The first thing to consider is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in conservation of health and for hope of it and caution of the occurrence of ailments, and that phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins that are in the arm, namely: cephalic, cubital and basilica; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter near digestion, when there appear signs of repletion.
And let a phlebotomy be performed on the third day or at the first hour after three hours have passed from the beginning of the illness.
The more phlebotomy that is administered, the more it provokes convenience and necessity for it, either at night or during the day, at all hours and at all times.
And it is advised that children who are not yet fourteen years old should not be bled, and a pregnant woman should not be bled except from the fourth month to the seventh, and the elderly who have already passed sixty years should not be bled.
And when someone wishes to be bled for any reason, it is advised that they cleanse their intestines before the bleeding with a warm enema or suppository, if there is retained fecal matter, so that the veins do not attract the superfluities during the bleeding of the pure bowels, and that they do not harm the main limbs.
And those who are nauseous, or have a fever, or diarrhea, nor those with illness or inflation until their humor is reduced, nor the disease of dropsy, and more so that bleeding should be avoided in case of colic passion and vomiting, and abdominal pain, and multiplication of coughing and fatigue and exercise of fasting or vigilance and all causes that dissolve virtue, either corporeal or animal.
And then consider in subtlety of humor discharge whether the blood is thick, with food and drinks, and with medicine if it is possible for them to take it.
And then enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or it is excited by some exercise so that the blood is thinned.
And perform the phlebotomy on them in the vein of the arm, at around the third hour, as we have said.
And it is necessary that the arm of that person be protected on that day from all bad animal accidents, as well as anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as effort and excessive sorrow and concern for them.
And in their presence, show the causes for the use of that which is customary among men with aromatics and fragrances and with balms and similar things to them according to the amount of possibility.
And let the one performing the phlebotomy sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
And then extract the blood from the arm, and let the phlebotomy practitioner press with his hand two or three times; and then tie the ligature with a strap and wrap it two times.
And if the narrowing is moderate, because the narrowing when it is not excessive, or the narrowing is with superfluity, then prohibit the flows of blood; or it is with softening, and then also prohibit the body from excessive blood.
Then apply the narrowing, so that one who should be bled, rubs his hands together between them inwardly so that the veins are inflated, and declared to feeling.
And then the one who performs the bloodletting anoints his hand with a little ancient oil properly; and then places his right index finger on the vein, above the place where he wants to perform the bloodletting, so that the vein is a bit swollen, and the percussion is slowed down because of the veins it is the one you touch thus like a cord that flees from the bloodletting, and of those it is full of wind; and when you apply the bloodletter on that one it is contracted from the bloodletter, and the one who performs the bloodletting is discovered; and the bloodletter does not press on the vein, and if it does, then it is narrow.
And thus, for this reason, it is necessary that the one who performs the bloodletting be firm and skilled in all these causes.
And then stop the bloodletting, unless the vein is opened in a good place, if so, it is; and if not, you will make another incision in that area with a small knife or above the hand with a ligature, if the area is not infected.
And if the area is infected, or the patient is spasmodic, then you will leave it alone for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because the strong tension would cause an infected abscess, nor enter into bath.
And then proceed with the bloodletting if it is necessary.
And if the perception is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will flow, then proceed with the bloodletting in that vein according to direction and adjust on the perception a small needle, and make it with a ligature before the area becomes infected, because the area becomes infected in many men due to little perception.
Unless the area has already become infected, then do not proceed with it, because it does not excuse any cause of yours; and stop on that particular part of the olive oil bandage, because it alleviates the body from the blood. And it is better in this place to use olive oil than other oils.
Similarly, administer an ointment of oil in the entire phlebotomy area where the phlebotomies cut the veins of the body, and make a tyriacal paste with sagzenea when it is placed on one of those areas, so that the blood is thinned out and revolves when it is coagulated.
And if in the area of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, because many wounds are caused, and especially to that which has not been bled but rather wounded, or in the area of the small vein, then you should take a sponge, soak it in water and salt, squeeze it out a little, and apply it for an hour, so that it is dissolved.
And cover so that it touches the sentiment of the blood of that vein with the complement of it or of another vein.
And if a black or greenish color remains in the area for some days, do not be concerned; and if you want, apply on that area some cause of aloes or of myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or of chamomile or something similar.
And many wounds and abscesses and swellings of the phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And then stop your hand over that, and if you find softness there, apply compression, for the protrusion is bad and evil; and be careful not to press on any area that might cause what we've said, because the flow from the artery will be strong.
And make a plaster for that which is affected by the condition, so that the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And take out blood from the man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that appears on the blood, as it seems.
For if the blood is black, then you should let it flow out until it becomes red; and similarly if you see it thick, then you should let it flow out until it becomes subtle; and similarly if it is sharp, until the sharpness of it is blunted.
And for the one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in a single occasion, that the phlebotomy of the vein should be amplified and the phlebotomist should be skilled.
And in one who is frail, the opposite of that should be done, and take out blood in multiple occasions, and that the treatment should be strict.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of a vein is that it should be a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from flow of blood and injury to nerves, and it is more gentle and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And to the one who is accustomed to faint during phlebotomy, and it is good that you cure that beforehand with phlebotomy with a little of warm water infused in the way of milky grains or simple oxymel; and extract from the blood in three or four withdrawals.
And if it is a cold condition, then take beforehand the phlebotomy with an infusion of syrup of myrrh or in syrup of honey flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or in flavored syrup with a pleasant smell.
And if fainting occurs during phlebotomy, and it is caused by the issuance of much blood, then it is good to take a drink of warm water and syrup with a subtle pleasant smell; and use aromaticity with some sort of oil, and anoint the chest with that.
And use other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
And he who wants to evacuate his own arm and dissolve his own blood a second time, take from him of which the flebotomy is for motivated evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, that evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
More whoever wants to evacuate his own arm and spill his own blood a second time, and his body is strong, then do this close to the seventh or ninth hour of the first phlebotomy.
But whoever wants to attract the blood of the body against the part where it declines, take that it be evacuated on the second or third day.
But that body in which there is much blood already has been scarred and is sharpened and causes fever to rise, take that it be bled of its blood in one occasion and that a great quantity be taken from the bleeding and the aperture be amplified while the syncope increases, since you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and put your hand on the pulse of the body where the blood is, so that death does not occur in place of syncope, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not attempt when you wish to release the arm and evacuate the second vein, since the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult to extract blood, that you press on it with vehemence and the vein is extended and curvated, for this is too bad.
Having the lancet enter so that it is a secondary bloodletting; or remain with the sharpness of the lancet that coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or apply to it tyrical plaster, or of sage, and compress with gentle compression until the blood comes out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then let it be and do not touch it until the inflammation is seated.
And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the blood again, and it is not an excuse, then bleed that one on that spot or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "cord of the arm" is bled at the place of the cubital or basilic, when they are not blocked or narrowed, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the bloodletting of it is that the patient dips their hand in cold water so that the vein becomes more apparent and the blood vessels become visible.
And then tighten it over that limb with a moderate stricture; and then make an incision according to the transverse section, not along the width nor along the length.
And let the opening be wide and let your incision be such that you make a small one on the joint of the hand.
And if the flow of blood is stopped, then put the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from warming the hand in water, and it is enough to soak the body in warm water during winter.
And the incision of this vein is less dangerous than that of all the other veins, because it has neither a pulsating vein nor nerve.
And the incision on the little vein of the right hand is beneficial for diseases of the liver.
And the quality of this incision is that you should hold the hand with a ligature or with your own hand, after you have soaked it in warm water, until the vein is inflated and is demonstrated to the eye; and then make an incision transversely; and if you cut not too much, nothing will hurt.
And be careful not to touch your hand to the incision site of the flesh, because you should leave the nerves of the dissected parts bare.
And immediately put the hand in cold water and let the blood flow in it, because if you do not put it in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you apply oil and salt on the vein, so that it is not consolidated too quickly; and similarly you should do in every other vein.
More, the youthful benefit of the incision on that of the left hand is that it is suitable for the ailments of the thigh.
And do similarly in the incision of the groin as you have done in the other one.
And the benefit of the saphena vein from the incision is for the ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as those of the mother, and retention of menses, and for the ailments of the kidneys and ulcerations of the thighs and legs, and similar things for the ailments.
And the quality of the incision of it is that the patient should put their foot in cold water and make a friction on which the veins appear; and tie above the joint of the foot with a cord; and the place of the vein I will make apparent by lifting the big toe, and from there it branches out to the surface of the foot, with many roots.
Therefore, we will make an incision in the abundant flesh on the thigh or place a bandage around the ankle to restrict the flow of it, because it is better and healthier.
And if you make an incision on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are located under the surface of the foot, and place your scalpel with which you make the incision across, as if you wanted to cut through.
And let the incision be visible.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse the patient's foot in hot water and let the blood flow into a container until it is evacuated.
And if the one performing the incision errs in the first vein, then cauterize the incision with a little salt, because the area is healthy; and do not fear the harm, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, make a siphon from the vein of the other foot to draw out.
And from the sciatic vein, the area as we have said is behind the ankle towards the hollow of the divided forest/thigh.
And the dressing of the incision on them is with a bandage when it is for cauterized blood.
And the quality of the fleubotomia of the patient is that they enter into a bath, and tighten and strengthen the thigh of the patient from the side of the wide intestine upwards under the heel upwards four fingers with a long subtle bandage, which does not appear except for that.
And then when it appears, the fleubotomia is thus according to each engineer that is possible for you and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise this by incision or cut this by cutting, because the place of the patient is salty.
And it is in dead men a mortified member; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then the fleubotomia takes some branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot near the said auricular and anular.
And beware of the nerves, and make flow from the blood the quantity that you want.
And then release the tension and place above the location of the fleubotomia cut and strengthen the location, because gentle handling is health.
Of flatulence and of the qualities of using those things.
Flatulences are of corns, or of blood, or of bile.
Venozation is performed according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is venozation without scarification.
And this venozation without scarification is according to two methods, either with heat or without heat.
And the venozations that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen locations on the body, among which one where venozations are placed is in the hollow of the head, and it is the last part of the neck; and the middle location is inside the two parts of the throat together; and venozations behind the jawbone are below the mouth; and venozations of the two spines; and venozations of the armpit, which is at the end of the arm; and venozations of the two elbows, which are on the two arms; and venozations of the two legs; and venozations of the two thighs.
And venozation does not extract blood, but rather from the thin veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not retain virtue through them, just as it is done by phlebotomy; nor is it necessary that venozation be performed with heat or without heat in any disease caused by excess, until the body is completely evacuated.
If necessity provokes evacuation due to illness or continuously, administer it every hour at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle place of it and at any time.
And then when in any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command purging to be done since two or three hours have passed.
Purging of the nape is that when it brings gravity to the head and adds to what is poured into the eyes; but it is good that there be an appropriate evacuation of the whole body.
And this swelling is in the place of bloodletting of the head.
And it is not advisable to use on him that which is of cold complexion, or in which there is a cough, because it gives great harm.
And for this reason one should not use that on the old people, and on the heads of whom cold maladies are.
More so to the one on whom it is continuously applied, forgetfulness is caused; and for this reason it is advisable that you order the sweeper to put his hand lightly on the swollen area near the divisions of the joints, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Greater swelling of alkohl is in the place of bloodletting of the dark vein and the basilic vein: and for this reason it is advisable for asthma, and for the constriction of the spleen and the division of the strument of the spleen, and for coughs, and for flatulence.
And it is advisable that the alkohl swelling be wrapped a little, because if it is left untreated, it generates debility in the body and in the stomach.
And the swelling of alhagdahan is good for accidental pains in the head and for ophthalmia, and for migraine, and for forehead pain, and for pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of bloodletting of the basilic vein.
And command the assistant that they do not press their hand with a scalpel so that the artery is not cut and acrid bloody fluxes are not caused.
And the assistant will put a cold compress on the mouth, for corruption of the gum, and for symptoms of illnesses that are in the mouth, and they are in place of a flebotomy of herbs that are in the two lips.
More, the application that is made on the two spatulas of a compress, which is made for replenishment of heat.
And the application of the two parts divided from the focuses of a compress, made from the flebotomy of three veins, which is of the basilic, fusca and cephelic, because it draws blood from all those thin veins that are in the flesh, and those thin veins of the other thick veins so that the attraction comes to the three veins.
And command the assistant that they do not proceed too much with the scalpel, because the area is devoid of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries.
And it is an application on which the application is made to the bones and compresses the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers, also.
And command the ventoser to make a large incision, and let it be of iron, because the place indicated by strong sweating; and strongly let the subtle incisions be made with a scarifier and let it be scarified with a scarification.
Lesser incisions of the smaller legs manifest for lesser reason, because they hold the blood of the whole body, and they increase ancient pains of the kidneys and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and they provoke the menses, and they increase bothor and edema; and they are in the place of phlebotomy of two sophas, and of two caverns, and of two calvings.
Therefore, a motor affects the whole body and causes syncopes in many men.
And of the incisions, the youth is given to the youth from the incisions of both thighs.
And the quality of the position of the incisions is that they stop the incision at the beginning of the vein and they suck with tempered suction, and do not prolong the position of the incisions, but rather lift them gently, and remove them carefully, and that the humors come to the place by gentle arrival. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already reddened, swollen and inflated, and that the rigor of the blood appears.
And then you scarify and extract the pus little by little, and then consider the condition of the body.
For that man who has tender flesh of sparse pores, beware that you scarify him only once and not repeatedly, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the bloodletter to amplify the scarification and penetrate a little deeper, and apply the suction with ease.
And if there is coarseness in the blood, then beware that you scarify twice, because in the first instance the pathway of refinement to the blood and its clarification are opened. More so in the second one to the acquired scrutiny of the extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then let the third scarification be done for the purpose of purging the dregs.
And moderately, when we want to extract a little blood or a small amount, one scarification is enough for us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we will scarify with many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then beware that we scarify with deep scarification.
And the limit of scarification is where the depth of the vein alone is involved.
And if the person whose skin is thick, hard, and dark, and their pores are very tight, it is good that the places of the blisters be treated with soothing, opening, and resolving remedies; if it is in summer, then use oil of almond or oil of violet, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of gum of the coja tree; and if it is in winter, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of sage, and apply these to similar areas.
And if the swelling is thick and cold, then let the oil be of marjoram, or of balsam, or of almond, or of anise, and apply it to similar areas.
More so if the blistering is of open pores with tender flesh, then it is advisable to prohibit oil, and it is good that for these places of blisters a warm or cold water bath be applied, either with saltwater, or with water of coja tree, or with water of borages, and similar things to those.
And for the one whose wound is of moist humidity, wash their blisters with sharp vinegar, or with water of myrtle and sumach, and apply similar things to those.
And from that of which the excesses are gross, wash their ventouses with wine vinegar, or with water of sage, which is majorana, or with decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and to their similarity.
And it is advisable that the ventousation be kept from in front of the bath; also advisable that it be administered just before entering the bath for an hour or two, and advisable that they sleep next to the ventousation.
What is it that should be regulated so that a bloodletting is done before the ventousation.
It is advisable that you consider at the beginning: then if the one who is to be bled or the one who must be bloodletted is bilious and has a hot and inflamed blood, then it is advisable that they take cooling causes, such as milgranas acetosas, and endivia in bitter wine and laytuguas, and secamabin, and julep, and similar things.
And give them to eat dishes such as poultry, and meat of small game birds, and cooked dishes with sour sauces, and similar things.
And from that of which the complexion is cold, it is advisable that they take in drink syrup made with almonds, or syrup of almond seeds, and sumac, and rose water, and odorant spices mixed well between old and new; and that it be commanded to them to use a small amount of drinking and eating, and give them dishes of game birds and hemp seed and sparrows and small game birds and pigeons.
And it is known that on the day of venesection and phlebotomy the patient's urine should be more abundant than their food intake.
And it is known that a drink should be given in some hours to some men tyriac almond, or musk medicine, which is musked, or citrate, before venesection or before phlebotomy or after, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is thinned; and it is not known that they take that scaldfish.
The best venesections that are made by scarification are those that are applied on the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the areas of the joints, and the pit of the arm, because these members do not suffer from scarification on themselves.
And it is not sought for those but attraction of blood from a member, thus as they apply venesection on the breast in illness of blood flow of the nose; and they use that to dissolve cold viscosity of the member, thus as they apply on the belly and the navel; because that rarefies the member and calms it and alleviates the pain when they resolve the venosity.
And it is applied on the joints when there is opacity or pores, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out the opacity and eradicates the pores from their place.
It seems similarly when it is paused over the liver and the middle where bloating is given in those enclosed spaces.
And these bloated areas are administered with suction only; and some swollen areas are administered with heat from a fire.
And some swollen areas are administered with warm water in the illnesses of the abdomen.
And this is because the swelling is filled and becomes larger, it is warm water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been cut for that purpose.
Form of swelling administered with heat: let the width of the orifice be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the poultice be the size of a palm; and let it be on the side of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the size of it, the hole being small according to the quantity that an needle enters into it.
Let it be made of bitter rue or citron, with thick margins, lion, kneaded and turned so that it does not let the member fall from its position on it.
And let there be in the middle of it a transverse rod of rue or of iron, where a candle is placed at the fire.
And this swelling should be greater than the one we have described; and the smallest part of it according to the illnesses and the age of the person who uses it.
And the flatulence of the elderly and thin people is different from the flatulence of the young and those with fat bodies.
And the quality of treating this flatulence with fire on the member is that it extends the stick with fire decently in front of a small candle made of wax, and place that on the middle of the transverse vein in the middle location of the flatulence, so that the fire is kindled around the affected part to prevent the body of the patient from being burned.
And then it is placed on the member of the patient, and the aforementioned is applied on the hole that we have mentioned, until when we have flatulence and do not indicate that it obstructs the aforementioned and that the vapor exits through that hole, then the flatulence will be dissolved.
And apply the stick according to its manner, and repeat it if symptoms of that condition are indicated.
There is also a type of flatulence that is administered in the disease of spleen, with water, in which there is no transverse vein or hole, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the member alone.
And this is its form: And this flatulence, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter 97.
Bloodletting is not administered in many members but in the members in which it is not possible to apply cups, due to their smallness, such as the foot and gum and adjacent areas; or in a member devoid of flesh, such as the said nose and its adjacent areas.
And the quality of using those that you have found to be bloodletting in the arteries of purified and clean blood.
And then let the daytime and nighttime be passed in arterial blood until they are hungry, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then let the body be evacuated at the beginning with flebotomy and with cupping; and then let the member of the patient be rubbed until it becomes red; and then let them be placed upon it.
And when they are filled and fallen.
And if it is possible to suck from the place with a cup, it is more desirable in treatment.
And if not, then wash the place with sour wine and then with hot water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed out.
And if the body of the blood is prolonged due to the removal of the bloodletting, and it is that which flows back, then you put on a cloth dipped in cold water, and place that over it until the flow is stopped.
If the blood is multiplied, then powder the vitriol trissat, or galls and similar things according to the stiptic causes, until the blood is dried; or place the plaster of roasted and ground favas on the area, and let them stay until the favas adhere to the spot, and thus the blood is dried.
And remove, if necessary, the repetition of bloody fluxes, when it is possible to change those.
And if the bloody fluxes are prohibited from suspension, then rub the area with recent blood or stick a needle in the spots until blood comes out; and then let them be placed, for they will sense some blood as soon as it is absorbed.
And when you want them to fall, powder a little ground aloe, or salt, or ash, over those, and apply as needed.
Thus begins the project of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is of many seen necessities in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and of accidental dislocation in the bones.
Or, son, know that they mock this chapter, foolish doctors and the vulgar, and those who for a long time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read from them a single letter.
Because of this cause, it is made that this manner of the scientists in our land is private; and you do not forget it at any time, nor do you abandon what you learn, but rather through lengthy reading of the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, until you extract the science from them.
And then direct experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my experience has passed; for I have abbreviated it for you and others, and freed it from the burden of length; and I have abbreviated it at the end of the abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of the declaration; and I have formed in it many forms of the remedies that are administered to it, as is done by addition of declaration, just as it was done in the two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summary and collections from the fractures of bones, from which a preliminary discussion is necessary, before we begin the reminiscence of fractured members and diverse things of each one. It is fitting that we say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which, at the beginning, the artisans are forbidden and a stop is put on the truth of those; so it is you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art, other than you.
And thus I say that when there occurs a fracture or dislocation or sprain or fall, then it is advisable to begin with phlebotomy or to remove that, or whatever seems appropriate at the same time, if no cause prohibits it, such as debility of virtue, or if it happens to an infant, or to someone in decrepitude, or during a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then be content with a diet of fresh herbs and meat of birds and crab; and forbid gross meats and filling up on foods and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are secure from aposteme caut, and if you do not fear an effusion of material to the member.
Then return the patient to their primary regimen, in which their custom usually runs.
And thus when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is advisable that the patient be fed with nutritious foods of nourishment, soft and light in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from whey, and broth, and cabbage, and peas, and cow stomachs, and marrow, and fresh fish, and similar foods, and with this regimen there is made a coagulation of the fracture and a soothing and mending.
And it is known that the brittle bones, when they are in the old men who are in the first weakness and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the desiccation of the limbs of theirs.
But my emperor's nature adjusts and connects above the broken bone of any part a similar cause to glue in which there is grossness that adheres and strengthens that thing so that it is conglutinated and tied together, until it reaches the end of strength and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, until some cause does not prohibit it from its functions.
And for this reason it is necessary that you apply the dressings to the patient, dressings in which there are gravity and viscosity and grossness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And you should come with the remembrance of the entire species of fracture, explained in the seventh distinct chapter apart.
There is a diverse multitude of fractures in this medicine. And the species of fractures of the bone are diversified in their medicines; for there is made a curved fracture and another that occurs in the stars; and some seen are made a fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagitta and of the astragali and the proceeding and non-proceeding, thus as it is done in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And each species has its own proper engine or torment in restoration of the thing, according to what will come from remembrance of the distinct in the seven places.
Sign of fracture of the bone. And by this is recognized a fracture of the bone: it is crookedness of it, and of that prominence and apparentness to feeling, and so from it when you press on it with your hand.
And then when there is not in the place a visible crookedness nor does it seem so, you should touch with gentle touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is not fracture here.
It is possible that there is a twisted or small fissure, therefore it does not fit that you put your hand on it and compression of all; meanwhile pause over them with the medicine of which you have remembrance, and apply it strictly to the location for subtle tightening.
And you know the location when it is curved and not divided into two or other things that do not happen in the satire, as the whole part of its comparison is re-measured, then it fits that you start from your time to rectify the aforementioned thing that happens to the place with an apostema cautery.
And if it happens to the place an apostema cautery, then let it be for some days until the apostema stops; and apply a poultice according to each manner that you are able to make of lightness and of art.
And you know that the restoration of it and the reduction of it is better than the operation on the bone in which the accident happens.
And then strengthen it according to what will come from its remembrance.
More so if the bone is satiated, then it is necessary to extend this broken member of two parts, whether it's the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and the hand.
And let your position be where you hold the limb in its natural shape, while the extended parts of the member are trembling, then you will perforate to make the additions return to their place and according to each manner that you can put them in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength so that you do not fall on the patient during the operation, nor cause harm; and perforate yourself according to your own power that you apply one bone to another as their best companion according to their natural forms.
And it is convenient that at that time you touch with your hand, and if sometimes here there is a different cause, rectify it and adjust it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, just as foolish doctors do, who cause abscesses or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen happen through the operation of their foolish treatments.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil member is that which you should recommend; because you should know that the constricted members are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And for those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the elbow, it seems that the covering should be of a very thin cloth.
But for those that are large, such as the thigh or the leg, it seems that in them there should be a hard and tight bandage, because the tight binding connects the large member and strengthens it entirely with strict constriction, so that in it no abscess enters.
And then begin, then make your evacuation of balance, apply a suitable poultice to that, on the place of that fracture with three bandages or four according to what the member deserves; and strengthen your hand a little with the bandage.
And then go to the most superior part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen it so that you do not loosen the constriction which you have applied to the place of the fracture. And then lengthen to yourself the bandage of the place of the fracture a little, and loosen the constriction bit by bit, until you take from the place a large part.
And then take another bandage and envelop the other wounded area around the location with a bandage, and apply it to the affected areas of the fracture; and be your operation in the tightening of the bandage and in softening of that one as we have said in the primary bandage above.
And then insert a pad of cotton or cloth between the bandages if there is a curvature of the fracture, so that the irregularity of the fracture is absorbed; and if not, do not put anything on it for any reason.
And then put a pad on the other bandage, and absorb onto these decently made bandages as much as there is no inflammation or cautious abscess in the location, then put it on the thing that causes the abscess or the inflammation; and let it be for several hours; and then strengthen with the bandages.
And let the bandages be of linen cloth of hemp or flax, and be formed wisely; or be of pine wood; or of palm branches; and let the width of each bandage be according to this form and figure:
However, it is fitting that the bandage that is put on that fracture be a bit thicker and wider than the other bandages, and the length of the bandage according to what is suitable for the limb in size and smallness; and then strengthen with the bandages another bandage according to your first tightness; and then loosen it above with a thread decently as we have said regarding tightness, and that should be your tightness according to the location of the fracture itself, and the more it is away from the fracture, the looser the tightness.
And it is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and be made of soft material; and if the threads are too thick, as has been seen in the operation of certain foolish surgeons who use threads of twisted cord, it is a great mistake, when the tension should be equal.
And also very thin threads are not convenient, because you will not achieve with tension what you want, and it is not necessary that between this and that there be more than a finger's width.
And if the patient is treated by applying tension to the extremities of the limbs, then apply it in those places, afterwards place padding made of cotton or flannel so that it does not cause injury.
Certain complicated fractures are with a wound, and accidents occur in the joint, and I will come back to the memory of it in that chapter according to specificity.
And know that every broken limb is not reduced with splints on the first day; the reason for this is that the limb, when it is large, does not require being immobilized by splints unless after some days or weeks or months, according to the security of the appearance of abscess or caution.
And this is the method of the ancient splint-makers by which the Ancients restored them, which were applied to fractures and dislocations and sprains.
The treatment for a plaster cast for a fracture restoration is suitable for complex wounds and especially for women and children, because it is about something on which no heat or cold is applied: and it is that you take powder of mulberry, and it is the marrow of the flour that you should remove from the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
And refine that dough as it is, but rather sift it with a sieve of wool, and pause the preparation of it not rough nor subtle; then use that refined one.
Another treatment for plaster cast restoration of fracture and dislocation and torsion: recipe of asafoetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is extracted from wild mint, all of one dram; of mirra and aloen one dram and a half; of alochil one dram and two scruples; all crushed and sifted and mixed with water or with wool if the preparation of the patient is ulcerated; then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones gently, and comforts many men.
Another treatment for plaster which you prepare for a fracture and torsion: recipe myrrh and half a dram of white altea, one dram and a half; of mirra and of aloen one dram and a half; of acacia one dram and six scruples; of Armenian bol one dram and twenty.
Let all things be crushed in a mortar with a motivated contraction, and be sieved, and be mixed with water or with white of egg and be administered.
Manipulation of plaster to joints and separated bones from their places, and sudden pain happens in those and in cracks and fractures: take a woolen cloth and submerge it in warm oil and vinegar and place it on the area.
More than this plaster is not the virtue of restoration, but rather to cauterize and expel pains properly.
Another manipulation of plaster that restores broken bones: take flour of dried fig and flour of wild poppy; mix everything and make a plaster from it.
Manipulation of quick plaster administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining swelling: take roots of lavender, of chamomile and flowers of violets, flour of peas, and all in equal part; let everything be crushed and mixed with wine, if the member is not scalded.
But if it is scalded, then mix that with water of colic or humid water and apply it to the area.
Another manipulation of plaster more strong in resolution than the first one, when there is a hard swelling for the restoration of the member: take roots of lavender and seeds of lin, and balustia, and melilot, marjoram, flowers of violet, of chamomile, all in equal part; let everything be crushed and mixed with water of sage or warm water or wine, according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
According to the great Hippocrates, do not apply anything on the third member except for restoration of it, unless made from wax and oil, and no other cause; and recommend that it be moderate between coarseness and subtlety.
In Galen's opinion, it is seen that things are applied on the broken member for its restoration and the causes in which there is drying with little heat, as well as myrrh, and other seeds similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manual of plaster that cures lesion and pain: take equally, of wax, of human skin or bear's hair, and of walnut, and salt, divided in equal parts; let them be ground and sieved, and then cooked, and make a plaster.
But the quantity according to which you think that the ligament is broken and then dislocated, is that you consider if there isn't acute pain nor swelling nor the bone is fractured it doesn't move from its place, then you shouldn't dislocate it with forced movements. And if there occurs at the place violent pain or swelling or inflammation, then you should restrain or dislocate it immediately, and apply its plaster.
Take a cloth of linen and a marine sponge humidified with lemon, and submerge it in warm water, and with this wash the area where the discomfort and pain are located to soothe them; and then let the limb rest for an hour; and then apply a poultice made from oil or rose oil on the affected area submerged in vinegar or oil, and leave it on for nine hours until you are certain of reducing the swelling and letting the inflammation of the limb subside, and the pain be alleviated.
And then apply a thin and subtle plaster, not too tight for your primary construction, and subtly adjust it to the area until it is healed.
And if at times the abscess and redness and pain and inflammation and all accidents have been completely alleviated, and you no longer need a plaster or bandage, then apply in this way as you did from the beginning of the treatment.
And if none of the causes we have mentioned affect the limb, then do not remove it, but leave it on for three or four or five or six days; and some times all that is left on for twenty days according to what seems right for the loosening of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the coagulation of flesh forms over it.
Then adjust the bandage more tightly in the upper part than in the lower part, and adjust it to the swelling of the patient's wound, according to how the memory of it is recalled.
If you have already cleaned and reduced the area of the fracture more than is necessary, then be aware that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; and so wrap it with cold water dressing, which has been watched over for three days; and loosen the bandage a little, and through this operation, restore nourishment to the limb, and it heals gently.
But those foolish restorers of the limb's fracture, who when it is not restored at the beginning, as is necessary, and it is restored according to its curvature, make a mistake in their procedure, and are filled with great fear, and if they were to increase the pain of the Ancients in their free writings and confess that they acted wrongly.
And I have not seen any of them do this before, for which it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
Chapter following: On fractures that occur in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are made by a blow to the bone, and the blow strikes all the bone entering the siphac, which is called the bone, thus as it is said in the chest, and because of this the species is named "ascial"; or the blow cuts into one part of the bone, and cuts the flesh of it and does not pass the cut into the back of it; and this species of fracture is named "levatio absoluta".
And the wound of these two fractures is great or small, and the fracture that is confused or bruised; and its cause is a blow with a stone or a fall onto a rock, and similarly to this.
And this fracture is penetrating that approaches the peritoneum which is beside the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures is great or small.
And from fracture that is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason it is named this species hairline fracture.
And it is a fracture that is made by a fall or by a blow of stone and similar things, which causes some layer of the bone to enter into the divided parts, and it is made in the concave place thus as accidents happen to the parcels of the brain when accidents happen due to blows and it is separation of their entrance into the divided parts.
And mostly it happens in the bodies of humid bones, like the heads of knees.
And all these species of fractures are called "suntagia", they are weights such as separated vertebrae. And I will come to the consideration of all this in its place.
We recognize all these species of fracture by detection on those and by inquiry of their pain and by feeling of corrupted flesh that is on them.
The species of hair-like fracture is known by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is scraped off, and cleaned with a thread, because the fracture appears black.
In the cure of fractures consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that they signify by manifest signification on fear, such as vomiting of anger, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and distension of the veins and contraction of those, and similar things to them in the major conditions, it is doubtful if there will be healing.
And if you see non-threatening accidents, then you hope for health, and so you begin the treatment of it.
The cause is that if it has come to you the wounded one at the beginning as it is wounded and this is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study on the feeling of the bone during the fourteenth day according to every condition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you touch the bone on the seventh day, having that which is said the bone is corrupted by the panicle, and that the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
And if the fracture has already penetrated to the pancreatic membrane covering the brain, and it is divided into thin and fragile parts, then it is necessary to sew the divided and fragile part together, according to what you have learned in your recommendations.
And that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover on the bone according to custom and manner as much as possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter for the patient.
And if you need to make an incision on the bone, or a flow of blood or a cauterized abscess, then you oppose yourself to it with what is necessary, and that you fill the place with warm drinks and rose oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess is discharged, and you are secure from flows of blood; and then begin in the circle of the bone and in the removal of it.
And this will be according to one of the two manners of operation.
And one manner is that you cut the bone with a cutter of strict so, and this is the shape of it: Then administer another cutter like this, a bit wider than that; and this is the shape of it:
And then administer the largest cutter, wider than the previous one.
And it is evident that you should be aware of the names of various incisions, some of which are longer than others; and some of these are shorter than others and are located at the end of the extremities, and are made of iron or felt.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incision so that it does not strike the head and injure it.
And if the bone is hard and strong, then it is advisable that you perforate in the circumference of the tooth with instruments which you call non-deep trephines.
And they are not called thus but because those do not touch the term of the bone of the skull to that which is near it, so that the trephine has a round extremity or edge above that which is placed the head of the pointed instrument resembling an edge or a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a large number of these trephines, each of which is suited to the thickness of each bone, while being present in the whole head of the skull, the extremity of which should be pointed, and the length and width should be according to the quantity of thickness of this head.
And this is the form of three species of trephines: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the trephine on the bone and revolve it with the ties until you know that the bone is already penetrated; then return the trephine to another place, and pause there where everything is pierced the quantity of the thickness of the radius or environment.
And then insert the incisors into the incisions that are between each hole of the bone, and make a very subtle pus on it with a touch of levity, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or for another cause due to various instruments which you will prepare for this purpose, like tweezers and subtle forceps.
And take care that you guard with all caution that the incision does not touch any part of the siphacium ( likely referring to a vital area, possibly the diaphragm or another sensitive internal organ).
And thus when you have perforated the bone in a circle, and it is separated from the diaphragm if it is continuous with it, and you extract that part, take care to rasp and smooth it in the roughness of its surface, so that it is like the bone itself with another similar instrument to an incisor, but take care that it is more thin and more subtle than the other incisors.
If a small part of the bone is broken and cracked, then take it with ease as that which is necessary for your instruments; and then heal the wound with linen and apply the ointments that we have mentioned.
And the other manual of operation is lighter, far from fear, which is called Gualia and is praised for its great ease; and this is its sermon: necessary for you at the beginning is to begin to discover the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is most vehement and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part and you have placed your hand on the extremity of this gentle and joyful incision, whose form is this:
And it is that the lenticular part is smooth and does not cut any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides before in length, thus as veins; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the siphac with the face of the acute incision on the bone.
And then strike on the incision of a part with a small hammer until you have cut all the bone with ease, as if it were revolving, and be sure of the pericardium that no accident will occur in the manner that you fear, and even if the doctor was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
When a cause is annexed to the bone of the pancreas in any location of the bone, it will affect that part of the body with the extremity of the incision, and it will facilitate the delivery of that which is obstructed, for it is obstructed by its own nocument and its own pain.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the pancreas, and that which is separated or stopped by the bone is the surface of it, and remains in its roughness and subtle scratches, then take care to scrape off that roughness and eradicate those subtle scratches with subtle scrapers, for which you have prepared the instrument, with various quantities so that you can administer them in any location, the most convenient for them and the most suitable for those according to what you understand from your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
And take care to administer in your scraper the one with which you scrape the bone from the beginning, the widest of those scrapers, and then use progressively the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do this continually until you reach administering the thinnest and most subtle of all.
In each of the other small fractures, capillary fractures and subtle fractures, take care to administer cure according to what you have understood for its correction.
It is a cause that is not diminished on all those who have studied in that art. And it is based on what we have written, which has shown us in great fractures.
And if the dressing is applied when you have extracted the bone, then take a cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and apply it to the orifice of the wound; and take another doubled or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and rose oil and apply it over the first cloth and do this as many times as you can without applying too much pressure on the dressing; and administer a latex dressing on it, and do not constrict it except for the quantity that the wound has, only just so.
And leave that on for the treatment for one day or two until you are sure of a mature abscess; and then remove it and administer medicines to those which have superfluous dryness, such as linseed and flour of vetches, and powder of anise and aristology, and similar things.
And it is that you make from these medicines a powder that is dusted over the wound, as they are dry; and universally, administer on that all medicine of property such that it cleanses and does not bite.
And beware that your skill ensures the plague in your cure is clean; and not in the surdity of ointment nor other; nor do you let virulence aggregate in it; for when it is adjusted on the panicle of the brain, it corrupts that and pours out that, and throws onto the patient a malignant malice.
And it falls on the siphac of the head, as from it is mondified the bone and mainly when the cure of it is hindered, and is blackened on its surface; and then consider that if it falls to the patient the accidents that we have said, you should know that it is perilous to touch.
And if it doesn't fall blackness but from the medicine that is applied beneath, and it's in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and mix those with a cloth, and place that on the siphac; and place the cure with the species of cure that are convenient until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
You should know that the nose is not broken but rather two parts together and above them, or one of those with some visible veins, because there are two bones in it, whereas the part below is cartilaginous, and it's not fractured but rather subject to bruising and twisting and bending.
If one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should introduce the small tool into the nose, and you will bind that fracture with the same tool indicating the location, and with the same tool you will push from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this for your convenience, and be careful that you do not fall during the operation on the patient's suffering.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and the tool does not reach it, then you should cut to the end of the rod on which the enlargement is placed.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the same as for this.
And take care to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then apply the vinegar or the decoction of the healing plant to the rest of the aposteme.
And then insert into the end of the nose a thread of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or two threads, if the fracture is in two parts, and let it be in the thread enough quantity to fill the hole of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers said that the threads should be soaked in borax, and should be applied throughout the day, but it is not seen by me; however, it is necessary that the thread be wrapped in a poultice of honey combined with powdered mallow; and then leave the thread until the bone is fixed and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes insert into the nostrils certain warm compresses, in place of heat, a poultice made from a mixture of wool and lion's skin; and make sure that you have already applied the fracture of the nose strongly and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want to, do it, and if you want to, apply warmth.
And if a severe abscess or boil occurs, plaster the nose with wax or with a mixture of melted wax and rose oil, or with a diaculum.
But if a severe abscess or boil does not occur, then take care to plaster the affected area with flour of euphorbia and powder of crushed almonds mixed with white album of egg; and place a poultice on the stoppage, and do not bind the nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then take care to split apart those, and extract those with instruments that are suitable for those; and place a bandage on the fissure, and cure it with water that nourishes and consolidates, and plaster it with what is conveniently applied.
And if an ulcer occurs inside the nose, then take care to cure it with warmth and administer suppositories of lead until it is completely healed.
Chapter Four.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not a serious wound, consider then if the fracture is only displaced and not broken in two and is curved to the separated parts within, then its union is easier.
And do this, if the fracture is on the right side, you will insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger of the right hand; and press with that the curvature of the fracture within to facilitate the displaced parts coming together, with your other hand on the outside of the bone; and gently move them so that they come together.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary that you apply extension to both parts according to the correct method until it is possible to bring them together.
And if it happens with the displacement of teeth to disruption, then hold those with which you expect to remain firm with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and place a bandage over the fractured jaw, and place a bandage over that one doubled, and place a large sterile cloth decently made, or a single piece of gauze along the length of the jaw; and tie this above according to what seems appropriate for the binding and what is convenient for the application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and stop the food that is harmful to them.
And if you think that the figure is already altered in some manner, then take it and separate it from the third day; and then rectify what has been altered of it and fill it with powder of moly, or album of egg, or flour of cypress, since you will have applied the cerate of it, and place on the plaster a woolen cloth.
And then when the plaster is attached and adjusted on it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it, so that it is not removed until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; for many times observed this fracture is strengthened in three weeks.
And if another observed aposteme occurs, then administer what we have often said in the treatment of it until it is healed, and the aposteme is reduced.
And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider if it is a piece of bone separated or fragmented, then you subtly remove those fragments with what is convenient for the remedy of those disturbances.
And if the edges of the wound are tight, then you enlarge it with a flea-cut according to the quantity of your need.
And then return the injured part to its original state, and if it is not fully restored, place a suitable plaster on that area and attach it so that it adheres until it heals.
Chapter five.
On the restoration of the hernia when it is strained.
When the hernia is ruptured in the division before the navel, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
When it is ruptured, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch the surrounding tissues; and it is easier to restore; or it is such that it touches the surrounding tissues, and it is difficult to restore; or it is such that the fracture is in the wound.
And the operation on it, when the fracture is in the wound, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the adjunct and follows the ruptured hernia, and the other stretches out the skin with that division.
Then shape the fracture with your fingers until its form is made according to what is suitable, and it should not be in a prominent or hollow place.
And if you need more extension, then it is suitable that you place a piece of cloth or linen under the patient's thigh, and its size should be according to the quantity of your need; and stretch and elevate the hernia and tie the cloth with your hand until it shapes the fracture as is suitable.
And if you cannot reach the extremity of the furcula to the divided parts in front, because it has come to the pubic area, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and a cushion be put on the muscle of their thigh, in its middle part.
And the minister presses the muscle of their thigh at the divided parts until the bone of the furcula is elevated that is in the pubic area in its place, and then you correct the fracture and bind it with ties to the thighs.
More often if you feel stagnations of the furcula and they are swollen, then it is necessary that you make an incision over that area and extract those stagnations with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision on it with one of the incision tools that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had previously placed the furcula under the instrument that serves the ciphac; and the instrument is made of wood or iron, of which this is the form:
And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and let its width be according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
Measure the length of it according to what is possible for the operation; that it should have two extremities thus at times, and one extremity should be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have made when you extracted the abscess from the bone is wide, and there is a risk of gathering pus, then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear gathering pus, then fill the wound with dressings and poultices according to the quantity of the split of the wound.
And if there is a gathering of pus, then put on a dressing made with sour wine and rose oil, and apply it to that area.
And you must ensure that the steel is not rubbed against the broken bone; and for this reason, as you visit the patient every day, when the ligament is softened or the steel has been reapplied, then you correct this and strengthen the binding.
And then you stop the patient's sleep by their neck, and place a small cushion under their arm in the night, so that when they are elevated by the assistant on that side, thus the fracture of the shoulder is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or their arm is tied to the neck.
And do not untie the binding unless there is an abscess or apostema in the area, within twelve days.
And then you renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to that effect, and adjust in the constriction and restore it, and let it be until it is restored and the fracture of the shoulder is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and some visits are made at home in less than a month's time of that.
Chapter six.
On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
The flat spatula is broken in the left side and it is not the breakage of it, but rather its edges.
And thus when the place of it is broken  and it is broken in the middle of its place  and not joined except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare it and reduce it according to its natural shape in every manner of art that is at your disposal.
And then apply a poultice of ground album of egg to the place, and stop it with a linen cloth; and apply dust of double-folded cloth; and apply on it a subtle plaster made of table or mortar according to the quantity of the spatula, all or a little more.
But if the plaster is concave in some of the places of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with a linen cloth, and apply the plaster equally.
And then strengthen it with a long bandage from constricted binding and from firmness of the plaster, so that it does not move from its place.
And check the dressing every day; and all visits that it should be softened, remove another visit and strengthen it and adjust the plaster if it has moved from its place.
And let the patient lie on their side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And then when the name is completed, you dissolve the ligament, and you should be assured that the dissolution is not of the bones, but rather of the cartilage, which is not a serious or worrisome condition.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the skin and put a plaster on it, then cut above it, and remove the splinter, and do as we have said in the treatment of the fracture with a hot poultice of emollient, or apply a cautery if it becomes necessary here.
Chapter 7.
On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot, having been broken in the middle part of it, and this causes a deformation; but the extremities of the movement are not deformed, rather they are shaken and dislocated.
And of the accidents of it, when the middle of it is broken, it is that it declines to the inner parts and causes great pain, and difficulty in walking, and coughing, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion under their shoulders; and apply pressure to the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it with the hands of two assistants, and proceed subtly in the operation and in the adjustment according to all manner that is possible and convenient for it, until the shape of the bone returns as it should be.
And then pause on the plaster and stop and pause above the subtle table of sauce or of warm poultice and of its similar things in lightness, since you envelop that in a cloth; and then subtly apply it to the broken bone so it's not dislocated; and go with the bandage according to the condition of the back some dressed wounds, and strengthen that with a strict dressing; and then consider the bandage at all times, and when it is softened, strengthen it.
And if necessity provokes a detachment of that which causes corrosion or rubbing, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then touch and detach that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what occurs with the hand of skill of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster, if at times it adheres to the face; and adjust to it the strictness within which it will be healed.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in coarse locations that are near the back; and of their extremities, from the partition in front, nothing occurs to those contrary but because they are cartilaginous. The recognition of it is not hidden from the sensation that guides the examination of it with the fingers.
And the restoration should be such that it reduces the fracture with the fingers according to the possible method, until it is reduced as it should be, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel, if necessary for that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining into the partitions of the dent, then it happens to the patient vehement pain and puncture, like the puncture that happens to one who has pleurisy, and for this reason the bone puts on inflammation; and it happens difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of bloody mucus; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the medicines are prepared for that with many preparations.
And of it they say: it is good that you give the patient foods that cause inflammation and swelling, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed away from the affected parts.
We would have avoided this for what is not a trivial cause to generate a cold abscess, if it does not happen; and if it already happens, then it already helps with that.
And they said some of them that the ventosa should be given and also that it should suck with strength; and it seems reasonable, but however it is feared that the ventosa will attract the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
They will say some of these: that the place should be covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and powders should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, which should be the binding plaster when you envelop the aforementioned retortion; and the patient should be treated with a cure of pleurisy of food and medicine.
And if the cause creates severe constriction for the patient who cannot breathe, and the bone presses on the vein with a sharp puncture, they should place a bandage over the patient, then they should make an incision on the place, uncovering the broken rib, and place their hand on that instrument which holds the diaphragm in place, the memory of which is preceded, and they should facilitate the bone, and extract that thing.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess forms, then cut it and pour powders in heated rose oil and apply to the place, and the patient should be treated with what is suitable for the internal abscess.
And let him rest on the side where he sleeps, until he is healed.
Chapter nine.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Some wounds imply fracture to the bones of the neck, and similarly injure them, and likewise to the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider this: for if the muscles are already softened and numbed and deadened and cannot be moved or stretched or strengthened, and when you constrict them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, you don't feel pain in them, then you should know that it is not curable, and in such cases it is often fatal.
And if you touch those areas and feel contraction in the fingers and prickling, then you should know that the nut of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see a similar thing in the vertebrae of the neck and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then examine their feet.
Then if you see that they are already softened, it happens to them as it does in the others, and when you put them on their back, there is loss of control and expulsion outside of their will, and some wounds make them be turned over on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is fatal, and therefore do not bother with their treatment.
Maybe if none of those things happen, the cause is better and more legible.
And the treatment of it is that you perform a cauterization on the abscess, placing it on the spine or between the shoulder blades, or in the armpits, for several times a day until the abscess is seated.
Then place one of the comforting and exciting plasters on it, and bind it with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where they feel pain until they are healed.
And if it happens that the bone slips or any cause that has already been separated from it, then cut on the tendon and show that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then heal that with some greasy ointment, until it is healed.
Maybe if the end of the bone is broken, then cut so that you insert the thumb of the left hand in the anus, and adjust the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second adjustment; and then place on it a plaster and bandage, if needed, and bind it.
If you feel shattered shards in it, then make a poultice on that area, and remove that, and cure the wound with the treatment that is preceded by until it is healed.
And if there are fractures in the head, then
Of the restoration of the width or On the restoration of the narrowness/stricture/con
The bones of the narrow parts are fragile and fractured, and if they fracture, then the break is not just a communication in the extremities of those but are cut in the length and decline to the separated parts; and it happens to the patient pain in the area and puncture, and the leg is numb when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that until it is above the fracture, which is the shape/form of it.
And if the fracture is in the extremity of it only, then you bind it according to what appears to you as proper for binding until it is assembled into its natural shape.
Moreover, if the fracture is in the long [bone] or that which already declines to the separated parts, then you make the patient lie on their stomach so that it is prepared for you, the restoration of that fracture. And then when you have bound it, put a plaster on it, and place on that a splint of wood or of leather, and tighten with a bandage over which you do not fear puncture of fracture nor movement of the splint.
Engage the cavity with what fills it so that it takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their side or over the side of the bed.
If the abscess bursts, then cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place on it what will calm it according to what has been previously said; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it in this way as is suitable.
And if it happens in the hollow bones or they are comminuted, then cease the treatments.
Chapter 11.
On the restoration of the fracture of the helper/ assistant (or possibly "of the joint").
The helper/joint is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners, of which one is that you take a wooden splint according to this form:
And let there be two ligaments in the two extremities, and then let it be suspended from an elevated place.
And let the patient sit on a chair; and then put the broken arm outside on the splint so that it reaches to the end of it, in the middle place where the curvature of the splint is attached.
And then suspend the affected limb above the heavy cause, or let the minister extend it to the parts of the hips; and then the doctor should check the fracture with the adjacent hands together, until the fracture returns to its proper place.
And the other method is that the patient should be lifted above the nape of the neck and the hand of the doctor's assistant should be suspended with a bandage; and then command two ministers that one of them should hold what is above the fracture with their hands; and the other should hold the pus from the wound; and each of them should extend to their respective part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then pull with a bandage on the fracture and also on that one with another bandage, and each of the two ministers should extend to both their respective parts.
And thus if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, it is proper that one half of the bandage should be placed on the cilic and the other behind the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, it is proper that the bandage should be placed on that location and also above the elbow.
Wrap that one with ease and effort, and then as soon as it is wrapped as it is proper and applied with good application, then pull it tight if there isn't an abscessed cut.
More often if there is an aposteme abscess, then put a strict bandage around the place for eight days, and apply to it a woolen cloth soaked in warm oil and rosewater so that the abscess bursts, and then you will strengthen that area.
And the method of strengthening that area is to put a plaster on the fracture, and then apply a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that support, and place your hand opened over the shoulder muscle.
And put the cloth and strengthen it around the support of the arm so that the arm is in place of splints, if not prohibited by some cause of the broken bone.
Then use splints.
And put on the fracture that splint which is thickest and strongest of the other splints; and put between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers from the whole part.
And then strengthen around the splints with the bandage that was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your bandage on the place of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture is more elongated, the bandage should be less tight.
And then if you examine the positioning of the stars and the strictness as we have said in the hour in which you restore the member to its natural position, then you do.
If you suspect a post-stroke abscess, then loosen the tight dressing and insert the metal rods into the affected area as we have previously described.
And then consider the ligature in all parts for three days so that there is no accident in the place of swelling or inflammation; or it is forbidden for food to reach the member due to excessive constriction; and thus correct everything according to what we have said.
More so if you are confident that no accident will occur from this, then do not untie the ligature except after three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands be over their stomach.
And apply to the injured area a poultice full of warm wool, and consider every hour of the night or day that the shape of the broken member is not deformed or dissolved, or that the ligature is not loosened, so correct all this according to your skill.
And feed the patient according to the order in which we have previously indicated, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it is fully digested; then increase the quantity of their food.
It is customary for the injury and the bandage of it to be tightened for 40 days; then they should be untied and a bath administered, and treated with ointments that correct that condition.
If the fracture is properly aligned, then you should not remove the dressing and the splints for one or two days.
Chapter 12.
On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearm bones; of which one is small, and it is the one that is called the radius, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed beside the small one, from the part below.
And it happens that only the larger forearm bone is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes they are both broken together.
And when the smaller forearm bone is broken below, then the restoration of it is easier, and the healing of it is also easier.
And when the forearm bone on the left side is broken, the fracture of it is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller forearm bone below, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to restore it, to make a small extension with ease so that it can be straightened.
But if the larger forearm bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to make a more vigorous extension.
And if both ankles are simultaneously sprained, then it is advisable that you apply a more forceful external traction.
And it is advisable that you place the figure of the hand in a way that restores and extends the patient's arm over a cushion, and be the pulse of the hand at the separated parts, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be seated on a low, quilted chair.
And there should be a cushion in front of them at the height or level of their thigh, so that the patient does not have to strain themselves.
Then let the assistant extend the arm of the affected part with their hand, or with a bandage, and another assistant similarly extends the other.
And then the doctor should put the bone back in place so that it is reduced according to the best position that it can.
And if the bone's fracture is displaced, then you should make a perforation to reduce the entire mass in its proper place with your skill.
And if it appears that the displaced part is separated and the ligament is torn and it's not in your power to restore it, then you should put a splint on it and immobilize it according to the method that we have mentioned above.
More often if the fracture is on the thigh, you have already made a special chapter for it, and so take the cure of that.
And if an abscessed cautery happens at the beginning of your restoration, then anoint a cloth made with wax and white ceruse and oil of rose, and be moderate between thickness and subtlety, and apply the cloth strictly so that the abscess is eased; and then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made from powder of ground clay and the clearness of urine, and put on bandages; and let the bandage be the one that is applied on that closed and strengthened fracture.
And you should know that the name of the bandages of the arm is seen in the major preparations, or it is a fracture in one splint or in two splints together.
And apply your bandage strongly on the place of the fracture, firmly and vigorously, and when it is more constricted to the parts above the fracture or to the lower parts of it, loosen the bandage a little softer according as the memory of it is preceded in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not harsh nor rough, and the thread with which it is tied should be moderately of its own proper size between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
Examine the limb and its ligament closely for several days. And if a cause arises that requires correction, such as swelling of the limb, then it is necessary that you immerse the limb in hot water until the swelling subsides.
And leave the limb unconstrained until it rests, and then apply the bandage tightly.
And if the fracture is already loosened and the bone is already realigned and resembles its original shape, then correct all that with your skill.
And consider more so if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess of constriction, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little and leave it for several days until it returns to its normal state, and then strengthen it.
More so, if to the patient no cause of those that we have mentioned happens, then it is not necessary that it be untied for about twenty days or around that.
And then let the hand of the patient be suspended by its own power of agitated movement, and make it sleep on its back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all that depends on the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter thirteen.
On the restoration of fractures of the knee and fingers.
It is known that to the knee and joints of the fingers, fracture often occurs, and it does not happen to them unless rough and violent movements are applied.
And when fracture or injury occurs to the knee, then it is good that the patient keeps their leg straight and their heel aligned with their buttocks, and place their leg extended.
Then let the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor anoint those ends that are to be joined with good conjunction.
And then it is good to apply a plaster and stopper, unless an apostemous ulcer occurs; and place a dressing underneath according to the quantity of the location, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
More so if the fracture is in the inner parts of the palm of the hand, then make a figure of eight with cloth, and command the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; it should be held with a long bandage.
And let the dressing be wrapped in cloth in which there is padding, so that the dressing is applied to the palm; and hold it as is necessary.
If the fracture is in the separated parts of the forearm, then it is necessary to place a splint above and another below the separated part on the palm, so that the hand can be open and straight; and then put a bandage, as if the hand is wrapped with a ligature between the fingers.
And if a fracture occurs to one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be bandaged according to what is necessary and put a splint on the palm if you want, place a small stick straight so that the fracture is elevated and not bent.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle one, or the index, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be bandaged and tied with a string around the finger itself; or all the fingers should be tied together continuously, which is better; or place on that finger a small stick, as we have said for the thumb.
And consider, in your treatment, and then apply that, the disposition of a hot poultice and oppose  in your operation  to what is necessary when any of those causes occur, as it is reiterated in the narration of the case.
Chapter 14.
On the restoration of a fracture of the thigh bone.
The bone of the hip joint is broken and declared by sensation, according to which it is converted into swelling in front and pus above.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is strengthened over the fracture and another bandage placed below the fracture, and the patient lies on their stomach and on their face.
Then the minister extends all the bandage to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
More, if it is attached to the root of the hip, then let the bandage be attached to the groove at the part of the perineum, so that the extension comes in order, and the other bandage below the fracture.
And similarly if the break is near the groin, then let the bandage be made to fit the groin, and let the extension be to the parts below.
And then the doctor should oil the bone with both his hands so that it reduces to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by good joining; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, unless the limb becomes gangrenous. More often if there are gatherings in the abscess, then you should wait for several days until the abscess is evacuated, and then return to your cure.
The stricture of it should be made thus: take a bandage that you wrap around the fracture, and fold it two or three times, and remove its excess; and then wrap the leg up to the ankle and to the root of the thigh.
And insert the end of the bandage between the thigh and the leg near the knee to the divisions of the joints, and let the ends of the bandage protrude from the division above the two parts, and then roll up onto the leg and the thigh what is excessive from the bandage.
And then put a splint on the thigh in the place of that fracture, and put one of them a splint on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the emptiness between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the stricture is consolidated.
And then start with a strong stricture in the middle on the place of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you get used to it at the location of the fracture, your stricture should be lesser and more loose and softer.
And then extend the two extremities of the thigh to the divided parts of the hips until it reaches the hollow of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the legs on the other side so that the ligament is not dislocated from its place.
And then put the structure on that, given that it does not cause corrosion or aposteme (infection) to the member, nor cautery (burns) or emflacio (swelling), and if any of those causes occur, then treat it with dissolution, and rectify what occurs, all properly, as we have said many times before.
More so, if there is a piece of bone in the bone that you can remove, then take it out as you are able; and if not, leave it alone and let it heal, and cure with what is previously mentioned, until the memory of it is healed.
And several times, this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by other things that are adjusted to its legs, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
But in the restoration of it, in such a way made, it does not cause the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, another thing that must be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he limps because of this.
And you know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a few months or a few years, and all this depends on the diversity of the complications and other conditions.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of the fracture of the collarbone of the shoulder.
Know that a fracture of the collarbone of the right shoulder is very painful, and more so if it reaches the nervous membranes beneath.
More so if it reaches the fracture, then it is not just a crack or hole in its divisions, and this can be with a wound or six wounds, and about this all has been stated according to sentiment.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken from its divisions must be united with the words between them, so that it may be joined and conjoined as much as possible by equilibrium and ease and creation.
Then apply a plaster and put it on that round steel, if needed for that condition; and bind it with a bandage to hold it in place conveniently.
And then consider all the conditions that we have recommended for other fractures, just as it is with apostema and similar to those cases in which one must oppose all accidents to what is convenient for it, until it is healed.
Chapter sixteen.
On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large and is named for the leg itself; and the other is delicate, and is named fibula.
And what happens to each of the species of fracture that happens to the two bones of the arm, for this reason restoration is made of it in the same way as restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
And if both bones are fractured at the same time, the leg is turned into many fragments.
And if the thinner bone is fractured, the leg is converted into fragments beforehand.
And if the larger bone is fractured, you will find that then, and it is one of those causes that cannot be amended.
Then administer extension and alignment and ligature of the bones according to that treatment.
But especially beware, if the fracture of the leg is an old and habitual one, that the extension should be less and more gentle, and alleviate your hand.
And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you straighten the bones and complete the entire operation, then you will take splints of wood from which are placed under the causes that were previously mentioned, and they should be made from branches of palm; choose from those the ones to which a small groove is petitioned, and not be of the knuckles, and let their length be according to the length of the leg, from the knee to the larger one.
And then wrap each bandage in two wraps according to the length of it, and place one wrap on the front part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and let the end of the bandage enter into the wound at the bottom location of the foot.
And then tie the two sticks in three places of both extremities and the middle place, for in this structure the leg is prevented from bending to the right and left sides, and it stays in good position.
And already a splint of wood has been administered according to the length of the leg; and let it be placed on it, the leg, so that it conserves that movement.
And moreover, take care that you do this in a fracture, and when one treats the wound properly.
And then consider each day the leg and examine it for previous study, and you guard it from apostema and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those causes happen, then apply to it what is necessary so that it may be healed.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the heel and of the bones of the foot and of the toes.
To the heel does not happen total fracture; but to the bones of the foot happens occasional fracture; and to the toes of the foot happens little fracture, and it doesn't happen to them except bruising in the middle of disposition.
And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and those bones need to be elevated above them, then the patient should place their foot on the ground prepared thus as before.
Then place one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and press those, and squeeze, and bend those until they turn in the places.
Then apply a plaster and stopper above, and place on the belly of the foot a small table to which are two clamps or clips.
And then stretch that on the foot with downward tension, since you have wrapped that on the foot with bandages and other things for which indications are given.
And when three or four days have passed, then undo the binding, for you will find the bones bent, or broken, or displaced, and the operation on them is thus as you would conjoin.
But if some of the said bones are broken, then restore them, and bend them thus as you know and are advised in the restoration of the bones of the hand. And then place on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be bound with a little bandage; and place on the foot this table that is recommended to you, and stretch it with downward tension.
More often if it is broken into two or three pieces, then you will place a quantity of it wrapped in lion's cloth on each digit of the foot, and hold the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand on one of the legs of the table to make the belly of the foot retain it well.
And it is suitable for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which I have told you about in other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and apply this to every accident that suits it.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the knee of the thigh and of the bone of the kneecap and of the rod of the man.
When the knee of the thigh is broken, then make that plaster cast in a seated position, and incline it slightly towards the back of the two, a little, and let it be held from behind.
And let the bandage cover the knee of the thigh, and be made on the knee of that person like a spear; and let the thigh be bent, and raise the two small ones little by little, until all that is forgotten so that it is seen that the knee is thus as before and the broken bone returns.
And then pause to put powders on their back, and when they want to urinate, hold the container with ease and urine, and return it and take back that second according to the manner in which one mixes the medicine at the beginning, and then return to the first powder.
And make them do this for seven days or surround those with, because that is restored.
And if you want, take a piece of wool and thread a hemp thread through the trachea of it a tube; and insert the whole bladder into the fundament, and blow into the tube with virtue so that the bladder is inflated within the fundament, because the fracture returns.
And then it should be filled with liquid and stopped for some days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the penis of man or woman is fractured, then administer in the restoration and reduction of it that liquid which we have recommended for the hip bone.
And that which is written is not hidden in these nearby fractures and which few understand, mainly to whom some study and use and intend my free speech; because that fracture means for you in the major preparations of the way of writing in the restoration and in the strictness of it, and therefore understand well.
More in the wound of the man when it is pierced, take a poultice of water, and put the wound in it; and return your hand over the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and return it be left alone for three days or around them, and it will be healed.
Chapter 19.
On the restoration of fracture of the bones when it is caused by a wound.
It is convenient for the one to whom a fracture due to a wound happens, and especially if the bone is large, such as the bone of the thigh or of the arm, or similar to that, which you consider and make incisions in the same manner as the conditions of surgery require, as we have said before.
And if the wound flows with blood, then it is necessary that you make an incision for retention of it in such a way that you dust over it with powdered dragant, if another cause is not present.
Then begin to restore the fracture on the same day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
But if a hot abscess occurs, then leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day at all, because you will cause bad accidents.
If the broken bone protrudes from the wound, then it is necessary that you reduce and set it with your hands for ease and minimal extension.
If extension is not according to your preparation and the patient's condition, then you reduce it with your hands using a device; this device is made of iron, its length is seven or eight fingers and its width depends on the size of the wound; and for this reason, the doctor needs to take three or four of them depending on the quantity indicated by the treatment of each type of fracture.
And let it be round, and let it be in minimal thickness so that it is not doubled over the compression during the operation.
And let it be with sharp extremities where the edges are smooth; and let its thickness be tending to coarse, and of its width extending into the partitions.
And this is its shape:
It is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means little spade or small chisel.
So that the extremity of the sharp one is elevated above the extremity of the bone that protrudes.
Insert a probe into the opening so that the bone returns, and let it be treated with some ointment.
And therefore make an effort to treat the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the fractured extremity is subtle, and does not take the ointment well, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone so that the ointment has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone to what we have recommended, then insert it with what is convenient for him of the insertions that we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whichever manner is possible for you.
And then scratch what remains in the bone of roughness and of sparse scratches.
And when the bone is reduced, and with the reduction the patient finds vehement pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you conferred with the patient previously.
When the restoration that you do to the bone is completed, then submerge a cloth in white vinegar, and specifically if it is in summer, and do not put anything on the wound such as wax or another cause in which there is oil, so that it does not induce pus and corruption.
And then administer steel in the hour of the complement of the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered so that scar tissue forms from the outer layers and uses bandages according to the quantity of the wound.
And beware with all caution that you do not touch the wound to the fracture, because many times it has been seen that foolish doctors cause death or corrosive illness, except for being sane. And if the bone's structure loosens, becomes soft, different from the structure of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you suspect those accidents worse than which we have mentioned, and you find pain in the area, then do not put steel on it, but rather make a dressing of durable cloths in place of steel and apply it with those.
And when for one or two days the wound begins to suppurate, and pus has formed in it, then remove the cloth that you had put on it with vinegar, and administer warm poultices, using those of our custom, which is to treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacon ointment and similar things.
And it is suitable for you to dress the limb and consider the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it is good that the member be prepared in such a way that pus can run from it to the lower parts with ease.
If the wound does not heal after many days, and it is neither consolidated nor separated from the arm, then you should know that this is a sign of small ulcers that will appear on the skin because the wound has become infected. And of those ulcers, those that are separated will remain and be extracted, those that do not separate from the flesh will cause the member to swell and create pain, you must make an incision in them according to what is possible for you.
And if there appears to the wound pus or ichor, it is a sign of corruption and putrefaction, then you should apply one of those remedies that is suitable for it from the treatment of which the aforementioned narration is preceded in the following chapter.
And in this case, you should place your sermon and present your wisdom: when the bone is fractured, apply it to the member like the bone of the thigh and of the hip and similar to those of the large members, and do not suppose that there will be an attraction of it, nor its extraction, because many times death occurs due to this; having removed the thing that presses, hold firmly for twenty days or thirty; then treat the wound if it is visible to you, and if not, let it be.
Chapter twenty.
On the treatment of swelling that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture.
Excessive movement causes this swelling in the vicinity of a healing fracture, and especially when it is near the joints, and it is worsened by the shape of the limb; and therefore it is prohibited to let the limb perform its natural function.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have a contracting effect, such as aloes, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similar ones; take some or all of these, and mix them with six-year-old wine, or with white alum, or with sour vinegar, and apply this to the swelling in a poultice, and constrict it firmly with a good bandage.
And leave the poultice on for several days without removing it; and then remove it and apply another one, until the swelling has subsided; or spread a layer of lead plaster on it, because lead has the property of reducing all inflammation in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into a stone and is hardened, then it's necessary to provoke an abscess, and then cut it open through the upper part of the limb, and remove the excess and prominent parts, or treat it with some corrosive remedies until it subsides; and cure it until it heals.
Chapter 21.
Of restoration of fracture when it is restored and then the thin member and the bruise are reduced according to its own nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then the thin member and bruise are reduced, this is not done except for several reasons: among which one is the excessive solution of the ligament and the loosening of what was previously bound; or due to an excess of tightness of the ligaments through which nourishment is prohibited from flowing to the member; or due to an excess of superfluous swelling; or a movement that is not at its proper time; or lack of blood in the body of the patient and weakness of it.
And the cure of this is to give food to the patient and to make their heart tender so that blood may be multiplied in them; and administer a bath; and apply warm and soothing treatments on them.
And then apply a plaster on the member, so that the plaster may draw to it much nourishment, or continue a swelling of warm water, until nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and the operation of them is prohibited from what is suitable.
When the member is restored to its proper place after injury or fracture, and swelling and nodulation occur at the broken and bent bone, it is because of this that the shape of the member becomes deformed, but even though the member does not prohibit its natural operation, however it is not suitable that you should heed the words of one who claims that the member will never function normally again after a new fracture.
Many foolish doctors and restorers have done this in our land; and this operation is very shameful, inducing great fear, the signal of which is mortal.
If the stiffness and nodulation are recent, then it is fitting that they be wrapped in warm water in which have been cooked softening herbs, such as leaves of altea and roots of it, and mallow, and similar things; and let a plaster of mollifying plaster be made for it, such as diacalabon well made; or that the mucilage of the root of altea be taken and mixed with gum of walnut or with oil of cypress, and applied to it; or that fat figs be crushed with females of colomb, and similar things of the medicines which are called by name consolidating.
And sometimes it is dissolved by continuous friction with a light touch on the most humid areas, and movement of the member should be administered in all parts at all times.
When the tortuosity has already advanced and is made strong and converted into stone and necessity calls for treatment with iron, then it is necessary that the worst of the abscess be cut out and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and let what is superfluous in the node of that member be cut away with subtle incisions, and facility be administered in that solicited and studied area.
Chapter 23.
On speech about dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some joint from its proper place, by which movement is hindered, and the shape of the member is distorted, and brings to the patient pains and great lesions.
Therefore when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to perforate as soon as possible so that it can be reduced, and do not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the area becomes infected and strong with what is made, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason it is not advisable to touch or stretch during the time of infection, because many times it brings about spasms and painful sores.
When this happens, then it is necessary that you apply the flannel to the patient's body, and let it be left on until the infection subsides; and let the member be wrapped in warm water and oil, and then let it be reduced with ease.
Every member should be treated with that which memory will bring back to its place.
And you have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the upper part of the body to the lower part.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
When both jaws are dislocated and do not articulate; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are returned to their places with little movement, and slightly loosened; or they are completely dislocated and reduced, until they are loosened at the joint, so that the saliva of the patient flows and he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his words.
More often when the dislocation of it is slight, then in major conditions it returns by itself for a slight cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and complicated, then it is necessary that reduction of it be administered promptly, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the minister should hold the head of the patient, and the doctor insert his fingers of one hand in the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient, if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both hands together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of their hands be outside with which they hold; and command the patient to cease moving his jaws and loosen them from each part; and the doctor should take hold of the jaw and pull it until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, especially when both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, until the reduction of both is done easily and the reduction of both is not delayed, thus as we have said.
And then when they are returned and still swollen, and the patient's mouth is closed and not loosened, then place on those swellings a poultice of wax and cerate, and make it with wax and mixed oil; and apply it with ease and soft bindings.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be held between two pillows, so that they do not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to chew anything; having their food nearby, forbid them from eating lion, until when the pains are lessened and the jaws are gnashed, then let them eat what they want.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth until after eating and drinking and digestion, until the jaw is gnashed and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any hour and not converted to their proper place, then give bitter medicines and constant soda, and if the patient's stomach is upset, and they vomit and have pure bile.
And when you see that, then know that it is a loss; and many times death occurs to the one to whom this condition happens in X days.
Chapter 25.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder and of the extremity of the muscle.
The shoulder is not dislocated from the part that is joined to the chest; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and this is declared by sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back with two pillows and extends their arms. And then bind the area with your palm with strong binding, so that it will return to its place.
And then put a plaster on that place and dust it and sprinkle it.
But the extremity of that which is joined to the body and continues with it, is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and put in place according to what we have said and according to what is appropriate.
And then put a plaster on that place, and dust, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to quietness and to rest until they are healed.
And with this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter twenty-six.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in one way, but rather in three manners, of which one is dislocation at the top of the tendon to the top of the joints.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the bottom of the muscle, and this is done with tension; and it is not dislocated at the back parts for the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts because of the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and pushed out at the bottom parts of the tendon, and mostly in those where the flesh is weak, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there are many muscles, it is pushed out with difficulty.
And for this reason some men suffer from percussion or blow, and the muscle of it is affected by a hot cauterization, and it is treated with that which was already dislocated.
Therefore, I advise you to apply this within the limits of your knowledge, and then proceed with caution in the treatment of it.
And the dislocation of it is recognized when it is at the bottom parts of the tendon; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, because you find among them manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the muscle a hollow and at the bottom of the tendon of the head of the muscle like a tube, and the patient cannot move their hand to their ear, nor can they move it for any movement.
If the foot or ankle is dislocated, then you will obviously notice a visible deformation, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, a lighter reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is an infant.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the hand of it to the divided parts; and then places the tied pouices on the thigh of it, and raises the joint with strength in its own place, and the minister raises the hand of it, and extends it in its; and then holds it until it returns lightly.
But if because of what we have said it does not return, and thus the dislocation persists for many days, then it is advisable that the patient be bathed in warm water and administered a softening enema that moistens and loosens, as if one were to cook turnip, and fenugreek, and melillot in water, and have it administered.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and held in place by the thigh of a servant in wait of a ladder that is between looseness and strictness, and then the doctor places his heel on the sphere, and raises the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the hand of the patient so it is not mixed with the divided parts, and another servant holds the head of the patient, so it is not mixed with the divided parts, until it returns to its place.
And if you wish, return that second segment in this manner: make sure a man is present who is taller than the patient, and let him be on the side of that rib, and insert his muscle under the patient's buttocks and lift the patient's buttocks to the divisions above so that the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the divisions below the patient's belly. But if the patient is lightweight, it is good that someone else holds them, so that another cause is suspended, for which is heavy, because the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is returned immediately in another manner: make sure a long stick is placed on the ground, the end of which is rounded in shape, like a pillow, not too big or too small, and place it under the patient; then place them on top of the stick's head, so that the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and extend their hand to the divisions below the other part; and let their body be extended on the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if the reduction of it is difficult by all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: make sure you take a stick whose length is two arms and width is four fingers, and its thickness is adjusted to the size of the thigh according to this shape:
And then place on the head a dressing of warm cloths so that the patient does not get a chill.
And then let the patient's bed be raised, and let the hand or arm be extended over the chest between the ribs, and let the body be wrapped around the hips and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And then let the arm be placed on a ladder according to its width, and the hand be extended between the ribs, and the other limb be suspended from the other side, so that the joint is in a balanced position.
And when the treatment of it is completed according to each manner that is possible for you, then take a sufficient amount of flax seed and wool of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared from powder of mulberry and white of egg on all the muscle, in such a way that it is wrapped around, and then bind the bed tightly with a decent strap; and the ligament be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand of it be tied to the neck of it, and be left so, and not be moved for seven days.
And it is good if the food of the patient is sparse, until the member is comforted, for it is easier for their healing.
And then the food should be given in large quantities and a exercise of movement should be practiced; and so if it is stopped and not softened, it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated with excessive moisture that occurs to it or for another cause, then it is advisable that a cautery with three punctures be administered there, as it is said in the chapter on cauterization.
And if it is done and after seven days the ligament and the joint are not strengthened, and the plaster and the bandage are removed from it with some moisture, and it is not strengthened and can't hold and can't raise that arm to the divisions above, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already injured or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Of the dislocation of that which is done to the foot and the thigh or the back parts, the reduction is made with a push and extension with the hands until it returns.
And let another bandage be administered to it, and cure it until it is healed.
And if there occurs to it the heaviness of healing in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use warm baths with moisture until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its first nature.
Chapter 27
On the treatment of dislocation of the hip.
You should know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and in the same way returns with difficulty; and this one is dislocated in all parts, and mainly in the front part before the back part, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you when you put your hands on the victim or touch according to whatever figure is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip to its place, it is declared manifestly to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch that muscle with the shoulder.
And it is necessary to treat the hip, and reduce the dislocation as much as possible before it comes to a critical point, because if it reaches the critical point, the reduction of it is difficult, and many times it does not heal completely; and mainly when it affects the back parts, because this one is worse than all other types of dislocations, and of major pain, and many times death occurs from it.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that the hand of the patient should be extended to both sides, and their arm should be spread out, and the hands of the doctor should be on the hip and on the back of the patient, and they press the joint with the fingers of their hands together, or with the heel of their palm until it returns to its place.
More often if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus that you double your hand with their hand, while striking the heel with the bottom of their palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer a vehement extension and strong movement.
And it is that two assistants stretch the arm, and hold that joint with two assistants so that it is not moved during the extension.
Then wrap the arm from one end to the other, since it is enveloped in double-wound long cloth over their hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with their hand, anoint that with some oil so that it has those causes which help in lubricity of the joint with ease; and then smear the joint with strong ointment while it returns.
And then the reduction of it being placed on that plaster in which is stipulated and exception with album of egg, and be restrained with strict bandage, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and be left for some days.
And then it will be dissolved; and thus if the joint is formed in its own place, then you undo the bandage of it and leave it.
And if you see the joint is not strengthened, then apply the plaster and bandage, and leave that on for several days until it is reinforced; and then remove it.
But if it happens that the gravity affects him, then with the reduction of the joint and its being in movement, apply humidification in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until he is relieved; or place a poultice on the affected joint, which is called a warm poultice; and then tie it, and leave it on the bone day and night. And then remove that, and put him in a bath; and when he sweats, then rub the joint with tempered friction, and apply on it an ointment, which is called a Ronhon, one time, and the second, and the third. in a warm bath, until he is cleaned.
And if you want, place on that wound of the cow a humid and scratched poultice with butter and strong over it; and do this several times, because it is humid and reduces to its condition.
Chapter 28.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
In the case of a dislocated shoulder, the reduction of the dislocation is easier, and on the contrary, it is more difficult for other joints, but it is essential to have speed in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated, provided that the area is not infected or that an abscess forms.
And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the assistant extends their arm, and the doctor places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it in until it returns to its place.
But it is also necessary to consider if the palm has been dislocated towards the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is in front of the hand, then the position of that hand should be intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand can act on the prominence of the joint.
And so if it returns to its place quickly, that's good; and if not, then force that arm with a plaster cast, putting pressure on the abscess and relieving it; and do not repeat this, because if not, there will be no relief nor power over the reduction of it, since the days pass.
We prepare the joint according to its curvature; and we do not apply any cause to the patient's harm, but rather the hand is softened and cannot hold any cause; then we know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then it is not a problem for them except that it should be strengthened with a cautery near the wound and reinforce their confidence by applying some cause.
Thus when the sickness is returned, then let it rest on the plaster that we have recommended, and let it be loose and strengthened for several days; and then let it be unbound and let it rest and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
We see that the movement of it is stopped and if any heaviness occurs in it, then we apply warm water and friction with some clothing, until it is relieved.
Chapter 29.
On the treatment of displacement of the fingers.
Some bandages are used to dislocate the fingers entirely.
And when a finger is displaced among those at the palm or the belly of the hand, then hold the finger and press the displacement with the thumbs, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that one from the part to which it is displaced, and let it rest for two days.
And then lift that one and stretch the one that should be straightened in that diseased joint.
And when night comes, lay him in that position and do not cease to loosen it in the day and exercise with movement, and lay him at night; and do this for several days until it is straightened.
And do similarly to this, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and lay it in that same place and do the same thing as the first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do the same to this when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Chapter thirty.
On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When there occurs to some of the vertebrae of the back or neck a complicated dislocation, and many vertebrae are displaced from their place, then in that case there is no cure, for death follows the patient.
And the sign of this is that the evacuation of the patient is outside of their will, and they cannot retain it; and many members of theirs are weakened, such as some limbs or two legs or two arms, or one of those; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for many are displaced and many are made to lose control of those in four parts.
Therefore, that one is already improved in the parts behind and is called recovery or health.
More, the cure of it is that then you consider if the recovery happens due to purification, because then in that there is no cure nor is total healing of it.
But in that which comes from accident or percussion or similar to these, the Ancients have already said the manners of cure with prolix speech, from which the most returns to profit; but I have already abbreviated it for the sake of avoiding too much of it, due to its proximity to my intention, to which I have explained and formulated from diverse instruments, with which I will show and expound.
And of those, none are cured except the one that happens on the back properly with what I have recommended.
And it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face on a low bench near a wall, and should be stretched with a soft cloth so that the chest of theirs is not constricted.
And then place a wooden stick on the ground at the end of the bed around the patient's head, and another stick in the air under their feet at the other end of the bed.
One minister holds the stick, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister holds the other according to that method.
And then wrap around the patient's head and tie the first bandage tightly; and stretch the end of the bandage to the stick which is near the patient's head, and tie it on them; and then tie the other bandage around their hips and their thighs; and adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick which is near their feet.
And then each minister stretches the bandage to the part of the stick, and let the two sticks and the bandages in their respective places where they are fixed, but however not tied as we have said.
The doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns to its place, or places on that one table, and then adjusts on the table the patient's feet until they return to their place.
But if it does not return to its place by this method, then take a table whose width or length is in the air about three arms, and hollow out in the part of which we have said is near the patient a place where the end of the table enters. And then put a hand on the patient's back, the doctor puts their feet on the other extremity, and tightens so that the spine is constricted and returns to its place.
And if you want, take the turn which is wound on the hand; and it is that you make on the ground two posts of the patient's feet, with a length of an arm, and two posts at the back of their feet also of the same length; and let there be a space between each post of one palm, and already made in each post a hole through which the turn passes, and each post is firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
And there be a wooden post in which the turn is made, and wound through the two holes of the two posts.
And on the extremity of it there is a hole in which the post is formed, the length of which is a palm where it is wound; and on the two other posts is something similar to that.
And then tighten the ligaments that you have tied on the chest of the patient in the hole which is at the head of it, and the ligaments that you have tied on its thighs in the turn which is at their feet.
And then each turn must have a minister who will turn the turn with their hand, and the doctor will anoint the spine according to what we have said.
And then when the spine is returned to its place, and the area is anointed, then take a plaster made with egg whites, and apply it; and put it on the plaster of the table from which the width should be three fingers or around that, and the length should be the quantity that takes the space of the swelling, and on the part of the spine apply it.
And then let it be tied with a bandage as we have said, and use on the patient a subtle nourishment so that they may be healed.
And if there remains some weakness in the area at the end of the healing, then take medicines that soften and lubricate for administration on the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already administered in that place is a plaster of lead.
And some times it happens that there is an emergency in the back of the spine, and it is thought that it is due to dislocation; and it is that bone for which we have already warned you, so that no absorption should be made with this medicine, because if you do, it will bring about your death.
Chapter twenty-one.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
It is known that the joint of the hip and the junction of the muscle do not just cause dislocation, but rather only the displacement, and does not happen to those what happens to other joints with little movement and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, that is, it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the rear parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and rarely to the front parts or to the rear parts.
And the sign of dislocation to the inner parts is that, when you adjust the leg of the healthy side to the sick one, it is longer and the knee is more prominent than the healthy one, and the sick leg cannot bend upwards without lifting the hip, and this is the place where the hip bone is separated from its joint, because the head of the thigh bone has already come out of its socket.
And the sign of that one to whom dislocation happens to the outer parts is that its symptoms are contrary to this dislocation.
If there is dislocation in the patient's jaw due to an accident, then it expands their own leg according to the injury, but especially does not double the pain that is in the tooth, and if it perforates to the nostril and cannot be retained at the front teeth; and the urine of theirs is retained and their throat is abscessed, and you should ambulate them on the ankle.
If there is dislocation in the patient's jaw at the back teeth, then it does not expand the tooth, nor can it double the front tooth that doubles the throat, and their leg is shorter than the other, and the throat is softened, and the head of the thigh is turned to that place.
Moreover, the reduction of the species of this dislocation is what you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that has already been antiquated with them having that applied treatment, and you administer reduction according to their disposition, then it is not entirely in that cure; and therefore it does not matter that a prognosis be made in that case.
But in that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should reduce it to what will return the joint and extend it to the inner and outer parts, and move it to the right and left, because it strongly returns and does not indicate another cure.
Mays, if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of the patient from the affected part, or with their hands, or with a bandage which is tied over the knee; and another minister extends the hand of that one in such a way that they place their hands under the testicles of the patient; and place a strong bandage over the joint of the thigh, and hold another minister to hold the extremity of the bandage.
And if it is an extension of the patient or of the affected part to the ankle joint, or from the back part to the buttocks area.
And if this extension is of all those things in a way that the patient is elevated with their body off the ground and remains hanging.
And this type of extension is a common species to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary to apply a specific treatment that I will speak of regarding its own cure.
In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the inner parts, it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back; and place bandages over the joint of the thigh in that location which is between the head of the thigh and the place where the ankle is; and then extend the bandage from the part of the ankle to the furthest part of the buttocks.
And then another strong minister takes the patient's arms, and presses the thick part of the thigh where the pain is, extending it to the affected parts with vigorous extension, so that it returns to its proper place.
And this species is of minor cure on which the member is reduced more than the other species.
But if you are excused from this and do not obey the entrance to this species of cure at all, then it is good that both feet of the patient be bound together with a strong, light bandage, above both the ankles and both the toes.
And let the length of each one be four fingers, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by two fingers.
And then the patient is suspended over the head of the stool, and it is in the mud; and let the length from the ground be the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong youth to bend the head of the thigh, and let another youth be suspended with the patient, and the other youth bending the thigh with strength, so that the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in proper reduction, when there is dislocation of the affected part, it is good that the patient put a poultice as we have recommended in the aforementioned gelbozitat; and let the bandage be tightened over the patient's leg properly and over their chest.
And then place two pads, one on the patient's feet and the other on their head; and then place adjusted pads on the middle of the poultice applied with humid cloths wrapped around it, so that the patient is not damaged by the pad being between their thighs, for which you must extend the edges to the divided parts so that they are not attracted.
And then let each assistant extend to their own part, and the doctor with his hand guide the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, it is better that the leg be extended gently, and it is according to this narrative about poultices; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the patient's shoulder, and then cuts with the other hand, and with this cutting places the extended part to the front part at the front of the jaw.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, it is not good that the patient's legs be extended, and it is elevated from the ground; rather it is better that it be placed on a hard surface, just as it is better if their hip is dislocated to the front parts, according to what we have said about placing them on two hips; and it is placed on its face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, there is no error.
And it is advisable that compression be administered on the table over the area where the joint is.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed as it should be  and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, and that is that you extend the patient's two legs, and when you see those limbs and the patient stretches their own leg and expands those six excuses, then you know that the member as it should be is returned  and then you adjust the two hips and apply a plaster cast and stretch with a bandage so that the width is not hindered in any of the divisions; and have the patient rest for three days or four.
Then remove the bandage and the plaster cast, and compare one hip to the other.
Then, if you see those limbs in alignment, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and allow the patient to walk.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that, and stretch it according to your first instruction, and let it be for three days.
Then remove that, and have them delay walking on it for some days, until it is comforted.
Chapter twelve.
On the cure of displacement of the tooth.
The tooth is displaced in three ways, for it is displaced to the front parts, and to the rear parts, and to the upper parts more than to the lower parts; and to the adjacent parts it is not displaced.
And the sign of displacement of it is that you command the patient to apply their leg to the thigh; then you will know that the tooth is displaced.
And the restoration of all its kinds is that you make the patient stand straight, and also that they extend their leg if possible; place their two hands on the face, and hold their foot between the two hands; and then make them press the tooth with their palms, and hold those between the teeth strongly over the tooth, and another assistant makes them extend their foot until the tooth returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction of it is that the leg sticks to the thigh with lightness without effort.
And then apply a plaster and make the leg stick to the thigh, and then tie those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then remove it.
And do not allow the patient to walk for several days, until they are healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer a strong extension with bandages in the cure of the hip as previously mentioned narration.
Chapter thirty-three.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle sometimes is injured by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the injury, and the dislocation of it is made at the inner or outer parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that the ankle is swollen, proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of the sprain of it is of gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with ease, with bandages, and kept still until it returns.
But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to the injury, it is necessary that you make the patient stand upright, and have a strong and able assistant at the back of the patient in the middle location of it.
And then put your right hand on the uppermost part of the foot, and your left hand on the lower part of the foot at the location of the ankle.
And then put the foot on your right hand, and hold it with your left for two supports, and stretch it with your left; and press the sole of the foot against your right leg near the thigh's work.
And make two supports as we have described.
And then press the sole of the foot to the leg for the third support, and you are at the calf.
Then if it returns in one support or in two according to this method, and if you bend the foot backwards, it's good; and if not, then repeat the operation on the other side, for that which returns.
But if the reduction of the limb to what we have recommended is prohibited for you, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stretch a piece of cloth firmly held on the ground, and which goes between their thighs, and you have wrapped around them with a sheet so that it doesn't hurt the patient.
And then one minister holds their thighs, and another minister stretches the foot with their hands or with a bandage that lies on the heel of the foot; and each minister resists against the stretching of their part, and the piece of cloth is stretched between the patient's thighs, retaining it, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the parts above their extension.
And then the doctor should adjust the dislocation with the healthy thighs, and another assistant should hold the sound hip to the patient's sides, so that the dislocation returns to its proper place.
And so when the dislocation returns and the health of the reduction is declared to you, then pause to apply a plaster and strongly tighten that limb with a bandage, and tie the foot to the leg with a bandage.
And beware that you protect yourself from the nerves which are behind the heel, so that the bandage on it is not violent and does not press too strongly.
And then leave it like that for two days or for three; and if the bandage is loosened, tighten it again.
And then undo it on the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient from moving for forty days. But if it is forgotten to put in that space, it is not done securely so that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted on it, and then it does not receive treatment.
And if a hot abscess occurs to it, then beware that you administer in the reduction of it what we previously mentioned, in another place of treatment and of application, until it is reduced.
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
It is advisable that one who is dislocated should be treated with little extension of the limb; and this which is not difficult, is easier.
More often if the dislocation is in some toes of the foot, then it is advisable to make the patient put their foot on the ground or on a table, and let them stand still as if they were walking.
And then put your foot on the ground, and place the patient's foot on what seems to be the lowest point of the joints, and then press with your foot on theirs in a downward motion so that it returns, and you will see that it has been properly realigned and does not appear out of place.
And then place the belly of their foot on a board that encloses the whole foot, which has two ends, and tighten it with a structure that is decent and firm for three days; and then undo it and make them rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and the recovery is assured.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
On the species of dislocation that are made with a wound or with a fracture or with whatever happens at the same time.
When accidents occur due to those things, and you perforate in the treatment of it and in the restoration of them, many witnessed successes follow, but death often occurs.
And for that it is not proper to presume on the treatment of it, except for one who is wise in the art, with long usage, merciful and pitied, slow, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses in the commencement of medicines that cause abscesses to heal solely, and lifts the sickness to divine judgment, but rather to the one for whom you hope for salvation from loss, and from the illness alleviation, and in which appears some hope. And therefore exert yourself so much to make the reduction in the commencement of the cause, provided that an abscess does not come to a head or burst.
And therefore if the member returns as we wish, then administer treatment which will cause the abscess to heal and cure the wound with what is convenient for it from the ointments of dried plasters.
And if it is a dislocation with a fracture and accidents occur in the separated bones, then you perforate their joint, and do to it what we have said about simple illnesses of this type that are treated in the places of those.
And beware and shun the intestine's path according to your ability in the ways of fear as my preaching has preceded you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutations to your body truly those in your time. Thus may the words of Albucasim be perfected by the words which God will bless. Amen is a direct translation, as
