Oh, sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, and by its completion one achieves perfection in it, and through its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I should complete for you with this treatise, which is a part of the practical work with hands, that is surgery.
For the practical work with hands is prostituted in our region and in our time, entirely deprived, to the point that the science of it is in peril, and its practice is stopped; and there remain of it only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which they have mixed with errors and confusion, so that the intentions of it are obscure and its force is elongated and the art.
And it seems to me that I should revive it in the ordering of this treatise, according to the method of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and that it comes to the forms of the preparations of cauterization and of the other instruments of the work, as is necessary for the addition of the declaration, and for its preparation.
But the reason for which no artisan is found skilled with their hands in our time, is that the art of medicine is long and requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes knowledge of the joining of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and it also requires knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their names, and their functions; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and of the places of their emission.
And for this Hippocrates said that a name is a word, more in the small work, and especially in the art of the hand.
We have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy, it is not unlikely that they will fall into error, through which men die, as has been seen with many of them, because some are formed in this science and turn away from it and lose their knowledge and their experience.
For I have seen a foolish and inexperienced doctor having made an incision into a scrofulous apostema on the neck of a woman, and having cut some arteries of the neck, through which a large amount of blood flowed, until the woman fell dead among his hands.
And I saw another doctor who ordered that he would swallow a stone of a man which had been processed in his stomach, and the stone was large, and it came out and passed through with a piece of the bladder, for which that man on the third day died.
And I have already called it foolish to extract that, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I suspected that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was receiving a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he went to a wretched black man who had a fracture in his thigh; and with his ignorance, the doctor extracted the fracture, on the wound, with poultices and bandages of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And return the dislocated according to the desires, and return the relaxed, and return the loose one for all joints and command that we dislocate the ligament; and it is thus entered that the thigh and the foot form an abscess, and it comes to a loss.
And it is called relief for him, and prepared to dislocate the ligament, and obtained is tranquility and thus diminished are his pains.
Greater corruption had already set in the member, because it could not be restrained, and did not cease to spread the corruption in the member until the patient is in danger.
And I saw another doctor who made a cancerous abscess, and it was ulcerated in the same days, until the evil of it was increased by the lord of it to him.
This cause is why the bitter humor is pure melancholy, then it does not matter that it comes to him from iron of all, but rather that it be in a member which suffers that all was hosted.
And for this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with hand be divided into two deviations: one is an operation to which health is associated, and in work to which danger is in the greatest dispositions.
And you have already exited that place in the entire location of this free one in which operation comes with error and fear; for which it is necessary for you to guard this and let go of that, so that the fools do not approach to speak and deceive you.
And then take up your arms with solicitude and protection of God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God to gain health and laudable success, and leave the terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and put away your arms from that which makes you fear, so that it does not decline in your faith and in your name: for many are remaining for your glory, and then established in the world and afterwards to your sanctities.
Wailing has already been spoken in some of his mournful words: Do not treat bad illness poorly, so that bad doctors are not named".
And you have already devoted this book according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter deals with the head between the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the sharpening of the cauteries, and with that which is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second section. The second chapter, concerning dryness and perforation, and of blisters, and of plasters, and of extraction of arrows and of similar things to them, all chaptered and ordered in the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of treatment of fractures and of similar things to them; a chapter ordered from head to feet, and of the forms of instruments.
It is necessary to investigate the quality of the juices of that cauterization and of its occurrences, and in what complication it is prohibited to cauterize.
Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the juice of cauterization and its occurrence is a long and prolix discourse, subtle by science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they are discordant among themselves, and for me it suffices to take a little from their discourses, fearing prolivity.
And therefore I say that cauterization is suitable for every universal complication, whether it be with matter or without matter, except for two complications, which are complications without matter.
In the complicated and dry matter, it is said that a burning sensation occurs; for some said that cautery is helpful in this case, and others said the opposite, that cautery is not convenient for an illness characterized by heat and dryness, since the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inconvenient to treat a hot and dry illness with something that is itself hot and dry, but rather something moist should be used to heal.
And they said that the opposite of that is true, that cautery is beneficial in all hot and dry illnesses that occur in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of a man and its humidity to the complexity of fire, you find the body of a man to be cold.
And I say this from the sermon of that one, who has already experimented with that many times and discovered.
But it is more fitting that what comes next is that which has already been tried and tested in the chapter on cautery through prior exercise, and having understood the diversity of the complexities of men and the disposition of their illnesses, and the causes of those, and the accidents that befall them, and the timing of those.
But in other complications, it is not about your fear, and especially in cold and moist illnesses, for already all the doctors agree on those, and are not in disagreement about the treatment with cautery in those.
And it is known, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery with fire and of its goodness, so much about medical combustion, is that the fire is simple, whose action does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized and does not reach another member of the body except for a small harm.
But the action of medical combustion reaches to that one in the members where it is joined, and strengthens it so much that it comes into the sick member with difficult healing and it also helps it.
But fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not make that except to overflow; And it is already known to us through experiment and length of service of study in the art about the truth of causes; and for this I am excused from the length of the sermon; And if it were not that my free will is not read in this passage to you, hidden secret with fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of its expulsion through which you expel diseases, in a philosophical demonstration, which would be sharp in your thoughts.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to do cautery and consider the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by the accident in time is submerged in the benefit of what the cautery attracts, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and constant, which do not tolerate delay so that it is feared that malice will come, which is worse than a small harm entering through time.
And I also do not cater to your feet, or, sons, this is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that for that illness which is healed by cautery, not all time is needed, and they pause on that consequence.
And the cause is not known thus by them because, since cautery is not but in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries the humidity which are the causes for which the pains come.
But I prefer cautery over medicine due to the will of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that the illness returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and what has come to it through its acquisitions in food and similarities of those causes; unless the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidities, just as a cautery for tooth pain and similarity to that, it is possible that in it the pain does not return, but rather it happens in a small way.
And most vulgar speech is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a third option, not because they understand in it, but because they believe that neither medicine nor any other cause justifies the use of cautery.
And the cause is to the contrary; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not unless when administering the methods of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and then at the end of the treatment, one administers cautery, and it is useful for that purpose. And thus it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and foolish doctors understand.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the excellence of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a difference, as this is not absolutely true, because it has been proven and found that it does not make a difference except in some bodies other than the others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said; however, when you do cautery with fire on gold, it is not up to you to declare, because it burns according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and prepares to receive cold; and if you adjust it over the flame, the gold melts in the fire, and certain layers are formed through which the artisan can work due to the occupation of that.
And for that reason, a cautery iron is made with a fine point and is properly applied with slight pressure to the affected area of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head between the feet, so that I clarify to the inquirer what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization is beneficial for the humidity and cold that affects the servant's accidental condition, of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of sweating and an abundance of rheumatic flux, called corrissa, from the head to the joints and ears, and an abundance of sleep, and of pain in the teeth and throat, and universally of all ailments that come from cold, such as paralysis, swooning, and apoplexy, and similar things in those ailments.
The method of this cauterization is this: first, we command the patient to evacuate with a laxative medicine, cleansing the head for three or four nights, according to what the virtue of the ailment and the age of the patient and their habit require.
And then we command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make that incision between the thighs on a heated bench and place his hands on his chest.
And then stop the flow of your palm near the sole of the foot on the flow of the nose between the ankles. Greater emperor, when the vein that runs through the middle of the place is perforated, touch that place with a probe, and apply the olive-tree cautery to it, which is the form of this treatment.
And then stop that on the location with a gentle touch, in a way that descends, so that the vein is constricted little by little, and you turn it around.
And then lift your hand slightly and examine the location, and if you see any part of the bone being uncovered to some amount of the head, like the amount of a grain of barley, then lift your hand, and if it doesn't return to its place, or if another one does, if it is chilled, until what was said to you is seen by the bone.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the location and apply it for three days.
And then stop it on the cloth dipped in vinegar and apply it to him until the scar of the wound is destroyed. And then heal the location with four-part ointment until it is healthy.
And it is said that as the wound in the arm grows larger, so much better does the arm become, because it is more youthful and improves.
They said that among them, the knee should be cauterized within the bone, and a cautery should be held within it until some part of the bone's marrow is released.
And then remove what has been adjusted to the bone, and then cure it.
They said that others with the cautery should penetrate to the back, until it strongly impresses on the bone so that the bone breaks, and this is the method of minor surgery: And they believe that from that place, vapors of the head are expelled.
And let the open wound be held for a long time, and then let it be cured until it is consolidated.
But to me, these two species of cauteries have not been seen, except in some men according to the way of fear; and I say, it is better for me, healthier is with salt, what it is; because the head is revealed by solution of continuity of the aforementioned, as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
And the first species of cautery is the safest and best, it seems to me; and from that usage and with that work, comes health.
Chapter according to.
Of the cautery of the head.
When in the whole head there is chronic and long-lasting pain and it is prolonged in the patient, and uses treatments with poultices and bandages and medicated plasters and remedies and potions and ointments and gargles and similarities, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that we recount and does not alleviate the suffering of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not fragile and absorbs much cold, then cauterize with another cautery, leaving that one a little. And then cauterize that on the horn of the sick head with a cautery within which the cord is divided. Cut the cord and let it be uncovered by the bone the quantity that we have recounted, and cauterize that with a cautery in the posterior part of the head, in the place which is called "vas" — and this is the place where the windy humour is placed. And raise your hand thus, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient by this will absorb much diverse pain different from the pain of all the other head cauteries.
And I say that this cautery is in its place, because it is known that the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occiput are cauterized is a more subtle cautery than the one with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Head of the bed.
Of cauterization of non-ancient migraines.
When there is pain in the part of the head or it is a stubborn pain within the belly, let it be evacuated with medicines that clean the head, and let another cure be administered, which was mentioned in the chapters on illnesses; and not to prolong it, cauterization is done in two ways: either with sharp medicine that burns, or with iron.
The best cauterization with burning medicine is that you take a cauldron of salt, and pour it out and bind the extremities of the patient on both sides. Then cut the place of the pain in the temple with a sharp needle so that it is in the patient's bad blood, and let the blood be evacuated, until it is hidden.
And then put a bandage on the wound to stop the strong constriction, and leave it there for three hours; and then remove it and wash the wound with salt water, and leave the plaster on for two or three days; and then apply a poultice soaked in vinegar until the place forms a scab.
And then heal it with an ointment until it is healthy.
And if you see that certain medicines burn, which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
More, the cauterization is done with iron following this method:  Ignition for cauterization of which this is the form:
and it is called nail hammer, because the head of it is like the form of a nail in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it is a small prominence.
And put the pause on the place of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery which is underneath is not injured — and turn the small iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it that is injured by the sharpness of the cauterization is as much as the size of it, and raise your hand so that the artery which is underneath is not injured, so that no flow of blood comes.
And put the cloth soaked in salt water and place that on the area, and leave it there for three days; and then put a clean bandage, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you see, cauterize at the extremity of the shoulder blade according to the cauterization, and beware of the incision of the artery in this proper non-ancient migration.
Fourth chapter.
On the cauterization of ancient migraines.
When you treat migraines with what we have said about previous treatments, and what we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes for the illness that is not enough what we have said about the first cauterization or medicine or cauterization by fire, then it is necessary that you apply the cauterized iron where it is whitened, because it signifies on the place of pain along the line of length from which is the greatest pain, or where that is; and place your hand for a guide and hold it firmly while you cut with the iron and penetrate to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard the continuity of the jaw, which is gnawn by chewing, and that the ligament not be torn and the nerve which moves it, and that spasm does not occur.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, because in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially for he who ignores what he does and is not careful and is imprudent; thus he should not begin the operation on him.
And you will come with the memory of the treatment of the flow of bloody flux from the accident of the spleen, according to its proper procedure, in the said place of this free one.
And if you see that this sickness does not suffice with this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle place of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you want, administer the cautery that we have spoken of in the chapter on contraction of the spleen with a cautery having two points, and this is a better cauterization and more effective.
Chapter five.
Of the cauterization of the pains of the ears.
When in the ear there is pain from cold and it is treated with laxative causes and with the other treatment that has been spoken of in the division, and the pain is not alleviated, then apply the cautery, and this is called a point, of which this is the form:
And apply the point to the ignition, and let it be carried around the entire ear as if a wheel is turning, or in the circle of each one of them if the pain is in each one. Along the edge with the cautery of the root of the ear little by little, then you will feel the place with your finger.
And if the cautery of twelve points on the entire ear, and which one, then carefully cure the places within that are sick.
Chapter six.
Of cauterization of the tortoise or about the cauterization of a hardened area, more likely it
Tortoise, which is cured with cauterization, and not just of the species that come from flow or flux, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the species that proceeds from dryness or from spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that species of tortoise with jealousy and bitter envy and stubbornness, and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize the disease with three cauteries: the first one on the root of the ear, and the second a little below the temple, and the third on the junction of the two lips.
And apply the cautery for the opposite of the affected part, because softening is not seen except in the healthy part that appears.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right of the extremity of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the aforementioned thumb, and then place your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the measure of the species of the codena is consumed.
And this is the shape of the cautery, and it is a specialty of the surgeon, the shape of which is described in detail. Maybe an emperor's hand is more subtle, but that one has a little of what is cut from the excess fat on it.
And then heal the area with what is described as a proven remedy to bring about a cure.
Chapter 7.
On the cauterization of old apoplexy.
When old apoplexy is treated and healed with what we have said and it does not respond to your medication and the patient has no fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the nape. And the handling of the cautery is done according to what has been previously stated.
And it is already cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and this is more painful; and then it is healed with what brings about a cure.
Chapter 8.
On the cauterization of oblivion caused by weakness.
It is advisable that the patient be given at the beginning large doses and pills to purge.
And then gently take the patient's head and place it on the block of wood, an plaster described in the treatise on plasters.
And let some heated irons be applied, for that is the method of cautery. And do this according to the order which has already been stated.
And thus if health is restored by this; and if not, then apply three cauteries on the back part of the head, which should be dependent on the upper part of the head and the lower part of the neck. And leave the thickness of a finger between each cautery, and carefully treat the cautery with that which has been previously prepared.
But if you have more experience and the patient is tolerant of this, then apply cautery to the middle place; and if you are more experienced, then cauterize the area above the two horns.
Carefully treat that which is inside until it heals; and let the olive oil cautery be according to the form previously given.
Chapter 9.
Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of the whole body.
As you proceed with the purification of the head with earth and with that which we have said; and take the patient's head, and apply cautery to it in the middle place of the head, and with cautery above all the horns of the head, and with cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the case of softening of the body due to excessive heat and the illness is severe, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and immediately apply the cautery until it is combusted by the cotton cloth of them, and raise your hand. And then cure that until it is healed, and this should be cauterized with olive oil.
Chapter ten.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
It is not the epileptic who is cauterized, but rather the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore we advise that you modify the brain of the patient at the beginning with years and with another cure, which we have mentioned in the division when the illness is great and the exception of medicines is tolerated.
And if it is an infant who does not tolerate medicines, then administer gargling and chewing servants to modify the service, giving this for many days, with improvement of the victuals.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle place of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the occipital bone of them, and on each horn of the head it should be cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize them with those cauteries that have been mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the olive oil be cauterized as it was previously stated.
But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cauterization in this manner.
Chapter 11.
Of the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and gross flaccidity, then cauterize them with those cauteries that we have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is a superfluity that inclines to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give them a drink that purifies their brain according to what has been stated previously in the division.
And rub the head of the patient, and make a poultice decently made from them around the circle, and apply it in the middle place of the head.
And let the patient be seated comfortably, and let them be held firmly on all sides.
And apply a liniment; and it is also worthy to anoint the eyelids with old ointment. Heat that on the fire with tempered heat by measure, which the said sufferer feels most in it. And then put that in the middle place of the head of it in a circle, and release it inside so that it is refreshed.
Make that to the patient for a whole week, with another regimen entering so that it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that making small points according to the size of it, provided you hold the hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
And then apply that to the affected part wrapped in cloth or in poultices of clay.
Chapter twelve.
Of cauterization of water descending into the vein.
When it has been declared the beginning of water in the vein through the signs which you have heard told in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient that which cleanses the head of it, and keep it from all humidity.
And make it sweat in a bath for ten days.
And then command it to shave its head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle place of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of evacuation of water in two veins, or on one side if it is the beginning of evacuation of water in one vein.
Make incisions with a cautery on all the veins and arteries that supply the kidney; and let the cauteries be in that length in the width of the temples.
And beware of flows of blood when it is being cauterized; and if you see flows of blood, stop them with some medicine, which is within your power.
And find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the removal of those and caution with flows of blood.
And in some cases, it is cauterized on the neck where two bones are, with two cauteries applied backwards to produce.
Chapter thirteen.
Of the cauterization of old tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and assiduously and through the veins and arteries which are in the visible place of the head before and it is verified that this is caused by superfluous and cold phlegm, then cauterize it with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle place of the head and with two cauteries on the neck behind the two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck behind the two bones. And if you indicate a need for cauterization, then cauterize that entire area of the skin on the external part of the eyebrow above the eyelid with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
Of the cauterization of foul-smelling nasal discharge.
When you treat that with the method we have mentioned in the division and do not press your treatment, then prepare it and give to drink to the patient the decoctions for three nights; and shave the head of the patient, and cauterize it with a medium cautery or an olive tree cautery. And then cauterize that area with a carnation cautery or two cauteries above the two eyebrows, leaving a small amount of hair.
And beware of the acidity that you do not irritate it.
And this is the form of the carnation cautery.
Chapter 15.
Of the cautery for softening of the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery or this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you do, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries on the entire division, and let them be extended to the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the swelling.
And do not press your hand too much with the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is irritated.
Chapter 16.
Of the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the skin is converted to the inner parts and it affects the entire eye.
When the skin of the eye is converted to the inner parts and it thus affects the entire eye, cautery in those cases is done in two ways, either with iron or with medicinal applications.
If you are going to cauterize it with fire, instruct the patient beforehand that they should lift their skin like those who are cleaning them, until they are stretched and loosened; and if the pain is too much for them to bear, then tie the eyes of the one with a bandage so that they are not moved until the skin is healed.
Therefore when they are healed and loosened, then put the head of the patient on your thigh, and place a needle on the eyelid of their eyes with a thread, marked in the shape of a dead man's finger, and let the beginning of the thread be near the skin.
Then apply a poultice made from the white of an egg or a softening plaster on the ankle.
And apply the cautery in the shape that is suitable for it.
And cauterize on the figure that has been drawn, little by little, in small touches, until the surface of the scab is consumed, which is thus like a dead leaf, entirely and properly fallen off.
Sign of health of the said work is that you see the eyelid of the ankle already being contracted and the skin of it being lifted due to the puncture of the ankle.
And so lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and apply on it a bandage until the wound is healed. And treat that wound with an ointment until it is healed.
But if the skin returns for some reason, then apply again the cautery on that spot just as you did at first.
But if the skin grows on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural place and is evened out so that the skin does not touch the ankle.
Put the cauterized medicine on it, this is what is commanded to the patient, that they lift their skin while it is prolonged and enflamed, and then make a poultice in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
And then take some soap of congealed and living worm, or that which is called, and then mix those things together, and make a paste with festination so that it is not chilled; and then spread that paste on the paper which is made like the shape of a myrtle leaf, and put that on one wound or on both; and put your hands on the wound wrapped in a cloth of wool, and the head of the patient should be elevated.
And put the finger on the medicine and press it a little and not on the bad part so that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for this biting is to them like fire.
And then when he will feel the strong biting, then lift the medicine and put it on the elevated finger; then when the biting ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and then consider if the eyelid is already lifted as if washed by the constriction of fire or incision, for this is a sign; and if it does not return to the place where the medicine was applied and does not deteriorate until it is inflamed, your operation will be successful and the wound will contract.
And then stop on the patient's cot with abiding intent that the cause of the adjustment be eradicated, and treat that which is afflicted with deafening grease or another disease within that needs healing.
And it is necessary for you, that your operation be guarded with diligent vigilance so that the wheel of medicine does not turn awry, and if the eyelid after several days is softened and some cause of the pills falls into the eye, then redirect your medicine to that place where the eyelid is softened, and properly apply what was done at the beginning, and apply an ointment inside so that it be healed.
And this is the form of the mortar of myrrha.
And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to size and smallness, and thus according to that your contraction is made.
And the way of direct treatment will not be hidden from one who has studied in this art.
Chapter 18.
Of cauterization of the fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with the method that we have spoken of in the divisions of diseases and do not confuse your treatment, then it is fitting that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place his head thus on the upper back, and hold the patient's head by some servant between the hands in such a way that it not be moved or agitated with the head.
And then stop putting pus in the wound or in the mucus of the thigh on the heel of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or the quill of a feather, on one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you see, it should penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want it to come out like a tent.
But I prefer that which is burnt is better for the said work.
And then press the fistula if it is opened, and draw out of it blood and dry it. And if it is not opened, then operate on it and extract the purulence from it.
And then put on it the cautery which should be well ignited, and give to the patient a hand with which to hold the cautery near the heel at the back of the nose, so that he does not move his hand or disturb the patient, and then put the cautery in the groove of the heel and cauterize.
And then if at the beginning of applying the cautery you see it enter into the bone, that's good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and let it be like that for three days, and then put on it a dressing with a bandage and wrap it with a drying plaster so that it dries out and becomes healthy.
More days have passed and it is not healed, then pause on the medicine of sharp corrosive until the bone is uncovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in this chapter.
And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula, which the experts first described: put it in the place of the fistula and make a hole in it and put a pause on that fissure with a subtle camel hair brush, which is the shape of it: And put in it the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with a good retention, and do not move the patient so that the melted lead does not penetrate to the depth of that; and cover what you put on the depth of the patient with cotton soaked in white of egg or in water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cauterization and the cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a tube through the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to how it will fit in its proper place.
Chapter 18.
On the cauterization of the fracture of the feet.
Some seen ulcers cause fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of infants.
Therefore when you treat those fissures with the method that we have told in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then apply the small cautery knife according to this form that is taught:
And be the cavity of it according to the subtlety of the skin.
Then put carefully that instrument in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then treat it with wax until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is found an apostema, and then it is broken, and then it is cut, and then a fistula is made, and then you treat it and do not deepen your treatment, then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then put that ignited thing in the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the ignited iron reaches the bottom of it, and afterwards make one or two openings; and then treat it with the method that we have told about treatment until it is healed.
And therefore if the blood is separated and it is healthy, that's good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what is described in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
Of the cauterization of the teeth and the softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are loose, and you cure them with medicines and not with confectures, then place the head of the patient on your thigh, and take the cautery in the shape that will be described later, so that you place the swab on the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery, doing it quickly, and make a small incision so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being penetrated.
And then lift your hand, and immediately apply the cautery to several spots according to what you want.
And then let the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, because the loose tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupted humidity is dried out.
Chapter 21.
Of the cauterization of toothache.
When pain in the tooth is caused by cold or heat, or if there is a wound or swelling, and the cure with medicine is not effective, then cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with a cow's horn or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with a cow's horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in a iron pot, and then take the cord and wrap it around the extremity of the tooth, and then dip the cord into the boiled horn, and apply it to the painful tooth, holding it there until it cools down.
And then repeat this process several times until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, dip a wool or cord in the aforementioned horn's broth, and apply it to the painful tooth, and hold it against a ignited iron until the iron penetrates to the pulp of the tooth.
Greater caution is required with cauterization by fire, that you pay attention to the size of the opening or hole, and it should be in the core of some grossness and the sharpness of the fire does not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cauterizer in the shape that is needed, and apply it to the tooth and hold your hand on it until the cauterizer cools down; and do this several times a day, either the same day or the next day, until the pain is relieved.
And it is proper that the patient should hold the mouth of the cautery in their mouth, good and tight, and hold it for an hour, and then clean it; this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize to the extent that you see as extreme according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
Of the cauterization of tumors or growths, (extrophies or excrescences in general
When tumors are caused by phlegm and cold humors and are not obedient to digestion through medicines and you see the digestion of those is weak, then you ignite the cautery in the form of which is shown here, having two extremities covered so that the smoke from one goes out the other, and place this ignited thing on that apostema for a while, and if it is indicated for that tumor, until it reaches the bottom of the apostema.
And if the apostema is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and leave it for three days and place on it a poultice in good faith until what the fire has burned is re-covered.
And then treat that one with ointments and bandages so that they are healed.
Chapter 23.
Of cauterization of the throat and narrowing of the passage.
When humidity comes upon the channel of the lung, and especially when it is caused by coldness of complexion, then it is known that the patient should be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the vein at the root of the throat in the affected area.
And beware that you do not touch the cautery to the throat nor burn much of its tissue except a little.
And cauterize it with another cautery at the joint of the neck on the posterior spine of it. And his cautery should be done in the same manner as previously described.
And then treat that one with what has been previously mentioned so that they are healed.
Chapter 24.
Of cauterization of lung disease and of cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humidity and the patient has no fever nor wasting and it is an old illness, then cauterize that one with two cauteries on the furcula in the affected areas of the lungs and liver; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cautery be done according to the previous method.
And if you want, then your cautery should be punctured with the instrument called a point, whose form is used in the treatment of ear pain.
And make points into those places; and then heal it with the aforementioned remedy that is previously inserted where it will be cured.
And you should have the cautery having three points, because cautery is done with this: in one session you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Chapter 25.
Of the cautery of the titillic which is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to causes of lubricating humidity and it is not fixed at the time of its return, you must return its dislocation until it becomes accustomed to returning, and then with a small movement it is displaced so that it ends up, as we have testified, then when we first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient is turned over on their back or on their side; and then lift the codena which is in the inner part of the citillic to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated to the inner parts.
And then prepare the cautery having two points; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the channel so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will come with five or six cauteries.
And some adjusted views are suited according to this count and for which there are six cauteries.
And then pause on the cautery and cut it with salt, and make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the member not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is to the separated parts and it is done thus, then cauterize on the muscle with a keyed cautery or with many pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of the cauterization of the stomach.
When there comes in the stomach cold and many humidities so that this extract of its complication is multiplied to it, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not confirm, then it happens that the patient is on their back resupinated, and extend their hands and their thighs, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: with one cautery place on the chest for the quantity of a finger with keyed cautery, and with two cauteries place on the two sides of the cautery, until the figure of triangular cautery comes; and elongate between those that are not adjusted so that they make a poultice.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the tendon.
And let the figure of the cautery be added according to this form, And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle place of the stomach according to this form; and let this be a cautery according to the circular form according to this form:
And let the stomach be cauterized by pricking the one who is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you put stitches on the stomach, according to the quantity that you wish with a needle, and then cauterize that spot with the cautery; and then cure that spot with the cure that is mentioned before, until it is healed.
Chapter 27.
Of the cauterization of the cold fever.
When there is pain in the liver due to cold or humidity or thick ventosity, until it is evacuated by normal complexion and purged by excessive excretion, and the illness is treated with what we have said before, but not with confectons, then it is necessary that the illness be sucked on the liver, and stitches are made with a needle, three cauterizings according to this form and quantity, applied on the liver below the hips, where the decubitus of the man can be seen.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the said part, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
And do not press your hand on the moved cautery.
And if the quantity of water that is administered is equal to the quantity of the mixture of the specimen of the decoction, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already spread their thighs, and raised their arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the specimen of the whole decoction be administered so that it may reach the entire body and penetrate into the intestines, for the decoction here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28.
Of the perforation of an abscess on the liver with a cautery.
When an abscess or swelling appears on the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will suffer gravity and intense pain.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, where the pain is greatly increased and many times the doctors have exhausted the cure for it.
Then it is necessary that the patient be turned over on their back; and secure the place of the abscess with a bandage; and apply the cautery which is assembled in a bundle, the shape of which was described in the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery inside which the entire cord is enclosed, until it reaches the spleen, until it penetrates where the blood flows.
And then treat that one by treatment of the other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not necessary that one use this form of cautery unless the one whose study in the art of medicine has been extended, and in many of which illnesses have been cured; but however I have experimented with some occasions and it is arduous to operate, but however I will write what is necessary for us, and it is enough.
Chapter 29.
Of the cauterization of ulcers.
The ancient doctors said that the roots of aristology were to be cauterized in this manner: to make a root, take a long and dry root from the roots of aristology, one finger's length, which is found and is of the thickness of a thumb.
And then submerge that in oil and bring it to the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at the place where the furcula meets the neck; and also apply two small cauteries guiding them slightly towards the part below the beard, and also apply two cauteries on what declines between the fifth rib and the spleen, declining slightly towards the back parts; and also apply another cautery in the middle of the chest; and also above the stomach, and three cauteries to the back parts; and also a cautery at the place between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on both sides of the chest, leaving the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
And do not think that you will press your hand with the cautery, but rather it should be evident in the operation of the tube in action.
And the ancient doctors said that they used an iron cautery resembling a rod and ignited it, and put it in the place between the ribs, until they reached the aposteme and the sania was forged and ejected, as we have said concerning the aposteme of the liver.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, for what happens most often is that it occurs in the place of the fistula where there is no healing.
Head of the chapter.
On the cauterization of the wound.
When you treat the wound of the illness with what we have said about the cure in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are beneficial, one of which is to make three or four marks according to the length of the wound, according to the shape of the cauteries of the foot, whose figure has been previously described.
And let there be between each cauterization the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cauterization be the same method that we have described for the cauterization of the foot, in this manner.
And do not press your hand on the cauterization; and let the patient be elevated above the two seats.
And there is another method of cauterizing, which is that you ignite the cautery having two virtues, which cause we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the tendon which is in the interior of the wound where the gaze of the patient meets the sinister side.
And let your elevation be with which you raise the tendon according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two instruments, ignite the wick, in that entrance through which the catheter of the other part penetrates.
Then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
And if you see it, cauterize with a cautery having three openings.
And then cure the cautery after it has been left to heal for many days, because it is more confident that the other causes previously mentioned in the cure.
Chapter 31.
Of the cauterization of dropsy.
Cautery is not applied in dropsy but rather on the affected joint itself.
When you cure dropsy with the methods of cure that we have mentioned in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and one cautery on the liver, and one cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the chest, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the cord.
And then place the cautery iron near the opening so that it can be grasped for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment, place the cautery on that which covers so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be fastened with its aid of healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a little nail according to the shape that has been previously described, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its previous description.
Chapter thirty-two.
On the cauterization of the feet and of the thighs.
When the feet are affected by dropsy and are full of watery humor, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in the area that is between the ear-shaped and ankle-shaped parts, and raise your hand with the cautery and do not touch that place; and then raise your hand, and do not return it at all, because the salty water flows out.
The cautery is made in this form: And then make on the two thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh a cautery is made at the end of the knife-shaped cautery. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the knee and another at the middle spot of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
And let the open wound heal for a long time so that some watery discharge comes out of it.
And then treat the case with those remedies which we have mentioned.
Chapter thirty-three.
On the cauterization of abdominal cavities or Of the cauterization of belly matters.
When the abdominal cavity is affected by cold and humidity to the point that it weakens the virtues, which are the digestive and retaining virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated with various methods of treatment and not contradicted, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cauterization of the virtue showing, then cauterize that with a large cauteri on the upper stomach as previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauteri of the circle and with four cauteris around the subtle navel, with subtle clavicle cauteri; and with cauteri on the alcatin or alozis area with a large one, or with two cauteris.
And if sometimes the humidities are excessive and the patient cannot tolerate it, then cauterize that on the pubic area and on the intestines, and firmly apply two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, which is a perfect cure for youth, of which you should not be ignorant.
Chapter 94.
On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When there are old hemorrhoids in the nature or one of gross humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured with what we have said in the division and do not confirm their cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus of the spine of the back, a little and a little triangular, and with a cautery above the navel for two fingers.
And if it appears that the stomach of the patient is weakened and their food is not digested, and their face is often discolored, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the middle of the back with a key-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery for some time open, and carefully treat the inside so that it may be healed.
Chapter 95.
On the cauterization of the thigh near the abscession of the hernia.
When you dissect the thigh, then apply the cautery that is assembled in a row. Then insert the ignited material into the dissected thigh, and place your hand inside so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And make a division or incision, where if the humors are excessive, then cauterize each one of them according to what has been recounted, and treat those with the cauterized area that contribute to their healing until they are cured.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more damaging in youth.
Chapter thirty-six.
Of cauterization of fistulas that are made in the behind, in the parts of the body.
When the anus does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal it with a cautery.
Therefore when someone has a fistula in the anus behind, and it is chronic, corroded blood of it and corrupted humidity, and therefore that which is most worthy to be covered is that which proceeds with a subtle thread, and then determine the quantity of the depth of it with the aforementioned thread.
Then ignite the cautery that resembles an arrow. And then insert the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the thread penetrates.
And repeat with the cautery until those corrupted bodies are cauterized one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your necessity.
Beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if a fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, beware of all those places; and do not perform that unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrable.
And then heal the place where it will be healthy.
And if the place is sealed, and its matters are separated from it, and they remain thus for a long time, then know that it is already entirely cured.
And if the matters are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the press of its corrupted bone, or this comes from those causes which will be remembered in their place.
Chapter 37.
Of the cauterization of the joints.
When in the joints there is pain due to cold or great swelling, and thus the coty of the patient is affected, then it is fitting that you cauterize that which is above the joints with a cauterizing iron on each joint with a cauterizing iron, for which one awaits remembrance.
And strengthen the cauterization with a second small application, for which will come three lined cauterizations, and thus they will serve as more reliable in joining.
Chapter thirty-eight.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When there is a weakness and softening in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that part above the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of nodes on the foot; and cauterize that part with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cautery be shaped like a key according to what is needed.
Chapter thirty-nine.
On the cauterization of the matrix (or uterus).
When cold and humidity come to the matrix, and because of that conception is prohibited, and the menses of it are corrupted, and the flow of them is delayed, and weakness and pain in the womb occur, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the bladder; and with a cautery above the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be shaped like a key.
Chapter 40.
On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When a moist mucous humor is poured into the area of the ankle, and it causes an imbalance in its joint, and the sign of it is that one thigh is prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is found in which way it is bent.
Therefore, you should cauterize the patient on the ankle area with a circular cautery, because you will have noticed that the swelling is within the circle of the ankle joint, and so that the ankle falls in the middle of the circle.
And let the cautery be of the type previously described for use in cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize with three irons and an olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the spiciness of the entire cod, and then take care that what has been cauterized will heal.
Chapter 41.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle area, and it is caused by cold and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said before and it does not work, and that is old, therefore you should treat the patient with gross humors with foul-smelling pills or artificial ones; and then cauterize.
The handling of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either with a medicinal cautery that burns, or with a cautery by fire.
It will be according to two scientific methods, of which one is that it cauterizes the area on the patient's groin with three triangular cauteries in this shape; and do so to a good depth. And let the space that is between each cautery be the amount of the thickness of the finger, and if the olive or grain sized cautery.
More often it is seen that the cautery is on the middle place on the head of the ankle for which there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the circle in which the shape is predetermined for the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, that the circle be continuous and burn the entire thickness of the tendon.
And this is the method of cautery for sciatica when pain is adhering to the ankle and is not extended into the thigh.
More often if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh in the place where you encircle the patient who has the pain; and with one cautery on the hip a little below the vertical part.
And if the cautery is cut, then its depth should be according to the quantity of the spiciness of the cord.
And if the patient complains that the pain has spread to the area near the toes of the feet, then cauterize that spot with a cautery for three points or four or more if indicated by that.
And if the patient complains of pain being on the back of the thigh near the hip, then cauterize that spot with a sharp-pointed cautery.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not touch with the cautery any nerve or large artery, and that by this you do no harm to the patient, either ill occurrence or contraction.
I have already seen and visited another of those who were cauterized on the hip and ended in cauterization, and the leg became swollen until the tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated and corrupted the entire foot. Then there follows a violent purging of the belly, and then comes death.
And if the pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterize each one according to this method.
They say that the wise men in cauterization of any cautery, of which this is the method: make it similar to a circle of iron, of which the circumference is the size of a palm; and let its orifice be according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
And let that circle be another third; and let the space be which is between them the quantity of the knot of the foot; and let those circles be divided into two parts; and let the length of those chains be a knot or two knots, and make in that margin of iron decently apparelled with rings; and this is the form of it:
Then put fire near the focus so that it ignites and sparks, and then place it on the affected part of the ankle, the patient lying on their side. And thus cauterize it with three cauterizers arranged in a row.
And then leave it for three days; then plaster it with a poultice and leave the wound open for many days; and then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says: Oh, sons, of this species of cautery we have made little use because of the fear of the care of it, and because we have found few who take care regarding it.
It is better for the evil to be cauterized where they are suffered, and to apply it to that place.
It is better to cauterize with medicinal adhesives that you make two circles having an armula perforated in which there is a iron hook; the length of the bandage on the nausea of them being two knots or four, those.
And if the space which exists between each of the quantity of the thickness of the said thing; and let them be opened above and below, and let them contain themselves within them according to this form:
And then pause on the part of the ill person's shoulder, and press your hand on the part of the shoulder; and take hot water and put it between two cloths, and let the quality of that be near the small fire little by little, and apply that for the quantity of an hour, and let the patient suffer the biting and adjustment of it — for that biting is like fire — until the biting ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all of the area with cold water.
And then let it be for three days and pause on that treatment until the blackness of the adjusted wound is removed, and let it be for several days, and cleanse its purulence; this is the last in treatment.
And then heal it with an ointment until it is healthy.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a statue for it that contains water according to what is done in the warm bath.
This is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe for alkaline and non-extinguished lime of both parts one, and grind them and pause in a new bowl of which the part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
And pour the bottom of one bowl into another enveloping bowl, and throw upon that alkaline and living lime sweet water which takes those in a finger, and once you compress them with your hand for good compression, and release the hole that separates the sharp water from the part in the enveloping bowl.
And then adjust all that water, and throw it on another living lime and other renewed alkaline, because that then will be of very strong sharpness, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for an operation that generates heat.
And of the medicines some are those with which it is cauterized, like thus tezizic and honey and lime mixed with soap so that they are mixed.
And Gualia recounts from one of the ancients the operation and the cure with which is cured pain of water and of vein sciatica, and magnifies much to be of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and that it is healed by a single glance, just as recommended, because the fort holds the bath and already has said that it will go away from that.
And it is that a certain green herb be taken, and if the green herb is not found, a fresh fig be taken; and the herb be crushed with a few grains and be placed on the ankle where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the leg, and be tied.
And let it be left for a duration of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the adjustment.
And then put him in a bath and when his body is warmed up, apply to the ground, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
And be aware that it's not suitable to use cautery with these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
Moreover, it is said by Escorides that when the vena stretica vein of the goat is cauterized, relief will be brought to him; and let the cautery be applied in this manner: take a woolen thread and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the metatarsal bones.
And then take dry goat's wool and inflate it with fire until it becomes charcoal; and place it on the thread and burn it until it is constricted. And then repeat this, and do not stop doing it until the sensation of the burning reaches the ankle and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called cow's cautery.
Chapter 42.
On the cauterization of toothache.
Some times pain in the back is caused by various reasons, such as a fall or a blow or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, due to the infusion of humid and cold matter.
And cautery is not applied except in this single case, which is made by the infusion of cold matter.
Then apply, with evacuation of the patient, warm pills similar to them, which are placed on the back where the pain is, three lines according to the width of it, and in each line seven or eight cauteries, according to the quantity that is seen of the tolerance of the patient and of their virtue.
And let a cauterization be made with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a key-shaped median cautery in this form:
Chapter 43.
On the cauterization for the beginning of paralysis.
Many times it happens that this illness attacks small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in the children is that they stumble upon their feet, due to lack of elevation and movement.
We are targeting the uppermost vertebrae in the spine and the nodes of the patient that have begun to protrude beyond the other vertebrae.
And so when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that part with a cautery that is circular in shape according to this form: that the cautery takes hold of the entire affected portion of the vertebra, including the adjacent area.
And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines. And let the points made be properly spaced between them.
Then carefully treat the area within which it is healed with what we have just said.
But beware that cautery should not be administered in inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter 44.
Of the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus how gout of cold cause is cured with the hand of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then they are alleviated by cautery.
And it is that you should cauterize the evacuation on the joint of the foot with a heated iron.
And let the olive-shaped cautery be the form of it:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains increase in the teeth or other joints, and this hot iron is applied to it, then cauterize each tooth with three irons or four of all parts with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries are needed so that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize and do not press your hand too much on the cautery beforehand, but only envelop the vicinity of the coding.
And if the pains increase in the tooth and the two, then administer the cautery which we have spoken of in the sixth chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands, and it is called gout, then prick on the circuit of the ankles thus as they turn, prick on those two lines.
And if there remains pain in the fingers, then prick on the circuit of the ankles over each knot and over the joint of the hand.
And if pains push close to the joints or the muscles, then cauterize all of them throughout the entire affected area.
And not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is done and the flux is evacuated with this cautery it will be healthy, God helping.
Chapter 44.
Of the cauterization of fractures.
When there is a fracture in the limbs and intestines are coming out through the wound, and this is what begins to happen nearby, then it is advisable that you order the patient to stop eating for that day and to use soothing remedies so that the wound of their swollen belly may heal.
And then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to hold their arms inside so that the wound is not touched or the flesh or the intestines protrude.
And then return to the aforementioned place and apply a bandage on the rupture of the bone of the pelvis with signs indicating the extremity, which seems like the majority of circles around the divided parts of the body.
And then apply the cautery in the shape of this:
Into that which is moved by red and yellow bile. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not protrude.
And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then apply the cautery on that spot with your hand, holding the cautery straight, and insert that into where you have inserted the bone of the instrument into the middle of the thigh; and try again in another way if you did not succeed in the first attempt to insert the bone.
And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during the time of your cauterization, so that you do not harm the intestine, lest the patient suffer death or some other great evil.
And know that when you have the cautery, if you do not touch the bone, your operation is not effective.
And it is fitting that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure.
And then treat the place of the cautery for three days with a warm poultice until the scar is formed by the heat.
And then treat that one with other ointments until it is healed.
And let the patient sit on their behind for forty days until the place and the wound are sealed.
And take care that you give the patient nourishment according to the length of time of their treatment, which will cleanse the stomach of the patient, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of vomiting.
And then when it is time to get up, after forty days, administer a moderate and decent enema, and keep the patient in bed for another forty days.
And let them be spared from work and from excess of food and drink, and from violent vomiting, for when one uses this regimen of complete healing they will be healed.
And I will tell you about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the stomach, and so on, and do not hesitate, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot cautery according to its quantity, and let that be extracted from the body as the third part of it; and then treat that one with what we have said before, and it will be adjusted.
And I have already said to some first that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this form, because it is touched with a probe:
And it is customary to make a line where the pain is located in the width of the area above the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a key-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is better and more gentle.
Chapter 46.
On the cauterization of the torso.
When pain occurs in some members due to a blow or a violent impact and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medicines, then it is advisable to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the size of the cautery should be for each member according to its greatness and smallness, and its strength and weakness, and location of the torso and pain of it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; and if not, then apply another one to it; for it is customary with these pains that they be punctured in the member near to the one where the pain is, so that it is necessary to repeat the cauteries until the patient is healed.
Chapter 47.
On the cauterization of leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes treated with a cautery for great benefit, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And so if you want to cauterize that person, consider if the leprosy is contagious and if it has been treated with what we have said in the division and not denied, nor this, and fear for the patient that the corruption will comprehend the entire body of theirs and the entire complexity of it, then cauterize that person on the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another at the back of theirs, placing the front to the end of the hair; and two on the horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And finally, put your hand on the cautery a little inside so that it presses on the bone a small impression, and from there will be displaced the organs, so that the exhalation of gross vapors is alleviated for them; and cauterize on the middle as it is prescribed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize that person with those cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and with a cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on the two maxillaries, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on the hips, and one on each hip, and two on the knees and one on each knee, and two on the elbows, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the sixth rib; and cauterize that person on all the joints of the limbs and feet, and on each heel of their feet, and on the soles of their feet.
Watch out for the nerves that are on the sole of the foot so that you don't damage them.
And some times it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the knee and with another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more they are helpful and effective; and know that the patient does not have pain from the cautery, unlike their usual state, because the body of the patient is already numb.
And it is fitting that the cauteries are large or small according to the limbs and the joints, as it is predetermined by the species of the iron instruments.
And then treat the cautery with flour of dried roses mixed with honey and with another cure, so that it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of the cauterization of numbness.
When a limb is numb or fallen asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let the cautery enter the depth of the skin a little. And then treat that wound with an ointment that will heal it.
And some times the area is cauterized where there is numbness which extends to the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back and it affects the nervous system which damages that member, and the numbness is alleviated.
But do not press on that except for one who is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the pathway of the nerves throughout the whole moving body.
Chapter 49.
On the cauterization of ulcers that cause mortification.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to the remedies of medicine, then you cauterize it with a cautery iron taking a little according to the quantity of the specificity of the code that is inside, until the whiteness and the color of it are restored, and its color is changed.
And then treat that wound with flour of oats and of lentils mixed with rose oil and with leaves of arnagrossa, and with blood of pigeon or blood of dove, each one a portion and all mixed together, and then wrap it in a cloth and place it on the area until it is healed.
Chapter 50.
Of cauterization of cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you want to treat it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around the circumference of the affected area as it is turned.
And I say that the wise ones should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; but to me it is not seen as such, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this several times.
And it is better to cauterize around the circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with many small cauteries.
Chapter 51.
Of the cauterization of hemorrhoids.
When some hemorrhoids are delayed in maturation, and this is due to the excess of feces that cause it, or because of the patient's age, for they are old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the hemorrhoids; then cauterize around the circumference with many small cauteries making small punctures; and immediately apply a poultice so that it will accelerate the maturation.
But if you want to make a perforation with the cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape: and apply it to the middle place of the hemorrhoid until it penetrates the skin.
And if the cautery is applied in that place where it is put, so that the body of the arm is alleviated; then carefully treat that inner part which needs to be healed.
Chapter sign or symbol, possibly indicating a new section or heading
Of cauterization of corrosives.
Corrosive is a creeping corruption in the member, which corrodes that part like fire consuming dry wood.
Therefore if you see that corrosive in a place where the cautery suffers with fire, then you will ignite cauteries of hot irons, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion is.
And then cauterize that entire inner part from which the corrosion radiates, and do not leave any cause of it.
And then let it be for three days, and apply on the cauterized places a dressing with oil mixed so that the scars are all eradicated and all corruption.
And then treat it with an ointment that generates flesh.
But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is born in which there is no corruption, that's good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains rotten in the corrupted places.
They corrode with certain sharp medications of harsh medicine, for that one is a substitute in place of cautery. It's better to apply cautery to the area of pus, to clean it gently.
And already said is the treatment of it with harsh medicine in division, and therefore take that which of it is necessary.
Chapter three.
Of the cautery of the claws and of the other similar things.
Moorings or calluses that grow on the divisions of the foot of a sick person which are called claws, and it is a thick, penetrating cause, which afflicts the foot; and cautery for these is done in two ways, that is, cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
Better is the cautery with fire, that you should make the cautery iron similar to a pen of vulture, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that the claw occupies, and it should have subtle edges.
And then apply the ignited instrument on the claw, and then rotate your hand with the cautery in the circumference of the claw until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the claw. And let it be for three days before it starts to form a scab. And then apply a plaster made from ground malt and salt to the wound, and leave the plaster on for nine nights, so that it will eradicate the roots of the disease.
And then heal the area with an ointment made from generated flesh, until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and warts appear on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, then take a cautery iron and dip it in water, and it is that you take a needle of iron or of stone or of pumice stone, and place it on the clamp; and then put a small amount of hot water in the needle, and hold your hand, and you stir the water with compression of your hand, and be pressing the edge of the needle into the root of the clamp, and introduce the hot water via the pressure of the root of the clamp; and let the patient wait a little for the burning sensation of the hot water for one hour, and then remove it, so that the clamp with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do the same to the others as well, until you come to those that have grown on all parts of their body.
And then heal those wounds where the roots of the warts have been eradicated with an ointment that generates flesh.
Chapter Four.
On the cauterization of trembling.
When you see that someone has a tremor due to cold in the nerves or due to a fever of a similar cause, then it is advisable that you cauterize that person with four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, between each vertebra a cauteri; and a cauteri on their chest, and another on their stomach.
And his trembling will be alleviated and the health of the cold disease will be strengthened.
Chapter Five.
On the cauterization of accidental wounds to the body.
When in the body there are spotty wounds and there are painful sores which are made of gross corrupt matter; then it is advisable at the beginning of the treatment, that it be cauterized on every head of the fistula with a subtle cauteri, or with a rod of myrrh, whose extremity is extended with fire; or with a long razor of erestology; or with a slow-cauterizing cauteri.
And some women are cauterized at the beginning of their purification in this manner; and they are not believed, and the excess is broken up, making those healthy, and healing those.
Most importantly, we must make sure that evacuation is done with phlebotomy.
Chapter 56.
On the cauterization of accidental bloody flux through an incision of the artery.
Repeated cuts to the artery from which the flux of blood flows, which cuts through the wound that it makes, or through the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and thus it seems, and it is difficult to heal that.
Therefore when it happens to someone, then you should put your hand on the orifice of the artery, and hold it with your fingers, pressing those cut vessels so that the flux of blood is stopped, and does not flow out.
And then apply cauteries of olive oil and bandages to the wounds, by name to each wound, and blow on them so that they are not inflamed.
And then take from them a small or large thread and sew the wound in which the artery is broken, above that vein, firmly placing your fingers so that you have healed it, and apply a cautery so that it is bound and restrained, the blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you heal your fingers and remove the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries which are prepared on the fire, and thus do not stop doing this with another one until the blood is restrained.
And beware that you do not touch the nerve that is here, and let another evil come upon the patient.
And be aware that when the artery flows with blood, it is not possible to restrain the blood in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with a cautery as I have already mentioned, or with extraction when it has not been extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of the member are burned and the blood is restrained, or that it be tied with a thread or with a ligature for strong structure, or that they be placed on medications whose virtue is to restrain the blood; and be tightened with a poultice or with a bandage.
More properly, he who administers restraint with a ligature or with tightening and with cloth or by position of causes that burn and of similarities, does not confuse but rather applies.
But if it happens that the patient's condition worsens and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then apply a poultice on the orifice of that vein as we have already said, and understand that due to the great constriction of the inside, the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and above the artery do not make an incision; and above the artery sprinkle with cold water of great coldness so that the blood is congealed and thickened; and consider whether it is necessary to use a cautery or medicine.
Of incision and perforation and of evacuations and of phlebotomy and of wounds and of their similarities.
We have already spoken in the first chapter about all the diseases in which a cautery with fire is convenient and with medicine that burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them; and we have ordered the chapters concerning the subjects from head to feet.
And we will proceed in this chapter with the same medical method, so that it may be of relief to the one seeking it, namely about what has been requested.
And before we begin this, it is fitting, my sons, that you learn that in this chapter is feared what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And because of this, my son, that it be with great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter many things must be watched, evacuation which is with blood, on which depends life, from the aspiration of the vein or incision over the aposteme or perception of exit or purification of the wound or extraction of the arrow or incision of the foot and their similarities. And all those things are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their worst case, death.
And I warn you that none of these things fall on you, for some observed cases must show you how to treat men with treated diseases of illnesses. And of them it is certain that he will escape his illness and flee from death, and also because of the violence of that which he finds in his illness, and by the length of his illness, and with the illness is fear which means death.
And of those it is one that gives you to have and to say, you waiting for that health, and his illness is pernicious.
And therefore it is not good that you consent to that which comes to you of which this treatment is; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and your rashness; and do not presume any cause about this unless certain science which verifies this for you, and to which successful usage follows.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of that which is health converted, for in that you are helped to acquire fame and memory, of praise and of glory.
Oh, sons, God put in you the gift of understanding and do not lack direction and protection, for that is in your hands.
And I have ordered this chapter distinctly by chapters as it follows in the chapter of cauterizations, about the cure from head to feet, so that it will be eased for you what you demand and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water that is retained in the heads of infants.
Know that this illness often happens to infants due to swaddling and when the nurse tightens the infant's head with force.
And it often happens for a hidden cause which is not known.
But I have not seen this illness except in infants; and to all those whom I have seen it has been fatal, and thus it seems to me that the work is left undone in them.
And I have seen that an infant whose head was filled with water, and the head of it was so magnified to the point that it could not hold itself up due to the greatness of its head, but rather the humidity increased until a fatal outcome.
And this humidity or is aggregated between the cartilage and the bone, or is aggregated below the bone on the spine.
When the operation on that where the humidity is between the cartilage and the bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary that you make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in width, and let the length of the fissure be two nuts so that the humidity can flow, and this is the shape of the spatula.
And therefore if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two incisions in this manner:
And if the humidity is below the bone, signal of it is that you see the comedones of the head open on every side and the pus is expelled when you press on it with your hand at the joints and it is not hidden from you. It is necessary that you make an incision in the middle of the head with three fissures in this manner:
and then extract the incision completely with all the humidity; and then wrap the fissures with bandages and plasters; and then apply an ointment of wine and oil until the fifth day, and then remove the dressing and cure the wound with tents and poultices, and hold the head in a steady position; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
And it is another manner of incision, that considers when the magnitude of the abscess appears and the collection of the water, for some evacuations are more in the occipital, or in the front part, or in the right, or in the left; and then attend to the incision so that the abscess appears and the replenishment of the water, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and divert flows of blood and let the patient die from that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter second.
When I find some catarrh or rheum on the shoulders or chest, and it is antiquated, and does not agree with the cure of medicines, then the last cure is in this case the incision of these two arteries.
And then be aware when you want to cut those that the patient's vein is near the head, and press the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries are visible, and hold the patient's neck with some cloth; and consider feeling the pulse; and the places of each one on the places which are near the ears, are hidden unless in some men.
And then place a thread on the artery with a needle, and insert each one into the gap of each affected part with a sharp pointed instrument that penetrates into the bone, and this is done for the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the instrument into the artery and make an incision at the affected parts with a cutting tool.
And let the length of the incision be two fingers adjusted, because when a vein is cut the blood comes out with pulsating ejection, which is relieved by frequent suction.
But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then take from the ear the quantity of the space of three fingers, and place a thread with a needle, and go inside the bone.
And this which is taken from the blood is a quantity of twenty units, and take it little by little, and not all at once, and all this is according to the quantity that appears from the condition of the patient and from the refilling of the artery of theirs.
And then consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause of suppuration, then cut it so that a postema abscess does not develop.
And then strengthen the wound with plasters and with ligaments of cloth of linen, and cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter three.
Of the extraction of the blood vessels which are in the temples.
When to some it happens that an old or chronic headache occurs, due to humid and aggravating qualities in the blood vessels of the temples, or a severe and violent pain similar to those, and it is treated with the methods of medical cure and not with those that are not effective, then we have spoken about these ailments, the extraction of the blood vessels in the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have shown.
And the method of operation and extraction of them is that the patient shaves the skin where the blood vessels are in the temples; and understand that the apparent blood vessel in the temple is shown to you by its color, and it's hidden except in few men due to the vehemence of cold.
And if it is hidden from you, then let the patient's neck be tightened with some cloth; and apply cold to the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water so that the blood vessel appears to you manifestly. Then take the spatula of which this is the shape: And scrape the skin with it in a way that facilitates entry to the blood vessel; and put your thumb on top of it and extract it from the upper layers until you extract it from the skin and discover it from the surrounding tunics which were covering it, from the entire thickness.
If the artery is delicate, then encircle it at the extremity of the elbow, and make an incision on that one side according to the quantity for which the extremities of the patient are stretched and contracted, and you will not find a flow of blood, because if it is not incised, the blood will not swell entirely.
And then evacuate the blood for a distance of one to three fingers.
And if the artery is large, then it is necessary to ligate it in two places with double thread of hemp or with cords at length, and do not allow putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound, and a flow of blood will appear.
And then cut the superfluity that is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or at another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery iron within the bone or with a cutting cautery that the extremities of the patient are incised, and it will remain in place of that half-done work.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion; because cautery is one of those things that help to dry out the humouring liquids, and thus it is better in youth.
And then return the extraction of the arteries that fill the area of the ancient wound, and let it be gently placed on the clean dust, and then it is cured with dry medicine that makes the flesh and calf fall off.
And if while you observe another evacuation of blood flow from the artery, then you must restrain that blood, either with a cautery, or by filling the wound area, and hold your hand inside so that the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes is present to you, then place a cloth on the area so that the blood is congealed, and wet the area with water of vehement coldness so that the acidity is calmed, and it is restrained according to what is suitable.
And this that is put more lightly in the extraction of the artery is that you cauteryze the vein with this cautery having two ends, because you have touched the two areas with a tent, and applied each, a bit of fire, so that they reach the bone and incise the vein in two areas, so that what is between the extremities is elongated, since they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two hips is felt. It is better if the sharpness of the two hips is milder, for if they are too pointed and close to each other, the flesh does not heal quickly.
Therefore, when there is some thickness in those areas, the heat of fire is applied to them and the flesh is separated gently.
And this procedure is better than any other procedure and is done gently.
And let the space that is between the two hips be the thickness of the said finger.
Chapter four.
On the treatment of bodies with sharp and acidic ulcers of the wheels (or perhaps joints).
When there are acidic ulcers, and it is the body of those veins which are on the head, and they do not agree with any cause of medical treatment, and often the face of the patient has already turned red and it seems as if they were walking in a haze, just like someone who walks in a cloud of ants, and the wheels (or joints) of that person are so weakened, humidified to the point that their skin is already inflamed, and the eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of tears, the ancient wise men mixed in the treatment of those of this operation, and I will not name this treatment with a pause.
And it is that you command the patient to raise the skin which is on the upper front, and then make three incisions in the front equally distant according to the length of the front. And if the length of the incision is two digits: one incision is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the front, and the second according to the length a little bit of the movement of the tears which are in the tear duct, and the third on the other part.
And beware of the incision of the arteries which are in two sides, and extend your hand from the continuity of both the jaws. And if the space of each incision is adjusted to the quantity of three fingers.
And if you have a piece of prepared sponge or dry cloth moistened with those which dry out the blood.
And then insert the spatula between the two acute extremities, of which this is the form of the incision of it: which is from the parting of the temples up to the second incision. Scrape out all that cartilage which is between two incisions on the siphac, which is above the bone, and then make a groove from the middle incision to the second incision. And then draw near this spatula and enter in the first incision another tool which is called a cutting tool, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And push the edge of that sharp tool between the flesh and the tendon, and the edge of it within the bone, and insert this thing so that it reaches the middle fissure, and cut away all the veins that descend from the head to the heels.
More, let the incision be continued to that point where the tendon appears, and then make it in the middle fissure enter into the other fissure.
And after that let flow a quantity of blood, squeeze the places of the veins of the congealed blood.
And then apply to each warm fissure a piece of old cloth, and apply on those powders mixed in wine and oil and sharp wine, and beware that there does not develop a post-cautery abscess.
And on the third day remove the dressing and administer a large warm infusion of hot water or broth, and then treat it with a mixture of basilicon and oil and rose oil and other things so that the wounds are healed.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of ulcers caused by catarrh and those descending from the parts of the head to the heels.
When the eyes are affected by sharp and continuous cataracts, and the small vessels of the patient's body are extended, and already the sight is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their skin is damaged, and in the forehead there is sharp pain and consequent extenuation, then it seems that this accident is due to the fact that cataracts do not come from humors but from excessive flowing of veins from the affected parts.
And the best cure for these is this: that you order the patient to shave their forehead, and make an incision in the middle of it, a small one in width (starting from the left temple's fissure to the right temple; and let the incision be up to the bone; and stretch your hand on the sides of the temples which are swollen due to bad chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and fill it between the two lips of the incision with a old cloth or cloths of linen. And then strengthen it with powders made from wine and oil so that the apostema does not become infected with heat.
And when you see that the apostema is already diminished, then it is necessary to scrub the bone until new flesh begins to form, and treat it with a drying regimen which makes the flesh grow; just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and from this make a plaster and administer it on these wounds for the growth of the native flesh.
Chapter six.
On the treatment of that which falls into the ears.
The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral dust or a similar thing to dust, such as iron and copper, or it is from a plant such as cypress or buckthorn, or it is a fluxible thing such as water and sour wine and their similarities, or some beast.
And then when dust falls into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not settle nor grow in the ear, and warm the ear by the sun, and if you shake the dust, then distill it with some oil of violet or sycamine, and then administer the extraction of it, and make it sneeze with condition, and stop the nostrils from the coming of sneezing. And then put in the ear canal some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear to the divided parts below, because moist warm applications are beneficial for these causes.
And if it is not healed, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called the fine gestatory epicicarians, of which this is the form:
And if it is warmed with a gestatory, well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a small thin onion of double application.
And thus if it is not previously prepared, then make a cane of iron and insert the extremity of the cane into the hole of the ear and close around the environment of the cane with wax and oil mollified so that it does not open except the cane. And then extract with the thumb strongly attracted, for the many things seen with what we have recounted.
But if it is not prepared in this manner, then take of alum or of prepared wax on which the auricles are pressed a small quantity, and place that on the extremity of the vein, and then wrap around that gauze decently placed. And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then clear the ear of humidity.
And thus if it is not previously prepared with all the causes which we have recounted, then you should cut to take away the abscessed tumor or spasm.
And the manner of cutting it is that you at the beginning cut the patient's vein sepulchral and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make that flow between your hands and turn the ear towards the divided parts, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear where the grease of it is in the place being pressed. And if the lunar-shaped fissure penetrates to the stone, and the stone is touched, then use an appropriate instrument to treat it; and immediately close the fissure at that hour with speed, and cure it so that it will be healed.
And if the cause in the ear is one of the fatty growths that swell and become inflamed, then administer the cure and its extraction; but if it does not obey your first treatment, then take a subtle spatula according to this form: and administer to him the removal of that growth which has fallen into the ear.
And do not do that when you think that it is moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in warm compresses, and extract it with small fingers or with a subtle gesture, or with a slight incision as has been said, because the extraction of it is made easier.
But in the water that has entered the ear, it happens that the patient uses a sneeze to condition the beginning, and fills his other ear with an old cloth, and puts it on the ear where the water is, and if by this it is forced out, well; and if not, then take hot small stones and lenses according to the length of the said, and heat them in the fire a little, and let the patient introduce one of these into the hole of his ear and press on the other side of that part with another stone, and push on the stone that is inside the ear. Therefore, do not cease this remedy until all the water has been expelled.
Therefore, do not cease this remedy until all the water has been expelled. And when the water has been expelled, take paper or cotton and insert one end into the ear and extend the other end to the fire until it is burned.
And take more cotton and do this as many times as necessary until all the water has been expelled, and squeeze that with a tube just as it is described in the treatment of the diuretic stone.
More in the extraction of the beast entering into that ear, if it is of small size, take it out thus and similarly; cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size which causes pain to the sense of balance, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and anointings, and the cause of it is considered lighter than all the other causes that happen in the ear.
But in the extraction of worm engendered in the ear, when you cure it with that which we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations and do not confuse your treatment, then beware that you expose the ear to the sun.
And therefore if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle anointings; but if no cause appears, then take a tube, narrow and wide at the end, of which this is the form: Insert the thin extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; and draw strongly with that sucker, make many repeated motions, until all the worms are expelled.
If it does not obey your treatment, then stop up and block the circuit of the vein with wax as we have said; then administer the distillations that the ancients have already proven in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be that with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form. Make it of silver or of bronze, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and flat on the bottom.
And then it will be as if they are filling what is in the cavity of the vein, which will be necessary here. And if you want, take the tube and wrap it in the extremity of the decent member cut, and put oil or juice of some herb, or whatever of these medicines you want in the vein — which is in the ear —, and then insert the tube with its cut end and press with your hand with tempered compression so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which has been inserted in the ear should already be scratched with a small focus. And beware that the cause which you will distill in the ear is not too cold, because ear medications do not tolerate that.
Chapter 7.
On the treatment of obstruction of the ears.
Some neglected infants have non-perforated abdominal openings, and this also occurs in some men, obstruction in the middle of the ear due to a plague or flesh growth in that area; and this obstruction sometimes is made in the forefront of the ear's channel, which does not allow for hearing, and sometimes it is in the partitions of the forehead.
And that which occurs in the forefront of it, which does not allow for hearing, is among the major conditions of difficult healing.
And in that case where you achieve hearing, take the ear of the patient to the sunlight and examine it. And then if you see apparent obstruction, open that area with a subtle spatula, of which this is the form:
If the extremity of it, where the width is small, one part being sharp and the other not, and the spatula being two fingers wide so that it does not make a lesion on the ear.
And therefore if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the ear or in the middle of it, then apply a subtle and violent insertion so that all the flesh may be removed.
And if the obstruction is in the cavity of the ear, then take a subtle thread and heat it in a fire for a little while, and insert that into the middle of the ear.
And therefore if you have felt an obstruction in the ear that the patient has with difficulty, due to the weight of hearing, relieve the oppression of it with ease; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
And apply a poultice to the ear made of resin according to the quantity of the width of the hole which you have enveloped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or that you take cotton and put it in oil and sprinkle it over the wounded place and use it; and if the ear has become apostemated, then take out the cotton and replace it with another cotton which you will have wrapped in wax mixed with rose oil, until the aposteme be cauterized; and apply a cure until it is healed.
When there is an excessive flow of blood, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use another remedy that restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 3.
On the treatment of cataracts that have grown onto the eyelids.
Cataracts that have grown onto the eyelids of the eyes, some whitish growths are moist, others are dry.
Therefore, hold those in your hands or with a clamp, and cut them at the root with a scalpel, and then apply a dressing to the affected area following the third treatment.
When there is pain with a flow of blood, then cauterize those areas with a subtle, lancet-like cautery.
And the best cauterization is to make incisions and apply moist dressings that promote healing when any cause of the root remains; and when they are cauterized with a hot instrument, the roots are destroyed and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Treatment of large growths that come to the eyelids of the eyes.
Certain whitish growths develop on the eyelids of the eyes for some reason, which is similar to a cataract in its strength and hardness, and because of this size it is called a grandeyssa.
It is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid.
Therefore the operation on them is what you consider then if the greatness proceeds in it from what appears of the eyelid and is hampered to the entire part; and the cause of it is laziness.
Then make an incision on that part with the width, and return the flesh of the entire part with ease until you evacuate, and lift that part with a clamp and cut that off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not overcome the evil for which the anguish of it restores and reincarnates.
And if the greatness declines to the inner parts of the eyelid, remove the inner surface, then evacuate the eyelid and lift the greatness with a clamp, or you make an incision, and press on the entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, this will not be noticed in any cause.
And then apply the treatment, wash the wound with salt water; and cure the area with the liquid that promotes healing from within.
Capitol seems to be a misspelling of
Of the treatment applied to the eyelid near the wound.
Axcirnath is a disease which is generated in the tissues of the eyelid, and mainly affects children, aggravating the wounds of those who have it, and causing their eyes to become catarrhous; and they cannot look at the clarity of the sun because tears are collected in their eyes.
And because of this, they often rub their eyes with their hands for a long time, and rub them while sleeping; and also the eyelids of their eyes become humid, which has already been covered by inflammation, and an abundance of mucus is apparent in the wound; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel mucus inside it.
And a certain manner of operation is in that case where the patient holds his head in his hand, and then holds a cloth of linen and wool, and makes a circle according to the quantity that contains the totality of the disease, and then places that on it and presses with the fingers of the entire circumference so that mucus may be collected in the middle of the circle, and then puts it in the middle of that humidity with spittle incident on the fissure by way of latitude, and the fissure is not larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
More in the press of what you find the entire code that prevails until reaching the extreme archaic, because in the more deposits processed archaic through fissure according to the form of white greasiness.
Then extract that thing with the help of cloths which you have enveloped between the thighs, to the parts of the foreskin and turn it between the right hand and the left hand until it is dispersed.
And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure so that with the spatulum you do not reach the hollow and you loosen that.
More if it does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, more that you adjust in the fissure a small thing with facility until the archaic is processed; and then extract that thing as we have said; and then submerge cloths in water and wine and vinegar and place them on the area and strengthen those with powders.
And thus apply that you sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that this thing which is a remainder of that humidity.
And then cure that until it is healed.
More if there appears on the spot a hot abscess, then cure that with cold plasters until it is healed.
Head of the hip.
From the hands of those who touch the womb.
When in the eyelids of the womb there is born a tumor and the natural skin is wrinkled, then those tumors on the womb cause troubles such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelid and fabric between which that can be a cause of destruction of the womb that is called touching the womb, and it is cured in four ways: either with cautery by fire; or with acute medicine as it will be said in the chapter on cautery; or it is touched by incision and suture; or with tubes as I will tell.
And then it is good that you place the head of the patient on your thigh; then turn the eyelid of the womb with your left hand, and if it is turned, well; and if not, insert a needle in that part where the faith of the partition is below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread underneath, and this should be — near the edge of the eyelid where the natural skin is — near the skin, and pull the thread to the upper partitions with the eyelid, and turn it to the seam.
And then put a suture in the inner partition of the eyelid below the natural skin to the septum, cutting into the larger tear duct and the smaller tear duct; and then pull out the thread and place it under the eyelid with a small piece of cotton or cloth, and sew over the eyelid with a needle, and let it be like the figure of a woman's veil.
More importantly, consider that the shape is according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because it has already been diversified in men, and it is one of those that indicates that a large quantity has been inserted into the eyelid, according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
Then return and place the spit on the two lines that you have drawn, and start from the larger tear duct into the smaller tear duct. And if your fissure is near to the natural skin so that it is like the thickness of a king.
Then put the hook in one of the two corners of the wound, and scrape out that entire area, and adjust the suture so that the two lips are joined with a thread or fine wire, and remove the blood, and make adhere what superfluous material of the threads is on the eyebrows for some hidden causes, if you want to do this, and if not, do not cure.
Then leave the suture of the threads for three or four days, and then cure that.
And if you want, leave the wound without suture, and cure it with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated by the separation of the wound and its aggregation; but suture is better, and thus said the ancients of Tacner.
More oil is applied on the patient's body, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another manipulation in examination, which is to place a figure like a fig leaf on the eyelid, and lift the eyelid with three separated and gathered inches according to this form:
But if it is not possible to do that, to have the inches, and this is not equal, then take a needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert one end of the thread near the larger tear duct, and the other end of the thread near the smaller tear duct, and adjust between the ties so that the threads are even, and then lift your hand to elevate equally, lift the entire codenna above which is placed as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound to suture, and heal that inside part so that it is sane.
But if there occurs an abscess on your incision or your fissure, apply that abscess with wax and to the similar place, with plaster.
And some veins appear on the eyelid that the eyes are turned, therefore take care that you use in that of what we have spoken of incision; but suture in each one is more artificial.
To treat gout with this method: And it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure as described, according to what has been recounted; and then by skill make two canulas or two subtle needles from which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them is less than the width of the spatulum. And you have already cut into the extremities of each separate part, where you hold the threads.
Then add subtly under what is overflowing from the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canulas of each part with a strong bind, and leave it for some days, because the coding by the constriction will die and will be rejected and will fall out, before it will have fallen by itself.
But if it is prolonged, then cut the bind with the tourniquets, and then cure the wound until it is healed.
Thus when it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not puncture.
And this is the method of making two canulas which you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of the length and of the width neither more nor less.
Chapter twelve.
Of the elevation of pierced skin on the ankle when the skin is hardened.
When the skin is unnatural, hard and rough and the ankles are pierced, then the operation on it is that you take a subtle needle and place it in that tender flesh of the spine and liver, and then adjust the extremities of it and massage each one with a very subtle touch. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of a palm.
And then you combine another subtle thread with it briefly, and massage the extremities of that one if you want to.
And then put the patient's sick head in its proper place, and let it be near the window so that your work may be illuminated, for this is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the skin that needs to be treated with art, and make it penetrate the eyelid firmly until you extract what is beneath the natural skin.
And then pull the skin from underneath and insert it into the scar, and let the skins be one or two or three, but not more.
And then pull your hand towards it so that the skin is pulled out to the scar on the eyelid with the natural skin.
If the elbow is strained and the skin is not broken, strain the elbow with parts of the thigh near the knee, which you have prepared beforehand, until the strain of the elbow is alleviated.
And apply that to the vision of the wound, because then you will strain the elbow and the knee, and wrap each one and close the wound, and leave it closed for two or three days, until the skin adheres to its proper place and forms over it a good scar.
And if the skin is too short, then adjust a skin patch of natural skins, and elevate it with that, or let it be until it is lengthened to the proper space, and then elevate it.
Chapter 13.
On the cure of the disease which appears in the lower eyelid.
When it appears in the wound, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on its own, either to the right or to the left side, due to poor consolidation of a wound or of a cut or of a cauterization, and it is called a leporina, and this contraction is natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor consolidation of a wound or of cuts or of cauterizations, or by similarity to other poorly treated ailments.
During the operation on him, you should make this consolidation and separate his lips, and place between them a piece of cloth, and tie them together until they are healed.
And do not attempt to treat him for the causes that dry out and constrict, because if you do it will only make things worse than before and at no time will there be improvement.
Use for the cause that softens, such as fenugrec, and soak it in water where they are cooked and strained, or a plaster of diaquilon, which should be liquefied with oil, and immerse the piece in it, and heal with it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you should pierce to the extent that there is nothing left unconsolidated, according to the form that was at the beginning.
And this operation that we have described is not but a correction of the prolapse that does not restore the shape of the place as it was before.
Chapter 14.
On the cure of prolapse which occurs in the eyelid.
This prolapse that occurs in the eyelid, which is properly called vertadierament prolapse, and it is of him something natural, or something accidental.
Pain from injury is caused by a blow or by cutting or by cautery or by other similar means.
And the method of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread comes out at the two outer extremities of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh to the separated parts with the needle and sew it up with the needle, and insert a ample padding. And thus the shape of the eyelid returns to what it was before; if not, take the thread and pass it through the split figure, and with that turn the eyelid back, and make two fissures on the edge of the eyelid.
And let the extremities of the two fissures be at two angles of the incision, which you made so that they meet, and let them form an angle where when they come together a figure is formed.
And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
Then stitch the flesh to the amount that is the edge of the needle, which is next to it, so that it becomes the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with a thread of flax; and then treat them with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices, so that they may be healed.
And if the eyelid is torn by a tear or suture or cautery, then it is advisable that you sew with a flat needle on the skin of the eyelid, as has been previously stated. And then separate the poultice between the two lips, as we have said.
In the summary of the sermon on the treatment of the eyelid when it is wounded or injured, that runs in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the manner of the eyelid, and this is in the form of diverse small patches.
And the skilled artisan always prepares a device in whatever manner is possible for it to make the figure return to its natural form, or close to it, and that patient according to what is convenient for them from the operation and instruments in the best dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many men in such a way that the eyelid is solidified and attached to the white of the eye, and is prohibited from its ease of movement and natural functions, then it is advisable that you insert the extremity of the instrument under the eyelid, and lift it up, or stretch it towards the angle.
And then you gently dissect the subtle adhesion with a blunt instrument, which should not be sharpened by the dissections, having obtained a small opening so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the tissue that does not bother the wound with its sharpness.
And let your dissection be such that it easily removes the adhesion, so that the eyelid is returned to its natural shape and the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you put on the wound salty water in which you have washed it; or dissolve the juice of juniper in water.
And then separate the eyelid from the wound with a warm poultice, and place on the wound a woolen cloth soaked in album of egg, and then for three days use consolidative remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
On the dissection of the nail and the protrusion of flesh of the tear ducts.
Know that the nail is according to two manners, either it is nervous, and is similar to a hard subtle callus; or it is not-nervous, similar to a white condensed humidity, which when the iron touches it, or it is forced to take on flesh, it is separated and the flesh is not fixed to it.
And with both eyes not moving except for the large tear duct which slowly closes and covers the vision and prohibits light and the movement of tears.
The technique of operating on the incision of the eye is that the patient should hold his own head in the tied tie, and return the eyelids to their place, and elevate the eyelid with your hand, and return the nail to its joint with little duplication and stretch that to the separated parts. And then take a needle and insert in it a thread of horse or of cow or of sheep, or of silk, or of strong wire, or double the extremity of the needle little by little and put that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and tie with thread the nail; and stretch that to the separated parts, and extract with the thread from the flesh the tear of the nail which is the pupil. And thus you follow that with the thread inside the skin towards the back of it.
And then you incise the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula or with little forked instruments, and separate the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that by the incision of that there does not develop continuous flows of tears.
And sometimes the nail on the sole of the foot is extended or is attached to the bone, as we have said, and then it should be excavated with a spatula, from which this is the shape of the tumor:
And beware that on the spatula you do not touch the corneal layer and that it goes into the rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then make an incision in the wound and put a little of powdered salt or crushed stone, and let it be until the next day; and then treat that with water that is warm, so that it may be healed.
And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed on the bone, then this type of nail is treated with medicines, and is healed in the same way as the others, and recovered, as recommended in the division.
And if you want to make an incision in it, then open the wound of the patient and take a subtle spatula of sharpened iron according to this shape: with subtlety. And if it happens that it is rarefied and confused and enclosed in the wrinkle, then distill from your work on the wound with crushed stone or with crushed rock or with powdered salt, and cover the wound until the next day.
And then apply a thread to that area of the operation where everything that is from him has been removed, unless an abscess forms in the wound, for which you will leave that, and treat the beginning of the abscess until it heals.
And then apply your operation to that area with reason where it will be healed.
The protrusion of the tear-producing flesh, if it does not go back into the wound for great harm, should be suspended with a bandage; and cut that part from that one side, and do not make the incision so that you do not cut the flow of tears.
And then pour a cool liquid on the tear duct and make a sign of blessing until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
On the incision of a diseased gum and on that which is born from adjusted flesh in the wound.
Some growths in the wounds of some people have produced red flesh, and it is placed over the pupil, or applied near the eyelids and holds the eyelids together with force to the parted edges of skin and is joined like the skin of a pomegranate.
More often the operation on him is that the patient holds his head in a fixed position; and then cover the wounds of that one and collect all that flesh with a bandage conveniently adapted to it, and hold it with a forceps or with tongs; and then cut the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the incision, and beware of the wound that you do not let it get worse from your operation.
And let your incision be the one with which you cut those things on the spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small chisels at the places where it is collected, according to how the shape of the foot will appear in this next chapter.
Then when your incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, fill the hole with triple salt, or distill it into a red powder resembling the one of corrosive medicines, and place on the hole a piece of cotton soaked in warm album to ensure it doesn't become infected with apostema or cautery.
And if there remains any cause of the ulcer and it is lorded with a harsh cautery, and you fear apostema or cautery, then clean the hole and treat that apostema with the thing that cures the apostema, and apply it on that one during the operation until it is healed, and similarly do on the adjusted flesh which adheres to the hole of this special case.
But above all, take care that you empty the foul hole either by natural way or by accident, working with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering enough to undergo the operation.
Chapter 18.
Of collection of sweat in the hole.
Sweat that comes from veins which are tested on the hole and prevents the movement of the vessel, and they develop the hole over a length of days.
Therefore necessary is at the beginning that you consider if the hole in which sweat is, is strong and in it there is no other illness except sweat, then you collect that sweat.
And it is that you command the patient to put his sick head in his tie, and then suspend those veins with an onion or with two according to your prudence; and let that onion be of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two onions gradually in a body according to this form:
And then the veins be collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and extract the blood hour by hour, until those veins are emptied of the hole and are turned inside out.
And beware that you do not touch the hole with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day under the sun, and be very firm in your operation so as not to cut except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then you pour into the hole clear water or wine so that with its acidity it cuts away what is collected from the sweat.
More so if it is not possible to collect everything at that hour, then apply a plaster to whatever relieves the patient's pain, and let them rest for several days until the pain is eased and there is assurance against the risk of an ulcer or abscess.
And then proceed according to what the doctor orders until they are healed.
And this is the form of the poultices:
Chapter 19.
On the reduction of fractures of the nose.
When you treat a fracture with a cautery or with sharp medicine according to what is described beforehand and it is not healed, then do not put anything in it except for dressing the abscess with its own mucus, and that you extract all humidity that is in it and from the pus until the bone is exposed.
And then when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is called a rough scraper, and it should be made of iron, and its head should be round so that it can scrape, which should be made pointed by sharpening with a file or a whetstone for subtle scraping (such as is shown in the following figure).
Stop that on the rotten part of the bone, and return it among the ligaments of the toes, and press your hand gently so that you know that the corruption is superficial.
And let some dressings be made, and return to restore the place with drying and astringent remedies.
Then if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh born in it and the body is separated from the wound and it suppurates for forty days, and it is not inflamed and not infected and no incident occurs, then you will know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is not in the skill but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: which is that you uncover the bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then you take three broths according to this form:
Let the sharpness of the iron be triangular, and its point be first extended to the extremity, as many times as needed.
And stop that on the bone, and let it be near the tear duct; and stretch your hand a little from the well, and return your hand with the broth until it penetrates all of the bone, and the patient feels by the push that it makes come out as much as where you put your hand.
Therefore, restore the area with medicines that are astringent and drying, such as those that you have extracted.
Thus when the flesh in the affected area is hardened, then the matter that flows from the purulent parts returns to the nose, thus it is easier to put on the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the swelling of the ankle.
When the ankle swells in its entirety and does not decrease with any remedy or treatment, then it is necessary to bind the patient, and to follow them, and to apply ventoses on the neck with scarification and suction for a good result; and to apply on the ankle an ointment made from katatra and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and to strengthen the plaster on the ankle with much powder.
And the method of the powders is to take cloths of linen and dip them in a lot of wine, and each cloth should be folded in four layers; make from those powders.
And then apply those one on top of the other according to the quantity that the ankle needs. And then bind over those with a hard cloth and strong strict bandage; and repeat the ventoses with suction and scarification; and then remove the ventoses and elevate the ankle tight day and night.
More often when the ligament is softened, then it is necessary that it be tightly bound.
And return the ligament to its proper place and tie it at day and night as we have said.
And if the joint has already been reduced, well and good, and if not, then apply a plaster with powders and a tightening and a purging enema until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
Of the incision of the prominence of the tunic of the uvea (or possibly "uveal coat" - referring to a part of the eye).
When there is disruption in the uveal tunic, and it becomes prominent and protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of rice, and the shape of the eye is disfigured by that, and you want to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle at the root of the uvea on the lower part in the upper part, and then put another needle which has double the thread of the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and pull out the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the place of the double thread and lift up that part of the uvea with the circuit of the needle, and tighten it firmly.
And then extract the needle and pause over the wound, anointing it with a white mixture of animal product and vinegar, so that the thread can be passed through the wound.
And then heal the wound with that which comforts it, until the wound is healed.
And on some wounds apply a poultice made from the entire plant, wrapped in a circle of cloth around the wound, and then it should be perforated with a subtle spatula to allow the pus to come out, and clear the albugineous humidity, and decrease the wound and enter at the same time.
And then strengthen it so that it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of ulcers.
This illness called ulcer, is not but an injury which appears as descending water, and it is not that.
More, the manner of working on it is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and upright chair, and then take their head in your hands from both sides, and turn it so that you see the ulcer coming to the parts below, and then it should be dried and not come down, and the humors should be stopped, and the patient sees the causes thus as they are seen.
And if it does not go down, know that it is a sign of water.
But if the descent is not prepared for the health with the water that we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a subtle sponge and apply it to the area surrounding the corner where the conjunctiva meets the cornea (in the location of the outer corner), until the secretion is expelled from the eye.
Then when it is expelled, you distill it in hot water into which you have mixed honey or water in which you have previously dissolved fenugreek and honey.
And then it will be cured with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of the descending water of the eye.
We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and what is convenient to pierce with serum, then declare that according to health.
Then it is good that you make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie their eye with a strong bandage.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of the eye with water, if the watery eye is the left one; or your right hand, if the eye is on the right.
And then take your right hand to grasp the left, if the wound is on the left; or take your left hand, if the wound is on the right.
And then pause at the extremity of the left near the crown due to the thickness of the vein in the white of the wound on the inner tear duct, and then insert the needle to the left with skill and turn your hand to that place.
And then penetrate into the white of the wound and feel that the left has already been pierced for a hollow vein.
And take the measurement of the chamber of the left eye to the pupil, the size of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the crown of the wound; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the wound through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then pause on the left inside the place where is the water, and raise your needle one time, raising another, and so if the water descends immediately, then the patient will see above that which they had previously lost their sight, and also in the following wound.
And then rest for a little while; then if the water has descended, you will deposit another deposition before the left one is extracted.
And so when it is sick and does not descend, then extract the mucus with ease, and turn that hand little by little, and dissolve in water a small amount of clear gemstone salt, and wash the wound with this solution; and apply to the wound cotton or stopes or wool infused in oil of rose and white of egg, and bind the wound with this oil.
More of us and those who are from our time put on that wound a poultice made with egg white.
And if it does not obey your mucus to the entrance of the wound due to its hardness — for there are some men whose wounds are hard to treat —, then take the spatula called albarel, of which this is the form:
And then perforate that joint, and do not push your hand through the hole, and it is not so that you should make a way to the mucus to subtle place.
Then introduce the mucus as we have said.
And give the complement of your work, let the patient be prepared in a darkened room, made to sleep on their side two pillows, and be prohibited from all movement.
And put in the nature of it the water by which its nature is cleaned, and do not move the head to the right or left side at all.
And let the ligament adapt according to its disposition within the third day.
And then release it from that dark and hidden place and cleanse the foul sight, and make him see some causes, and then return the ligament within the seventh day.
And do not attempt to do this at the time of cures or unless the infusion is nearby. Be careful that you administer it in such a way that the water penetrates gently and with great and violent retention.
If a warm abscess occurs, then be careful that you release the sore before the seventh day, and correct that which has caused the abscess to burst.
Then you will absolve the sight of it and place upon its face an orifice through which the evacuation of it is regulated, and it exists in the dark and hidden place for some days.
And then let it be extracted from that place gradually and investigate its causes.
And know that in this case the disciple of vision is not excused from visiting certain times, and then you will be skilled about the operation.
And already it has reached us from some of those who are at the Artach, and some say that fire is made in the Ayraic cave, pierced through which the water flows.
Maybe it seems that nothing like this has been seen in our land, which has perfected this thing, nor is this thing legitimate according to some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this thing is new.
And these are the forms of the species of diseases for which there exists a remedy for those who ignore them:
And they are made of iron or of steel properly, and their extremities are thin with this subtle triangular shape, the sharp extremity thus as that is the form.
Chapter 24.
Of the healing of flesh in the nose.
When in the nose there are born diverse flesh growths adjusted to which is some cause that is assembled with a scorpion of bad words, or a polypus fish; and this illness is called polypus because it is a resemblance of that fish represented. And from it is cancerous flesh, of dark color; and from it is that which is not dark-colored flesh.
Therefore in that which is in these non-fraudulent nor cancerous flesh, take care to make the patient sit between your hands and put it in the sun, and warm the nostrils of it, and prick the tendon once in those flesh. And then extract that from the divided parts of the purulent discharge, and carefully remove what you have understood of those things with subtle spatula of one part into which you know that all the flesh has already been removed; that if there remains some cause of it, then you will scrape it out with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that from its remaining cause. More often if there is bloody or acidic apostume (abscess) on the wound, then stop that which flows; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then touch and cauterize that part until the healthy and sound areas are separated and all the cavities are cleared.
And then let it be put into the nose, either vinegar and water or wine. But if the nose is opened and its process humidity reaches the palate, then you will know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that the dead flesh is nothing in the pus or ulcers of the nostrils, to which the abscess has not reached.
Therefore it follows that one should put in the thread of the ligature to which some thickness is, and tie in the word knots, and place between each knot the quantity of the said or mentioned, and induce the patient and insert an extremity of the thread into the nostrils with a catheter or another instrument if possible.
And then it is made so that the aura is created, which draws the mucus inward until it reaches the channels of the nostrils, and is excreted through the mouth, because many times the similarity to this action makes the children at school, and it is the lighter cause for one who wants to do it.
And then pause at the two extremities of the liver, one extremity that goes over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a closure of flesh with the nodes that are on the liver, and do it until you know that the flesh is already on the nodes of the liver.
And then extract the liver, and pause at the nose with the abstraction of blood a purging, and do it for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that is rotten from the flesh.
And then at the end of the treatment, put in the nose a tube of lead for six hours until it is healed.
More if you are skilled in cure that you seek, use this method.
And this is the form of the instrument to make purges, in which are distilled oils and medicines into the nostrils:
Make it of silver or of copper, which should be similar to a small covered lamp, thus as a small funnel, and the middle similarly.
And if you want, make a sealed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument to be purified by the craftsman should be flat and uncovered; on which handle you will hold at the back of it, with which you will pour into it oil or whatever liquid you want from the juices and susceptible causes.
Chapter 25.
Of the ulcers born on the external parts of the nose.
Wart-like ulcers are born on the external parts of the nose, and it is magnified and mentioned in certain days during which a wart is born, where one reads the treatment of it.
And for this reason you should write that at the beginning of the appearance of it, and inherit all that follows. Then apply a cauterization or medicine that burns, which will be in place of it.
If the incision is delayed until it becomes enlarged, then consider if it has become hard, of dark color and with little sensation, do not touch that part with iron where there is an aposteme of cancer; for many times seen, whoever cuts this aposteme brings great malice upon himself.
And if the aposteme is of a fiery touch and not of dark color, and at times the incision is possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and cut without fear, and treat the area with what is suitable and constrict until it becomes healthy.
Chapter 26.
Of the suture of the nose and the lips and the ear when continuity is dissolved by a wound or by similarity.
Know that when there occurs a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer successes in that operation except for some men.
Therefore, when you come upon some cause of those, consider if it is a fresh wound with healthy tissue, and then adjust the lips of the wound with suture, and treat it until it becomes healthy.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is necessary that you excavate each part of its underlying flesh until healthy tissue appears. And then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture and strengthen them, and on them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and crushed vitriol, and apply on the powder a plaster of diafinicon or another consolidating plaster, and leave that dressing for two or three days, and then remove it and replace it with another plaster, and leave it until the wound is scarred, and then heal it with an ointment inside so that the tissues are restored.
Moreover, the technique of the suture is that you add a solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity to the thread as you do and make it known.
Chapter 27.
Of the extraction of that cause which comes in the two lips in the divided teeth.
Some wounds are found in the divided teeth of their lips, some of which show symptoms of apostems similar to grass of ears, and some of them are minor and some are major.
Therefore, it is necessary that you convert the lips and wounds each one of those hardnesses of the whole part, and then the abscess is cleaned, and the place is washed with warm water and vinegar, and the location is treated with that which is stipulated, until it is healed.
Chapter twenty-eight.
On the incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Cut the old and putrid gum that is called albulus by the ancients, then take care to suspend or hold the gum with pincers or forceps and incised gum, you must give its root, and let the blood flow or the wound.
And then apply a poultice on the wounded place, either with astringent or excitant powders.
And if the flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Chapter twenty-nine.
On the root of rotten teeth.
When on the surface of the teeth that are divided, separated, and in the mouth, and between the gums so adjusted, scurvy, cankered, and some old, are blackened and are made citrine or green within, as the gum is seen to be corrupted, and the teeth are loosened.
And then take care to seat the patient between your knees and hold their head in a firm place, and rub the teeth where those scurvy and corrupted things appear, which seem like sand within, so that no cause of harm remains, and this makes the blackness and citrinity and other things that are monstrous disappear.
Therefore, if this is the stop that is in the beginnings of the reasoning, it is good; and if not, then you will repeat the reasoning on the other day and on the second and on the third day until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have need of various shapes and figures of mortars according to what is prepared for your operation. And because the cutter with which the tooth is cut from the part of the teeth is different from the cutter with which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of cutters must be prepared by you, whichever you will see:
Chapter thirty.
Of the eradication of teeth.
When you cure the tooth of its pain with all ingenuity and delay in the entire eradication of it, because it is not a single cause that would suffice to relieve it when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance that comes into play in the eradication of it.
Moreover, when the patient is about to have that tooth eradicated, you must be firmly certain which tooth is the painful one, because many times the pain deceives the patient and it seems that it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate that one and then the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this in the operation of the barbarians.
Therefore, once you have certified what the aching tooth is, and what you know to be good, then investigate the circuit of the tooth with spatulum to see if there is any virtue in it, until it is dissolved from the tooth and gum of the entire partition, and apply that with cotton threads or subtle forks little by little until the concretion is extracted.
And apply a strong ligature with large threads for good retention or strong structure, and hold the patient's head between your teeth so that they do not move, and pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
And then if it is not forcibly removed, take one of those instruments, and put it under the tooth on every side with ease and effort to facilitate the removal of the tooth so that it is done at the beginning.
More so if the tooth is decayed or corroded, then investigate with a probe to fill in that hole and tighten it at the edge of the root with a subtle thread so that it is not broken in the time of your construction on it while holding it.
And investigate with scrutiny to scrape in the circuit of every part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it and rend the partition of it, and return to the patient for the cunning that is more than the first pain of it.
And beware that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their boasting and arrogance regarding the eradication of it, which they do not administer as we have recommended; because many useless things make come upon men with great illnesses, which are more difficult to treat, and the roots of them are all or some of them, or extract that one with some bones of the jaw, just as many useless things we have testified.
And for the eradication of it, let the mouth be washed with six or seven sour salts.
And if there is an efflux of blood through the mouth, just as many times it happens, then sprinkle a certain quantity of ash and spread it over the wound, and if that ash does not work, apply a cautery.
The shape of the forceps and tongs should be subtle with which the tooth is pulled at the beginning being of long extraction, short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you have to operate with them.
And let them be as many times thick in the handle so that when you grip them with those they are not bent, and let them be short in the extremities.
And let them be made of Indian iron, well-made and with extremities, and in the extremities of those let there be teeth which one enters into the other and grips with strong construction, and some of the extremities of those are shaped like the beak of a bird, which is called cicoria, that is, parrot, and they are of strong construction.
Chapter twenty-one.
Of the eradication of teeth and extraction of the bones of the fractured jaws.
When you need to eradicate a tooth that is fractured for some reason, then it is good that you apply a poultice on the spot with a bandage for a day or two until the spot becomes softened; and then insert the tips of the tongs, the extremities of which are assembled at the beak of a tool called pincers or forceps:
The extremities of them should be made pointed like a file or a rasp.
And if it does not obey your efforts with these forceps or pincers, then it is good that you cut around the root and scrape away all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called elevator, whose form is this:
And let it be of brief extremity, a little thick, and not sharpened so that it is not fractured.
Then if by this the root is uncovered, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular with extremity in which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a subtle pointed extremity.
And thus helped with this instrument having two edges, from which this is the suitable shape for the following: and with other instruments which I will describe in the scraping of teeth; because it is made with this instrument which is assembled with a large ring, and this is the shape:
of the triangular pointed extremity, twisted or short, which should have some thickness, and not be sharpened so that it is not too delicate.
And you should know that the instruments for the teeth are moved in a similar way to the other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisan in the art will find for himself, according to what it means for him, the operation and various diseases; because there are diseases for which the ancients did not devise or even think of a proper instrument, due to the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or the other bones of the mouth are fractured, or shattered, then weigh carefully on that place with what is convenient for the instruments and the forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help yourself with the gesture of which this is the shape:
And let there be in the alcune ( likely meaning "hollow" or "cavity") a small, gradually increasing tightness, and let it be held or tied at the mouth so that it does not evacuate or escape until the whole bone is fortified; and then restore the area with medicines convenient for this purpose.
If there is small porridge (or pus) in the bone, then take away that porridge and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of teeth that protrude beyond the others.
When the teeth protrude not according to their natural body and the form is faulty, and especially when it happens to women, and even more so to venerable old ladies; therefore consider this: if a tooth has no contact with another tooth, and it's not possible to file or smooth it, then remove that root; but if it's not attached to another tooth, then you cut that one with this instrument, the shape of which is like this; and it should be made from Indian steel of utmost sharpness.
And let your incision (cut) be the one with which you cut it, for several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it not be too pointed or sharper than the other teeth.
And if there is an eminent tooth exposed to the file, then sharpen that one with the iron file from India whose shape this is:
And let it be all of iron from India and marginally pointed; and let it be with many small points like a file, with which the tooth is sharpened little by little in many days with facility, so that no other tooth is bitten or wounded. And then anoint that end with the ointment, and rub it with the aforementioned razor.
And if it is a tooth of which one part is loose and the tongue is injured, then it is necessary that you sharpen the edge so that the roughness of that fraction is smoothed and polished, and is flattened so that the tongue does not become lacerated nor the speech corrupted.
Chapter thirty-three.
Of the restoration of gnashed teeth with wire of gold or silver.
When it happens to the teeth in front a concussion and removal by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated them with medications that tighten, and your treatment has not been effective, then so that they are not worn down by those which are tied with wire of gold and not silver, because silver becomes rotten and soon deteriorates, but gold is never changed in any way.
And let the thread be of such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the thread and take double its length between two healthy teeth, and then tie it with two knots of the thread between two molars, or one or more, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then direct the instrument to the area from which you started, and stretch your hand with ease and skill so that it is not injured.
And let your tension be the one with which you pull the thread away from the roots of the teeth that are not extracted.
And then cut off the superfluous extremities of the thread with the forceps or scissors, and put those aside in each place, gathered up, and hide them between the healthy tooth and the injured tooth, so that it does not harm the tongue. And then release that thread thus stretched like a cord.
If it is loose or broken, pull it or them with another thread in such a manner for all the time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two injured teeth, thus with these threads tied:
And when it happens that one tooth or two are returned to their proper place in the jaw, and are re-implanted thus as we have recommended, and they regrow.
And do not do this unless you are skilled and wise.
And some remedies are prepared from the bones of a cow, and are made into the shape of a tooth, and are placed in the location where the tooth is lacking, and are tightened as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Chapter thirty-four.
Of the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which comes with the tongue sometimes is natural to man, or is accidental and happens due to a wound which has already consolidated.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, their head being held back by you; and lift up their tongue, and carefully cut that nervous ligament according to the width into which the tongue is freed from its restraint.
But if there is some hardness or knot in it, and this has occurred due to consolidation of the wound, then you apply oil and cut it by the width into which you have found the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And beware that there isn't a tear in the flesh of the perineum and that you don't cut the artery and come out with a flow of blood.
Then wash the edges of the incision with warm water or wine or cold water; and then apply a dressing to protect it, for it is advisable that the patient keep their tongue still in each nostril so that it does not consolidate another passage.
If there is an excessive flow of blood, apply a bandage to the location; but if the blood comes out, then cauterize the area with a broad cautery that suits the case. And then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
On the extraction of a rabid or ulcerated tongue.
Some passages of the tongue cause an abscess resembling a small tumor, preventing the tongue from performing its natural operation; and it is so enlarged that it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it consists of opening the mouth of the patient, sitting in front of a candle and examining the abscess.
And if you see it is of a dark or black color, hard, in which the patient has no feeling, then do not touch that part which is cancerous.
And if it declines to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then put the onion on it, and cut that with a subtle spatula, and cut from the entire affected part; and if blood comes out during the time of your operation, then pause for a moment, so that the blood is restrained, until it is stopped.
And then return to your work until you have treated it with a complement of it, until it is washed with sour wine and salt; and cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter thirty-six.
Of the extraction of abscesses from both ears and of that which is born in the throat and of the other abscesses.
When I find in the throat a swelling, so there are glands that are assembled together, which are called before ears, which when you treat them with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little feeling, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; let it be until it is matured, and then you will treat that, or it will burst by itself.
And if it is of a white color, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what is thought to be an incision.
And the operation on it that you consider, during your operation, if the apostema has already been restored with a complete restoration or if it has diminished with some diminution; and then examine the patient in front of the sun, and the head of it should be in the tieu position, and open the mouth of it, and the servant holding between their hands press on the tongue of it with an instrument of noble motion, which is the form of this:
And let it be made of silver or iron, and let it be subtle as a knife.
Then when you press on that tongue and the apostema is shown to you, and you see above it the infected vein, then take hold of it and place it in the amenla, and pull it towards the divided parts as much as you can. Or when you pull out some cause of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument of which this is the form:
Or when you pull out some cause of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument of which this is the form: and it is assembled with forceps, although the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one of them is in the end of the other, with sharp points, which should be made of iron or forged.
If this instrument is not at your present, then describe that spatula of which this is the shape: And be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And since you have made an incision, make the other according to this same method of incision, and apply the incision to the patient's wound with cold water.
If there is an efflux of blood, treat with water from the decoction of seeds of milgran or of leaves of myrtle and similar to that for the causes of haemorrhage so that the flow of blood is restrained, and apply a cure so that it is healed.
And some abscesses are found in the gum and others on the ears, and incise those according to what was said and dictated in the incision of two similar abscesses.
And I have already treated a woman for an abscess which had formed on her gum, the abscess was of a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed her mouth, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and she had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she would have been near death if treatment had been delayed by a day or two.
And the abscess had already pushed so much that it had formed two passages between which the pus flowed out through two tracts.
Then I cut through the fistula and put my finger in one of their holes, and pulled it out, and having drawn out a large portion from it, and then I made an incision to comprehend the other tract, and then I forced open its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then I put my finger in the hole into the abscess.
And then I cut out a large part of it, and there did not flow from it much except a little blood. Therefore the abscess of that woman is resolved, and she began to drink water, and then took a diet, therefore I did not see any need to operate on that abscess anymore for a long time, and another abscess succeeded in its place, which operated between where it was prolonged.
Then I applied heat and cauterized the abscess of it, then dried with adhesives; and then I bandaged and did not know that God would do this close to me.
Chapter 37.
On the incision of a navel when it is abscessed.
When there is a discharge from the navel, and it is abscessed and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the part below thick and round, then it is called bubo.
More often when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and not confused with your cure, and also many times that the aposteme cauterized is stopped from them and is subtle, then beware that you write down those that are aggregated around; and if it is to that longitude, and it is sanguine, of dark color or black, and not to their consent, then beware that you hold the incision of them, for in that there is fear about the patient.
And when you see that according to the method that has been said about its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit and press their tongue with an instrument by which you will shape their form and put the nail in the new moon, and pull it down and write it down with one of two instruments which is mentioned in the incision of two molars.
And beware that you do not write it down unless what is adjusted according to the natural term, for if you write more of them, you will injure their speech.
And after the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two molars, and cure it until it is healed.
More often if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, beware that you use art in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of the cautery on it is not but with sharp water, and it is that you put the head of the patient in the tie, and then press the tongue of them with the instrument that we have said, and then take from the water which we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and apply to this living cause, and put this neither sparse nor subtle, and fill the cavity of the instrument for which this is the shape:
Let the extremity of the patient's cavity be where the medicine is placed, as with the cavity of a ulcer or sore, and place the instrument of medicine on the wound, and the patient will spit over the sheet to prevent saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one from entering the inside medicine, so that it does not end up in the throat of the patient and so that it descends.
And apply your hand with the medicine, and squeeze that out onto the uvula for half an hour until it becomes disintegrated and seated by the biting of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the sore, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and introduce the sore into the cloth with a tube to apply until the cloth adheres to it, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound, and then leave it so that it dries and falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then the cauterization is removed from the circuit of the wound with a cloth dipped in butter, and cleanse with what is in the circuit of the patient's medicine, and let it be washed with cold water, and let it be treated beforehand with an embrocation, and anointed with gargling until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is considered safer than incision and less fearful.
Some wounds are cured with this water that is more subtle than cautery and incision, because it is cured with subfumigation in this manner: take calamine, hyssop, origan, rue, arabic scammony, chamomile, broyde and similar to those of the herbs, and mix all these causes, or some of them, in a bowl, and let them be submerged in warm wine, and boiling; and the bowl should be washed decently, and in the middle of the bowl there should be a hole, on which an instrument made of silver or iron is placed according to this manner; it should be made of silver or iron.
And the extremity should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor goes up to the uvula above the tonsil, until the uvula is much suffocated.
And then apply it to those many wounds until it is dry, and beware that you do not make this treatment at the time of the onset of abscesses, because too much would be adjusted in the abscess, and it is not good that you do this, unless you have the declaration of the abscess of the patient's doctor.
If the instrument is not at your present, then take a cane and place a closed hook in the extremity of it, so that the mouth of the patient is stopped up, because the hook of the cane prohibits bad air from entering the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter 38.
Of the extraction of thorns and of that which adheres to the throat and of other causes.
Mucous plugs adhere to the throat or a fishbone or some other cause.
Therefore see that you extract that which is apparent from those things, on which the sight falls, since you press the tongue with an instrument under the teeth, so that it may be declared to you what is in the throat.
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because perhaps the cause attached to the throat will be brought out by vomiting; or that the patient swallow a piece of soap or root of licorice or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dry marine sponge and tie it with a thread, and put it firmly in, and make the patient gargle with it, so that when it comes to the place where there are thorns, then they will be brought out. Take a needle and it should be tied with a thread, and immediately the thread should be pulled out; or take a lancet and immediately pull out the blood and immediately let it be extracted.
If not, then make a cast of those causes that we have discussed, then use an instrument made of lead in this form:
And let it be made thick so that a small rod fits, and at the extremity of it be hollowed out the part that you insert into the patient's throat with ease.
And raise the patient's head upwards, and beware of touching the bone of their throat, so that it does not go into the body and with what you insert, whether it be the bone or the spine, or what the doctor puts in with his hand.
But when the patient inserts it themselves, it goes more deeply, according to the science of the place of the cause and presses down below, and pulls the hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity that has been prepared in advance, before it is cast.
Chapter 39.
Of the extraction of blood coagulated on the throat.
When the blood is treated with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and not with confectures, consider then on the throat of the patient the tongue, because you have compressed it with an instrument that you have recommended to them.
Therefore if you treat the bleeding, extract that one with a small instrument or with subtle gestures decently.
And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a curved cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and place in the cavity of the cannula an ignited iron, and do this as many times (until the bleeding is dead and stops from the throat) and withhold water from the patient for the entire day.
Then take a pitcher full of cold water, and put the patient's mouth in it, and wash their mouth with it; and do not swallow any of this remedy and give them water an hour later with their hand, because the bleeding stops as soon as they feel the cold water.
But if it is not cured by the remedy that we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cypress or with asafoetida through the instrument that we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, until the fever subsides.
And there is another manner of operation in the fumigation of that, which is that you take a pipe in which are ignited coals and the pipe is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole, and let the extremity of the instrument be composed in that hole; and give below the fumigation; and put the patient's mouth on the extremity of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you know that the fumigation has reached the bleeding, because the bleeding subsides as soon as it does.
And if it doesn't work, then you should try the subfumigation with heated vapors, and keep the patient from drinking, and make them eat salty foods and alhes, and don't give them water, and it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which the bloodletting of the throat is treated when it is visible; and it resembles a forceps as many times, except that it has a curvature in its handle: which is applied to the throat, and the extremity of it resembles a beak of a heron, which is hollow, in which is pressed a file, so that when we compress any cause, it does not let go.
Chapter 40.
In which is the sum of the sermon in perception of abscesses and in section of them.
The abscesses are many special species, of many kinds, according to which one remembers them, each one in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and section of them by two methods, of which one is for the species of abscesses that are in the body itself; and for what we compress regarding humidity.
And the second method is suitable for the places in which accidents of the body occur, because an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy place is different from one in a joint; and each of them requires judgment through operation.
More of the abscesses are such that they do not need to be punctured, but rather just matured with the application of a plaster or dressing on those.
Other abscesses that need to be punctured when they are severe, and are not matured according to their nature, such as abscesses that are close to the joints, because an abscess that is close to a joint, its being there is prolonged until the purulent matter that is in the circuit of it, and thus the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, which makes a cause for contraction of that member; or it is an abscess close to a principal member, and if you delay the puncturing of it until it is matured, it will harm the principal member; or it is close to the anus, then puncture the one that is not matured; and it is not suitable to puncture the crude, unripe ones, but only the ones that are close to the anus, so that the pressure of it does not push upwards and it is elongated to the parts inside the anus, and a fistula is made, or it is made in the term of it that is not healthy. It is necessary that you know the time for puncturing the abscess, and this is when it is matured.
And it is known that it is a good sign when the decrease of pain and the cessation of fever occur, and also the reduction of swelling and of pulse rate, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And beware that you know the perforation can occur in the place where pus has accumulated from the abscess and from pus coming from the purification of the swelling.
And the perforation can be through the length of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the thighs or feet, and in the place of the tendons, of the nerve cords, of the arteries; and, finally, in all places where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, the use of perforation is according to that member.
It is better when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is preferable to delay the perforation until digestion is confirmed according to the compliment, as we have said; for if you perforate before that, it prolongs the body of the pus and of the muddy matter, and forces the lips of the wound to become hardened and the depth of it.
Most abscesses should be perforated according to the width of the flesh or body where necessary, or according to that of which the member indicates.
And see that you administer a small perforation, in the large abscesses a large and wide perforation or incision according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And other abscesses in which it is seen that the tissue is excavated and ulcerated, when it is thus done with a poultice and dressing, in terms that have already been stated, just like that which occurs in cases of dublecs and buboes.
And of those that are incised with a section having three edges; and of those in which the incision is made like the figure of a leaf of mint, like the abscesses of the angles.
And of them in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, similar to those.
More, that one in which there is not a deep abscess, but only superficial ones, see that you perforate it with a superficial perforation, or merely a plane.
And see that when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, that you perforate it and do not worry about extracting all the pus at that time; having extracted a part of it, and then apply a dressing to the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and apply repeated dressings according to the gradation until it is fully evacuated.
Majorly if the patient is of frail virtue, or a woman with child, or a small infant, or an old person in decrepitude, because the animal spirit moves and is resolved with the egress of the blood, and fortifies the morale of the patient, and you operate on them.
Keep this chapter with great caution, and make your perforation in which you perforate these apostems, so that you cleanse the plagues and consider if the plague of the apostem is slight, or is a flat section, then you administer the ointments of garlic or old cot; and if the apostem is large, and the fissures of the perforation are moved, then make sure to apply a dressing in each wound so that they heal together.
And if in the apostem a part of the skin is cut off or has been hollowed out in the circuit, then make sure to fill it with old cot or with a thread made from flax or linen cloth, as when you treat wounds or roots, with humidity; and apply this for three days; and afterwards remove it and cure the wound with what is necessary until it is healed.
But if there is an outflow of blood during the time of your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar in the places where you apply a linen cloth, and place that on the area of the outflowing blood, to stop the flow.
If the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary that you administer treatment and cure, and sprinkle powders which have been recommended in many places in our book and division.
If it is in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then it is necessary that you wrap wool in wine and hot oil, and apply these to the areas.
And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then it is necessary that you apply wool soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all this should be cold so that it is the third day, as we have said, and it is necessary that you open the abscess and cleanse it and administer to it the cure that is convenient for it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary to know for the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the way of distinction I have already spoken of all abscesses in whatever manner it is the way of the cure of them by chapters specifically.
Chapter 11.
Of the section on abscesses that occur in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck small abscesses form, and they are a species of knots that contain tunics which are adherent to them; and the species of them are numerous.
And of them are swellings, and of those that contain humidity resembling slime. And of those that contain humidity resembling dust, and resemble them; and of those that are leprous, harsh.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, since you must not make the extraction of those provoke anger or irritation.
And the operation in section of those is that you squeeze those with an instrument the shape of which goes near to them, which is called entromes, while you know what they contain.
For if that which it contains is humidity, then cut that one with a section according to the length by superficial section according to this form:
And begin the section from line B to line G. Then when the humidity is evacuated, then you excise that which contains the humidity, and do not leave any of that cause of all, for if many times seen returns, if it remains from that same cause.
And then submerge the wound in Egyptian paste, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with that the wound and leave it until another day, for on that which corrodes all that is broken of that skin.
And then apply a second and third Egyptian ointment to that wound if it is indicated for the patient, until you are confident that there will be no rupture of any cause of that skin layer; then heal the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty knots, then you will incise that second in this manner: Make an incision in the shape of a cross, and put threads between the two lips of the incision and extract that from the entire affected part, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains it.
More so if your skillfulness makes opposition, then do what you know to be recounted as primary.
And similarly do in the abscess of incision and cure according to what you have been told; an incision on a putrid abscess is considered lighter, because it is of little blood and little humidity.
And some times there are abscesses on the head of some men in whom there is absolutely no humidity; this is why you will not incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and you will touch the abscess as if it were a dull, rough, white stone, which could not be touched, and if anyone were to strike that place, they would injure it.
Moreover, in other accidental apostems of the head, this is not the chapter, just as the apostems that come to the heads of infants and should be removed from the roots of the ears, but the section of all these should be a superficial section.
And make a perforation in those of the lowest part of their chest, so that the body of the blood is alleviated to the lower parts.
And then heal those with what is convenient for that cure.
Chapter 42.
Of the section of scrofula, which occur in the neck.
Many times seen, these apostems appear in the neck and in the axillae and in the groin; and some seen occur in the other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and many that are engendered between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own proper tunic, and just as in the nodes and apostema of the head, as we have recommended.
And the species of these scrofula are many, for some of them are lumpy, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey cure.
Therefore, in that condition, you see good disposition in the Touching, of which the color of what is manifest is proper to the color of the cody, and it is moved to the entire affected part, and it is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not deep, so that you should make an incision on the superficial surface of the upper part of the body to the lower part of the line of .G. between the line of .B., and remove the entire affected part, and stretch two lips of the cody with a forceps or more if needed, as we have said in the apostemas of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is greater caution that the vein or nerve is not cut.
And let the spatula be not too sharp, that it does not touch your hand with the incision, or disturb the patient, and that you cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and hinder your operation, then apply to the wound vitriol paste or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and tighten the wound, and lay on it so that the acidity of the apostema is restrained and the wound is softened and begins to be purged. When the blood is separated.
Then return to your operation until the pain is alleviated.
And then investigate with your finger if there is any cause for the other small tumors of scrofula, therefore cut out those and clean those.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then beware that you do not cut out that scrofula from its root. Beware that you tie that wound with a strong double bandage and that you dress it before it falls into a bad condition.
And then fill the wound with old fat that you have already mixed with Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then beware that you adjust the two lips of the wound and cauterize as much pus as so that there is not remaining any excessive matter.
But if you see that there remains excessive matter due to the size of the scrofula, beware that you intend to cut out the root of it, and extract it, and apply a suture and do what is said.
And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation where it appears to you the place of maturation, and stop the perforation of what is said to be the worst pus of the body, as we have said.
And then apply administration of perforation, with warm poultices and similarities to those, so that it corrodes the Roma of the corruption. And then when you see the wound is already cleaned, then cure it with a poultice of generating flesh so that it may be healed.
Chapter 43.
On the section of the pilum of the accidental apostema inside the throat.
The ancients said this section in the pill, and they didn't see anyone in our land who had made that.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those ones.
But in men having squint, it is advisable that the extraction of the pill be avoided, since for this reason not all the veins and major ones of the patient are here.
But in those who have apostemas cut in the mouth or throat or two ears, when the disease is not in the cane, it is advisable to use the section of pill to flee the loss which is made by perforation.
Therefore it is advisable when we want that, to incise the pill with three circles of the circles of the pill, or four with small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, that the section be in the ciphac, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, since it is deprived of flesh and the veins of blood from it are few.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, then he should extend the ligature of the ankle with a bandage, and then tie the bandage so that it penetrates to the channel, avoiding the veins of blood if there is some cause for alarm.
Then note the ciplach as we have recommended; and it is indicated for the section of the channel by the weakness, which is from that excess that is from its disruption and by the separation of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour is reached in which the perforation is feared, bring together the lips of the wound's bandage, and sew only the skin with the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow so that it is healthy.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended is not an exposition, but rather it shows that some of these apostems have already operated on the ankle of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their life is in danger, and some will have to cut the skin so that the patient can breathe over the area of the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
And by this command, let the opened wound be such that the evil of the sickness is consumed; and it is the evil of it for three days; and then I command you to dress the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And that which I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and put it in the gullet of a man, and pierced a part of the vein of the lung, and I was called to his care, and I touched the mucus as one touches that of the dead, and I uncovered the wound and I touched the blood which was coming out of the small wound.
Then I confessed that it had not wounded a vein or tendon, and the coming out was from the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
And I did not touch the servant if he didn't improve in his health, and after several days he returned to improvement of his conditions.
And now I say that in the removal of a tumor there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
Of removal regarding an abscess which occurs in the throat, and it is called throat hernia.
This abscess, called throat hernia, is a large abscess according to the body's condition, and it dies in women.
It is secondary to two manners, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, it is not necessary to cure.
And the accidental one is secondary to two manners of which one is similar to fatty tumors, and the other manner is similar to an abscess which is made by arterial swelling, and in that there is fear. And it is not suitable to make compression with iron except on the one that is small. And you probe that and investigate it with the aforementioned, and if you find something similar to fatty tumors, and it is not suspended in any of the veins, then you incise it in the same way as the nodes, and extract it with the fluid that it contains from the skin and flesh; and if not, then it is prescribed a complete treatment, and apply a cure to the area with what is suitable for healing until it is healed.
Chapter 44.
On the section of the species of knots (or nodes).
Of the nodes there are many species and I have already spoken of all their species in the division.
And it is suitable that I recommend thus the difference between a node and an abscess to remove doubt.
Therefore I say that in an abscess there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the excess is calmed; and it is a complicated putrefaction which then stops the fever, pain, and heat.
There is no warmth or fever or pain in the thigh, and it contains a cyst that is next to the bladder.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a waist and is made thus as a vacuum, whether larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, which are either fat and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, depending on how it divides.
Therefore, when you approach the cure of the knot, that you expel and inquire into the beginning with the instrument which is called intromes, according to how its form will be found in the chapter which is proper to this.
And it is the method of inquiry into abscesses and all knots, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid place which you find in the abscess, and you will rotate the threads of the needle with it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the cyst.
Then finally put your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the intromes and consider what is coming out from the remains of it.
And if the flowing humidity is expelled, of whatever color it may be, then you will proceed with drying on the surface according to what has been said about other abscesses.
And if from the sediment of the urine there is no humidity, then you will know that it is a fatty substance.
And dry it on the cloth having dried in the shape of a cross according to this form: Thus as you have been taught, and hang that cloth on a hook, and scratch the outer layer of the entire affected area with ease, and keep the skin or bag, if possible, above it and extract that fluid from the node.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that fluid, and many times it happens that it goes away by itself, and then you extract it gently until no more comes out for any reason.
For if from it a flow of some kind, little or much, the knot returns according to the more.
And if you see that from it a small part flows, then fill the wound with some corrosive sharp powders and tighten the dressing, and place on it a cauterized plaster, and cure that one with another treatment until it is healed.
And if it is a large knot, then sew the two lips of it and cure it with that which will make it heal.
But if the vein is contrary, or not pulsating, then cauterize and fill the place of the third vertebra which is vacant and apply that strict treatment for two days or three until the wound closes and the inflammation of the blood subsides; and then return to separate that which is broken from the knot.
Chapter 46.
On the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those are the forms of the introducers, and they are of three species, one of which is large, another is medium, and another is small.
The form of the large introducer is this:
The form of the small introducer is this:
Made of iron, with a handle, and well-crafted extremities, so that they hold the instrument in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are named probes, and one of them is called a rod.
And they are of three kinds, for one of them is large, another is medium, and the third is small.
The form of the large probe, its shape:
The form of the medium probe, its shape:
The form of the small probe, its shape:
It is suitable that they should be used for these abscesses and ulcers and fistulas and tumors, so that between them there are bones and other causes.
And they are made with round, thick, and broad needles, like large pins on which the threads are sewn, and they are made of copper, or of iron, or of silver, And the best ones are those made of copper.
They are made the experiments of black lead, which agree that by those the fistulas in the cavity of which they are reflected, should be reflected with their lightness on those reflections.
And it is of three species, some of which are long, and of the others are medium, and of the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of the tightness of it.
Shape of the large experiment with lead:
Shape of the medium experiment with lead:
Shape of the small experiment with lead:
The shapes of the tools are of many species, some of which are simple, for which there is only a curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
And of them are metal tools, and they are of three species.
And of those are tools having two curvatures, and they are of three species.
And of them are ones having three curvatures, and they are of three species.
And all those things are necessary in their place.
Shape of a small simple tool, shape of it:
Shape of a large wound having two curves: Shape of a medium-sized wound having two curves: Shape of a small wound having two curves:
Shape of a large wound having three curves:
Shape of a medium-sized wound having three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and the apostems are cut and scraped, and they are of three species, namely large, medium, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of the medium-sized scalpel:
Shape of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and not placed in such a manner, but rather so that it can be done gently in the scraping of the nodes, the fear of cutting a vein or a nerve, and for this reason the patient is comforted and finds tranquility, obtaining a little relief which they find from the scraping of the apostem.
And these are the forms of ailments, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
There are made treatments of iron and they resemble a king's rod with which the liver is treated.
And it is in the extremity where the spot is pricked with a hidden spatula and in that course to the divided parts of the teeth and of the flour, when you want, as you see.
The forms of probes, which are sharpened between the fingers to make a perforation of the abscesses and do not pierce the ailments, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those tools:
The forms of vessels with which the flow of blood is diverted, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of it:
There are made instruments of iron, rounded with some length, and they are subtle.
And it is necessary that these species of vessels be at hand, your large, medium, and small ones, so that through them the flow of blood can be diverted with speed when needed, and then when first aid is not medicine.
One does not use these to cut into the entire body, and one only uses them in fleshy areas, such as in the muscles of the thighs and hips, and in the muscles of the arms, and on the breasts and belly and groin, resembling other fleshy and humid muscles.
And some incisions are made with those small instruments that resemble scissors or forceps, according to this form; through which the blood is let when it is done by phlebotomy, or a cut of a vein or artery.
And some incisions are made roundly according to this form:
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of men's breasts that have become similar to women's.
Some men have inflated breasts which are a result of excessive sleeping and eating, and thus their breasts become inflated and similar to women's, and they become soft and flabby.
And to the one who has that, make an incision with a lunar scalpel in this manner, from line B to line G, and then excise the entire thickness, and fill the wound with medicated fleshing ointment, and sew the two lips of the wound together with stitches, and cure it until it is healthy.
If the breast declines to the sides and is softened by its magnitude, so that it approaches the women's, then it should be divided into two lateral parts, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, each of which is contained in the other until the end of each, while the larger line contains the smaller one according to this pattern of the line of B and the line of G. Then extract the cord that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fatness, and administer what we have said about the suture and powders, which is necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of what must be cut due to the restlessness of the patient, and due to an flow of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive ointment and let it be until it corrodes the roughness, and then cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of the perforation of abscesses that come from the thigh or the buttocks.
These abscesses that come from the thigh or the buttocks are of the species of scrofulas, hard ones, which contain a skin that is sacred.
And of those there are some that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity are covered so that they are incised with lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is evacuated from the apostema of the blood, then you complete the cot or viel and send it to the other side.
And then the cot should be stopped and cured with a suitable ointment for that, until it is healed.
And if the apostema is of the species of knots and of scrofula, then you should incise above that thus as we have said in the section about scrofula treatments.
But if the wound is extended to such a degree that it becomes putrid, then administer to him a cautery according to what we have previously said.
Chapter 49.
Of the section of apostems that occur by way of the arterial vein or the blood vessel.
When the artery is broken, and the vein that is above it is consolidated, then it causes an apostem: And the signs by which it is recognized that inflammation and apostem are through the artery or vein are: for when an apostem is through an artery, it is long and attached to the front of the body; and when you press on the apostem with your fingers, you feel a hissing sound in the vein.
And that which is through a vein is the reason for the apparent manifestation of the body.
And cutting into this abscess is an error, and especially in those who have ulcers, and in the joints, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is a serious matter, therefore it is advisable that its treatment with iron be avoided, and that which is on the extremities, or on the head, should be avoided.
More about that which is from them due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, incisions in the tube cut into the lung; and immediately after the incision apply ointment with onions and immediately apply the artery, and tear the tunics so that it may be discovered.
And immediately put on that needle and make it penetrate through to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to have an injection of two arteries which are in the temples.
And immediately prick the place which is between two ligaments with a spatulum so that the blood comes out as much as is in it, and let the abscess be dissolved.
And immediately administer a cure in which is generated pus inside so that the ligaments fall; and immediately heal that with a convenient ointment for it, inside so that it may be healed.
If it is an abscess caused by a cut in the vein, then take care to hold with your hand that which is possible for the abscess on the cord, and then insert the needle in the place where you have held your hand, and make it penetrate; and be it in the double thread from which you extract the one from the other side, and tie the abscess with a strong ligature as has been said to you in the ligature of the fourth part with two parts on the extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert the thread with the needle so that all of the abscess is covered by the first incision of the needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in its middle place where there is that which comes out of it, then you incise the superfluous part of the cord, and let that which is tied to it remain.
And apply a poultice on it, which has been submerged in wine and oil, and administer the cure that is made with warm baths and ointments so that it may be healed.
Chapter one of the abscess which occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Thus when an abscess occurs in the artery and in the vein, and similarly an abscess occurs in the nerves when it occurs from percussion or from excessive labor, and from similar symptoms.
And it is made in the hands of the patient in the places of the helpers or of the ankle, or in any place where the joints are bent.
And it is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the larger parts of the patient's disposition six of them and when it is strait with vehementia, it seems to the patient as a stupor.
And it is not an abscess that collects in the front of the body, and for this reason the coda (or tail) is left, and it is bent to one side and does not go to the parts either before or behind.
Therefore, that which is in the joints should not be covered with iron, for it would make the contraction stronger.
Hands of one who has a wound on the head or on the forehead with spatula. If it is a small abscess, then take that one with the forceps and cut it out from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and excavate it, and place a dressing on it; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter of the hip.
Of the section concerning an abscess which occurs on the thigh that extends to the abdomen.
We find in some men certain excrescences grown in the abdomens of those and in other parts of the body of those thighs which are called fungal due to similarity with fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head of that is thick; and already the lips of that are turned outward, and it is of that which is small, and it is of that which is very magnified.
And I have already seen one, and in the abdomen of him there were two thighs which were more similar to fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with minimal roots.
And already the lips of those were turned outward and were splitting, and humidity was flowing from that the whole time.
Then I incised those and extracted one weighing eighteen ounces, and the other weighing six ounces.
And the operation in the incision of it is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the tumor is white, humid, with subtle roots; then you incise with a broad spatula, and be in your presence cauteries at the focus, for many excrescences must expel the section of him very abundantly; and if you see abundance, cauterize that.
And if the patient is pale and fearful, beware of excessive iron; but then take a new-made lead plaque, and apply it to that part, the handling of which is what we have already described; and leave it on for two days.
Then adjust it in the strictness of the lead wire; thus, do not cease to apply a large amount of lead plaster on the ailment, until it is healed and falls off by itself through its own effort.
But if the ailment is of a coarse root, then in its treatment there is some cause for fear and dread, and especially so in one who has it in the belly.
But it is possible that you treat the worst of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure it until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not attempt to treat the ailment which is of a dark color, of little sensation, and sluggish regard, for that is absolute cancer.
And I will come to the memory of the sick person then with consolation.
Chapter or Head ( possibly "Capitol" is an older
Of the treatment of the prominence of the navel.
Prominence of the navel is made by many causes; or by fissures of the ciphac which is above the belly, and from it the web or intestine comes out as in other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery as has been said before, or by constricted fatness in it.
More often it is due to the fracture of the spleen and the inflammation of the weave, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and it is a serious pain, and it appears in various situations. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the situation of that man with what we have previously mentioned, of great and intense diversity, and when you press on that man with your fingers it is hidden, and then returns; and it is strong with him in this way, and it is magnified by the movement of the bath and the violent exercise.
More often it is due to humidity, then it is a serpent and is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor does it increase.
And if it is due to blood, then with this symptom the abscess appears on the declined blackness.
More often if it is due to bad flesh, then the abscess is grievous, thick and hard, and it is fixed according to a quantity.
More often if it is due to flatulence, then the touch of it is painful.
And the operation on it is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of the liver, or of vein, or due to flatulence; then be warned that you should be prohibited from the treatment of it, for in that there is fear and anxiety as I have instructed in the chapter in which I have spoken about abscesses due to liver and vein.
If the protrusion is due to the intestine or the membrane, then it is advisable that the patient hold their own thigh, and stretch out; and place a tent under the entire navel area, and instruct them to stay bent between their thighs over their back, and encircle with a spatula the navel area over the location where you have placed the tent; and extend the majority of the abscess to the upper parts with a large hook; and place it in the area with a strong or weak thread and the technique of the ligature.
And then probe the middle of the abscess, extended over the ligament and insert the finger in that place and feel for the intestine; and if you have not found it or retained it by the ligament, then extract it quickly and push the intestine to the inner parts of the belly.
And if you have found the membrane, then take it with a hook; and cut away the excess of it.
But if it is opposite to your artery or vein, then encircle that spot, and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them into the two strong threads and push two needles through the area you have made around the abscess in a cruciform shape, which should penetrate; and then tie the abscess into four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and dress the area where the extended flesh protrudes and falls by itself; or cut away what is putrid and rotten, and treat that which comes from the ulcers within until it is healed.
And if the protrusion of the navel is from no flesh in it or due to humidity, then it is necessary that you treat the abscess as we have said and remove the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and treat that which comes out and consolidate the area.
Chapter 3.
On the treatment of cancer.
We have already spoken, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner it is possible to cure it with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid iron treatment so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have spoken of cancer generated in the matrix and caution of its treatment.
And the ancients said that some cancers in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, such as cancer of the breast or thigh and similar things on the limbs, can be extracted entirely, especially when it is just beginning and small.
But when it is old and grave, it is not advisable to touch it, because I have never seen anyone recover from that one, nor have I seen others who have been cured of it, or that it has been overcome.
And the operation on them is when it is allocated thus as we have said, it is that you precede and release the patient from black bile purges, and then apply the sagana, if there is an evident and visible repugnance.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which there is a place for the operation, and then anoint the affected area with oils that cover it; and then concave the entire part with a bandage to make a good enclosure so that no cause of the roots of it will be disturbed. And let the blood flow, and do not constrict the vessel, and press the places, and purge the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument, whichever is most convenient of the instruments.
But if there is opposition to the thick blood of an incision in the vein or artery, then cauterize that place until the flow of blood ceases, and then cure it with another cure so that it will be healed.
Chapter five.
Of the cure for dropsy.
We have already recounted, in the division, the species of dropsy of water, and the signs of each species, of the cure for it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is not similar to the species of altitudes alone, and it is not approximated with iron to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hypochondria, because that is mortal.
And when you have medicated this species of hydropic tympanites with medicine and have not confirmed your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already obtained debility, or it is with another illness, another hydrops, thus as if it is in the toes or belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is about that.
But if you see the patient with excessive vertigo, and it is not another illness but hydrops alone, and neither infant nor old, then the management of the operation is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and minister to them, apply warmth to their belly with your hand, introducing water to the lower part of the abdomen, and apply a warm sponge to the spine in this manner:
Be of two sharp parts long, of sharp extremity like a sponge; but however be brief in the alcove, little by little, so that in the operation you do not go into the intestine, and that you touch it.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from part of the intestines, for it is known that you have sectioned the navel string to the quantity of three fingers to the partitions of the intestines, on the right side of the patient near the navel.
But if the generation of dropsy is due to liver disease, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
And if the generation of it is from the bladder, then your section should be on the right side.
And it is not suitable that your section be on the rib over which the disease wishes to flow, so that the excesses do not run to that cold place.
And then perforate the instrument through the entire cord, and then insert it into that section, and lift your hand with the spatulum between the cord and the siphach, and you will extract that; if it is the quantity of a fingernail or about.
And then puncture the siphach so that the spatulum reaches the empty place, which is the place of the water. And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the shape: and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or gilt iron, on which in the lower part there is a small hole, and on the sides of it are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its extremity is fashioned according to the shape of a feather, thus sometimes:
And in the extremity of the pus that is above the arm, when the instrument penetrates to the water, then they put it on the instrument, so it evacuates from the water in the middle amount, because if you evacuate from the same amount that doesn't fit in the hour, perhaps the patient will die from resolution of their animal spirit, or approaches death closely.
Empty it according to the quantity of the virtue of the patient and as the disposition of the patient indicates, concerning the virtue of their pulse and the goodness of them.
And then extract the instrument, and hold back the water which is the cause that is retained by the tube, which holds the pipe that is above the siphon, for which it is recommended to you that you perforate in that manner.
And then insert the instrument to the other side if the patient tolerates it, and extract from the water a small quantity, and do this for several days without fear, and beware of error while not spilling much water.
But if you suspect the patient, and a large quantity of water is extracted, then treat them as if they were buried in hot sand, and move them to a bath, and expose them to the sun for a long time; and treat them with desiccative medicines until they are healed.
Cauterize on the stomach, and next to the liver approach the extraction of the water, according to what has been recounted in what has been previously stated.
Treat the area near the liver, following established
Regarding the treatment of infants whose urinary openings are not perforated.
Some times, in some infants, the belly of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or the passage is narrow or it is not in its place).
Therefore, we must make an opening for it as soon as it is born with a subtle spatulum according to this form:
And then pause in the hole a thin lead clamp and tie it, and leave it for three days or for four.
And when it wants to urinate, it should be uncovered and urine should flow; and then the clamp should be returned.
And if you do not leave the lead in place, it is possible that the urine which passes over the area will not close the opening.
It is better for the one whose hole is narrow to be treated with a lead clamp, as we have said, for many days until it is widened.
It is worse for those in whom the hole is not in its place, but rather is situated, which causes it to be one of those born with the hole at the end of the head of the penis, so that they cannot urinate properly inside, until they elevate the penis to their mother's parts above; and it is not due to generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother as it should, and it is a very bad malady.
And the manner of the operation on it is that the patient should be placed on their back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with vehement extraction, and incise the head of the penis at the place of the perineum with a sharp spatula, just as one cuts a feather, or so that you do not touch any part, so that the middle of the vein seems like the head of the penis and the blood flows into the middle place according to what is convenient.
And beware that in your operation of blood flow, for many times it happens that this occurs; and be careful with the patient that you are treating, so that you do not cut off the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter Six.
About the treatment of what is cut in the prepuce on the head of the penis and of corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Many times it happens that this treatment is cut on the penis and it is an excess of flesh.
And one of them is malignant and the other is not malignant.
Not malignant, it is advisable to suspend it with a subtle hook and cut it until it is completely removed; and then apply a poultice of submirgit, an Egyptian ointment; and then, cure it with a diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, with a black color, then it is advisable that you apply cautery near the incision and the root of it.
Moreover if the ulcer is on the prepuce of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then it is advisable that you remove the ulcer that is inside first, until it is consolidated; and then treat the outside one, because when you treat both at the same time, it is not certain that it will not be complicated.
And also amenorrhea and black corruption occur in the genitals and in the prepuce, therefore it is advisable that you conquer all that which is already corrupted and that which wants to corrupt or is already corrupted; and apply a liniment on that area with honey, which is mixed with flour of wheat and of various herbs such as mint and chamomile.
And treat one with the other treatment until it is healthy.
Moreover if there is an abundance of bloody flux, then administer lunar cautery in this manner:
for juvenile cautery is for two purposes at the same time, that is to say, for the flow of blood and for the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed entirely at that time, then it is necessary that you insert into the middle of the foreskin a lead tube so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence only occurs in one whose foreskin is its own, and for whom circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to a plague or an abscess) it is necessary that you scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from the entire partition.
And if it is difficult to distinguish those things precisely, then it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula on some part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is perforated by its subtlety effortlessly.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin thread, which has been soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then let it be treated with a strong styptic until it is consolidated.
Chapter 48.
Of the purification of infants and the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity problems: but rather it's an operation of our will and intention, and those who undergo it are properly infants, it's necessary that we assign the best operation and path so they lose less health.
Thus I say that the ancients did not recommend circumcision for their free men, because they didn't use it in their laws, and it's not so, but rather we have acquired through experience, which is the cause that has been found by most of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a new knife and tongs; and they use ligature with thread and incision with nail.
And I have already proved all these methods and didn't find better purification with forceps, or ligature with thread than the purification with the nail, because many times the skin escapes from the fingers, because the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and one layer remains below, and it is necessary to make another incision and painful surety. And in the purification that is made by the Alpecati, and is digital, which the barbers use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secure, because the foreskin enters into the wound of it.
More in the operation of the nail, the iron instrument breaks and corrupts your operation. And the bowel of the infant is short by nature, and many times seen in such a manner that there is no need for modification, and you have seen it.
More of the modification that is done with forces and ligaments of the faith, goodness, experiment reveals to me, because the forces are of proportional incision, for which the acuity that is above is as the acuity that is below; and thus when you press your hand in proportion to the two acuities, and you make an incision according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the faith with a figure containing the bowel of the entire partition, in which no error is made.
And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the infant stay still if it is one of those who understand a little, that you should not do but rather you should place the faith in its belly only, and that you should read to it until the other day.
Then do this to cheer up in all that manner which is at your possibility, so that it receives its intelligence. And then prepare to be between your hands in a prepared station, and do not be careless; and hide the forces in your hand or below the tie of your foot, so that the infant does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into the patient's vagina and blow into the womb, and pull out what is inside until the head of the fetus is visible, and then cleanse that which is accumulated in the placenta due to rot.
The shape of the purging medicines, this is the shape:
Some are to be extracted without cutting and the others are to be cut, so that the branch of the nail is not visible, and the length of the two edges is as sharp as the length of two fingernails together.
The greatest mistake in purging is when the internal womb ejects all or part of it outside through the incision.
Therefore, I advise that you stretch out your finger during your hour on the affected area and write down this prescription according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a needle and write it down.
More so if three days have passed, and the swelling that is inflamed above the affected thigh has gone down, then you should let out what is accumulated in the abscessed place, and extract it with ease, and write it according to what you have prepared.
And beware of the head of the thigh, because it would not be good for him.
And so treat it with the remedy that consolidates the wound with powders which we have recommended in the treatise of powders.
And if it is written on the quota beyond measure, and he obeys the separated parts, this will not be noticed by him.
And more treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stone or by congealed blood, or by powder or by flesh, and similar to those things that we have said regarding methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with the water that we have mentioned, then the cause is violently made on the patient, then it is necessary that you administer extraction of it with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and the needle should be subtle, like a cane of a reed or a feather, thin as a ray, in similarity to half a palm, to which there is a subtle pipe at the head of it.
And the handling of the emission of urine with it is that you take the thread doubled and tie it in the extremity of the wool or cloth for a good ligature; and insert the extremities of the thread into the part behind the syringe, and if there are superfluous threads cut them off if they cause an obstruction to the wool, but insert it vigorously into the pipe. Then fill the syringe with water and introduce it to the body.
Make the patient sit on a chair, and anoint their bladder and genital area with oil of olive and agar, and apply heat.
And then insert the catheter with facility until it reaches the root of the genital area; and then bend the genital area upwards towards the navel; and then push the catheter inside; and then push it in until it reaches the bladder, and this action makes the patient understand that the cause of their trouble is being treated, and it's not done in this order, but rather as needed to relieve the obstruction.
And then pull the thread from the bladder little by little, so that the urine wets the thread.
Then extract that and do it for the cure of urine, and use a catheter, don't stop doing this and using a catheter until the bladder is evacuated and the patient feels relief.
Chapter 49.
On the quality of cleansing the bladder with a clamp and similar instruments which are suitable for this purpose.
When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or it is obstructed by a stone, and you want to distill waters and medicines in it, then use an instrument called a clamp, and this is its form:
But in the extremity of it, the vein is stopped. And in that one there are three perforations: two from one side, thus many times.
In the beginning of the place is a cavity, in which is that which is injected, and it is according to the quantity that oppiles that one, added to, until when some cause is drawn from that of the humidity, is pulled, and when it is expelled, with that it is pulled, and when it is expelled far, according as it makes clamp or grasp with which naphta is picked in the battles of the sea.
Therefore when you want to expel humidity from the bladder, insert the extremity of the clamp into the humidity, and pull with that the liquid which is injected to the lower parts, so that the humidity is pulled into the cavity of the clamp.
And then insert the extremity of the clamp into the rod according to what we have recommended in the description; and then inject the humidity with the liquid that you inject, so that the humidity passes to the bladder as much as possible, and the patient feels it.
Shape of the subtle bladder channel in which the bladder is catheterized, and this is the shape:
And let it be made of silver or of gold, of which the head is similar to a small plum, and place the cane with the ligature on it.
And then take the bladder of the motor, and pause on it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and tie it between two strong ligatures with double thread, and evaporate this humidity over the fire.
And then insert the extremity of the crystalizer into the rod.
And then tighten your hand over the bladder with the humidity and structure that descends into it, so that the disease can feel that the humidity has already penetrated to the bladder.
But if the bladder is not present to you, then take a piece of parchment and make from it a circle; and perforate it with all its thickness; and then insert a strong thread into those channels, so that they are wrapped; and then attach the circle in the same way that it is attached to the navel, because you place on it what you want of the humidities, and waters and juices.
And then tie that one to the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand so that the humidity penetrates to the bladder.
Chapter sign or possibly related to the head.
Of the extraction of foot (possibly related to a medical procedure).
We have already spoken in the division of the species of foot (or possibly stone) and its cure with medicines, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and one generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have spoken of the stone in which surgical operation on the hand is required, and section (or cutting).
The stone generated in the bladder itself is the one that is formed in the bladder.
And I have thus given a clear and concise explanation of it.
Therefore I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly goes to the infants; and of its signs it is that the urine which is expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its thinness, and sand appears in it; and the patient rubs their groin, and many times they have a swollen penis; and it is treated with this: and with this the stone comes out through the urine in most of these cases.
And it is a joyful healing for the children under the age that they have reached 14 years; and it is a difficult cure for the old. But in young people, it's moderate, because it's between the two (i.e. not as easy to cure as in children, nor as difficult as in the elderly).
And of that which the pain is greater and the cure is more difficult; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that to cleanse the patient with a crister which will extract all the fistula that is in their intestine; because that fistula, having been seen and prohibited, prevents the entry of the pain during the examination of them.
And then it is necessary to press the patient with their feet up and supported, so that the pain descends to the weight of the bladder, or it jumps from its place, having been seen several times.
And then make that which is prepared between your hands, and their hands are placed under the thighs of them, so that the bladder is entirely prepared to decline towards the parts below.
And then ask for that and all that flows from it.
Therefore, if you feel the pain in the space, then you will touch them as much as possible with a dried cloth over them.
And if you don't touch all of them with your hand, then it is necessary that you anoint the right hand with oil and apply it to the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if they are a young adult, and insert that into their anus. And seek from the worst part into which the liquid has been placed. And convert that small amount little by little into the neck of the bladder.
Then press firmly on that hand with the applied liquid, and push it through to the divisions before the bladder at the place where you made the incision.
And order the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and order another assistant to extend the genitals to the divisions above with their right hand, and with their left hand hold back the skin which is above the genitals, at the division of the place where the incision is made.
Then insert the spatula so that it becomes incident to this, which is the form of it: and cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, but beside the left thigh; and let the incision be on that worst part and the applied liquid be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the incision before is wide and deep according to the quantity that has come out of the worst part as much as possible, and not more, because the weight of what compresses the applied liquid which is in the anus, the worst part will push it away with difficulty.
And be aware that from the stone there is some that is attracted to the one with the angle and margins, for which the urination of it is made difficult by this.
And from that stone there is one that resembles a nut, and is round, and its evacuation is made with difficulty.
Then if it is the stone which has angles and margins, adjust it in the cleft.
And if it is not thus protruding, then take care that you press upon it, or that you hold with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is like a file on which you hold against the stone, and does not slip from it; or that you introduce your subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you cannot operate on it, then enlarge the hole a little, and if you see a flow of blood, sprinkle on it vitriol triturated.
But if the stones are more than one, then at the beginning you introduce the hand into the mouth of the bladder, and immediately cut on it; and immediately introduce a little immediately after; and similarly do if there are many more.
And if it is a very large stone, then ignorance is that you cut it with a large incision, for which two causes happen to the patient: either it dies or it has continuous urine retention, because the place is not entirely consolidated.
Most administrators of purging induce from the inside what has been expelled, or the injury in the fracture of the inner forearm that extracts it through pressure.
Then when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with an ointment of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And apply on that dressing immersed in oil and wine, or in rose oil and cold water, so that the postulated abscess may be diminished.
And then raise the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage for the first three days.
And when that has been undone, wash the area with water and warm oil, and then treat it with a gentle ointment and a soothing balm until it is healed.
But if in the wound an abscess forms, it is likely that the blood has congealed in the bladder, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the expulsion of blood with urine), then insert a tube into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will provoke corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with sharp wine, water and salt, and apply all species, with what is convenient for the cure until it is healed.
And cover in the hours of all treatment that you put both thighs and adjust the medicines which are applied to the area.
And if the stone is small and it is in the middle of the bladder, and it is stuck in it, and urination is prohibited, then treat that one with what you have recommended before, since many times this treatment has been accused of causing retention; and already you have tried and it hasn't worked, so take a iron perforator with a thread, whose shape is this:
of triangular extraction, pointed, stuck in the fist.
And then take a thread, and tie it to that of the bladder and of the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the bladder, piercing with facility until the perforator comes to that stone. And turn the perforator with your hand on that small stone, little by little, and you make the perforation of it until you make it pass to the other part; because the urine is then liberated.
And then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the division of the bladder, because it is loosened, and it is expelled with the urine, and the patient is healed.
If this cure is not prepared for you by some cause that prohibits it, then apply one poultice to the area, and another poultice above the area. And then bind above the area on that rod between two bandages. And then extract that. And then dissolve the ligament and melt the congealed blood, which is formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to leave a ligament on the poultice, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and another ligament above, because when the poultice is dissolved, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for this reason it is necessary to leave the poultice above, so that you lift the skin upwards at the separated parts, or that it returns and fills the defect, and covers the wound as we have said.
Chapter 61.
On the extraction of poultices from women.
A poultice in women is rarely engendered.
But if a poultice is seen on one of those women, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited due to too many manual treatments.
The one of them is when the woman has strong thighs.
And the second is when you don't find a woman knowledgeable enough to describe to the doctor what is happening, or it is one of the women who have been married.
The third is when you don't find a woman knowledgeable in this art, especially the operation on the hand.
And the fourth is that the location of the incision above the hip in women is far from the location of the hip, for which indications of deep incision are given, and in this there is fear.
But if necessity prompts you to do so, then take a woman doctor who is knowledgeable, and it is rare to find one.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek a doctor who is skilled and subtle, or present a midwife who is knowledgeable in the art of women, or a woman who has a share of knowledge in this art.
Therefore, make that one present, and command her to do all that you order her to do, from the incision above the hip to the beginning; which thing is to examine if the woman has a prolapse, then insert what has been said into her rectum and tie up the hip.
Therefore if you take that, cut it from the bottom upwards, and then order someone to write on it.
If it doesn't work, then instruct the midwife to insert the bottom upwards into the patient's womb and inquire about the stone, because she will place her left hand on the bladder, and squeeze it with a good compression.
Therefore if you obtain that, it is good that it gradually draws out the orifice of the bladder to the divisions below at the sum of its virtue entering so that it comes to the root of the thigh.
And then write on that application of the matrix of the womb towards the root of the thigh from whichever part it may be to the woman, and cut the stone in that part, and let the bottom of it not be removed from the stone cutting below it.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the blade on that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the quantity which you know the stone will be extracted from it.
And you should know that the species of stones are many: for some of them are small and large, and rough and sharp, and long and round, and having edges.
Therefore you know how many species are of it for that which you signify about that which you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust in the place a twisted or bent vein and keep it for an hour until the blood is separated, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
And make that you prepare for yourself the instruments which are said in the extraction of stone in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is cut, then you apply powder on the place and bind it tightly with a bandage to stop the descent, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because if you do, the patient will die. And then heal the wound.
Therefore when the flow of blood has stopped, and the place is clean, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Chapter 52.
Of section concerning hernia treatment.
Hernia is nothing but an aggregation of humidity in the white spleen which is behind the kidney containing the urine, and is named spleen or cyst.
And in some cases it is seen that the prepared nature in the area of the knee is towards the back, until it is cured, which is another matter; and this is the code of the genital area between the white cartilage, which we have already mentioned, and not that one but tartar.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genitals, because in those it accumulates this matter, and sometimes it happens by percussion made on the genitals.
And this humidity has various colours, for the colour of it is inclined to be citrine or sanguine, or red, or black and feculent, or whitish and watery, and that which is worse.
And the signs by which it is known that this aggregation of water is present: for if it is in the white cartilage which we have mentioned, then the apostema is a little red and inclined to length, like the figure of a knee, and the genital appears, because the humidity contains everything on all sides.
And if the humidity is in its own knee pan, then the apostema is red at the knee joint and thus one estimates that it is another knee.
And if the humidity is between the genital code and the white cartilage, then one feels it in the centre.
And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you express the color of the humidity in the apostema with intertwined cartilage from which the form is preceded; and according to what is exited in the vestige of the cartilage, judge that what is detained in it.
Therefore when we come to the treatment of him with iron, then it is advisable that we command the patient to be bled if it is possible for you, and at times touch the body of the patient.
And then let it be placed under the seat two on some cause a little higher, and place your hands under the patient's armpits.
And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the servant to follow on the right side of him, which extends his rod to both sides at the crotch of the thighs and at the division of the navel of the belly.
And then take spatula and divide the crotch of the thighs in the middle place for length between the pubic area and the perineum.
And let the section be made according to a straight line at a distance from the line that divides the skin of the thighs, until it reaches the white hip, including.
And scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not cut into it; and your scraping with which you scrape the part should be suspended with a hook and subtly examine the scraping according to the quantity as much as possible for you.
And then perforate the spleen full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate the two lips of the wound with forceps, and pull the spleen apart from the surrounding parts; and do not touch the genital area, and insert the spleen in that manner which is most possible for you. And insert it with its entirety or in pieces, and mainly the subtle sieve, because if you do not perform the insertion of it with exquisite care, it is not done securely so that the water does not return.
But if the hole proceeds from that defect of his genital area during the time of your operation, then when you have completed the spleen's wound, return to that, and then adjust the two lips of the genital area with a suture, and then cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the hole corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you ligate the vessels which support it, and extract the hole, and then cure it with the same treatment that we have mentioned.
But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore insert the part as you have done in the other treatment; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then you do it.
And then you purify the wound, and insert a flax seed submerged in oil or in rose oil; and put on top another flax seed that you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over two pieces of cloth on the navel; and put above double cloths and powders, and tie them with a bandage that follows this method:
And then you press two cloths and fill them with heated flax seed according to this image; and make the extremities that are pressed with a towel or with wet cloth, and add them to the structure of the pants, and one of the extremities take from the thigh between the two, and the second take from the division of the perineum, and two extremities over two hips of the patient, and two other extremities over two shoulders, and all the structure be adjusted in the area of the pants.
And some times this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery in place of a section with iron; and it is that you take a sharp and subtle knife and make incisions on the code of the genitals, and set fire according to what we have recommended until the white ciphac containing the water is discovered, and then you apply the cautery according to this method: It is assembled with Greek letter.
And then pierce that tissue, and set fire to it so that all the moisture is driven out.
And then stretch the tissue with tongs, and scrape it with tongs, and cauterize it with a finely ignited tool; and cut away as much as you can possibly remove of it; and beware of the hole that the fire does not touch.
And know that this operation is more safe and longer in stopping the flow of blood, and better than an operation with cutting.
But if you encounter an adverse circumstance during cutting or cauterizing, or excessive bleeding, then take heed that you cure the adverse condition that you are experiencing, with the appropriate treatment that is suitable for it, according to what has been said.
But if the patient is faint-hearted and does not await the second operation due to its horror, then administer a perforation as I have recommended; and it is when you are certain of this, for what we have said about the symptoms, that this hernia is painful.
Then take care to seat the patient on some elevated chair, and pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a broad spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the wide opening be where all the water flows out.
Then put a pause on that place and bind that one and release that one, so that the remainder of the water flows. And then heal that which is inside so that the wound is healed.
But if there's a contradiction to the flow of water at that time, you perforate it: and this is not done except for the fact that the white pad in the orifice of the wound creates a contradiction and prohibits the exit of the water, then you should put in the wound a stone or instrument with which the water from the drops is extracted, the form of which is as previously described; or adjust on the opening of the wound a small [object].
And you should know that the water returns, and is appropriately evacuated in a few months or around those; and when it is accumulated, then it should be perforated according to that measured method, so that the patient will pass the following days.
Chapter 63.
Of section on carnal hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section about this hernia, there is a fearful loss to the major disposition; because it seems to me that the dismissal of it and being saved by something better.
And you should recall the operation on that and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that the abscess is born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is made for many causes: either by sharp acute surplus, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess follows the color of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a serious abscess.
And for this reason it is a hardened abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not give way to the touch.
And some swellings are made by dilation of the arteries, and by inflammation of those areas where the memory of it has already been perceived, or by inflammation of the veins.
But that which is from dilation of the arteries is recognized by the dispersion of the abscess when you press on it with your fingers; and do not touch that.
But that which is made by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by any cause, except for compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that on this species a cut is made and on the other sides; and you will incise the skin of the genitals, and then hold the opening to the separated parts, and extract that from the white scrotum, and release the suspensor of the veins, and tie them, and incise the suspensor until you release that entirely from all the separated parts of the opening.
Therefore, if the oil has already consolidated with the meat broths, then it's good that you extract the oil and inject it.
And if there is an adherence between some cause of the liver, or between that which is between the intestines, then it's good that you deliver all that adherence and inject it through a round injection.
More so if it's a birth of flesh in the place of the adherence which is behind, then it's good that you inject all that is from it, and extract the oil thus as we have said.
Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with flaxseed soaked in rose oil and wine; and then heal that with another cure among those that are healthy.
Chapter 64.
On the cure of hernia that is from the gut.
A hernia is an apostema enclosed by some enclosure resembling a broth with softening of the testicles, and makes difficult movement exercise and walking for the patient.
And in the cure of this disease it is to be feared for that thing from which it is preceded, a memory.
However it's good that we say operation on it in the way that the first ones did.
And I say that it is good to place the patient on an elevated seat; and then insert the suspension of the testicles into the separated parts of the thighs; and also take the ligament of the genitals with the fingers at the said places, which are proved to be near the penis; and hold those other servants that you have, and extend those with extension vehement.
And then insert the spatula laterally through a transverse section in the right of the vessels, until the vessels are uncovered.
And then scrape from the entire affected area thus as you have said in extraction of varices which are in the temples.
And then put in those a needle in which there is double thread, and tie that on the first of the places where you have inserted, and tie the other end at the back of it. And then insert those in the middle place through a right section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is accumulated of foul, corrupted and putrid humidity.
And then cure the wound with care for the other wounds in which you want to be healed by so that the vessels, which are not one of the two genitals, do not fall, for this is not an evil.
More often it happens that death occurs to all the intestines, when it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles for this reason be cut from the intestines, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the removal of the intestines, and that they are exhausted, or that this happens so that there is no youth in those.
Chapter 65.
On the cure of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a weakness that develops in the sifac extended over the belly from the angles of the diaphragm of the belly, so that by saying the intestines of that rupture go to some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of its weakness, and these two species occur for many causes: either by percussion, or by wound, or by shouting, or by lifting some heavy thing, or by resemblance.
And the sign of this thing, when it is due to an extension of the diaphragm, is that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is a swelling that grows between the navel and the pubic area because the diaphragm compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is due to a weakness of the diaphragm, because at the beginning it causes vehement pain to happen suddenly; and it is a diverse swelling apparent in the groin, and this thing is for exit of the intestine, and the body of it goes out through the parts below the diaphragm.
And sometimes the intestine bursts through the abdominal wall, and this condition is called intestinal or gut hernia.
And sometimes it is caused by obesity, and sometimes it runs into the intestinal fold, and here it gets stuck, and this is a great danger to the patient, and sometimes it becomes a painful and more serious condition when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of the species of this disease with iron, there is fear, because it is desirable that the evacuation be avoided in that case.
And the manner of the operation of this is that you command the patient to return the intestine with their hand to the internal parts of its cavity if it obeys its return, and then be wrapped over its coil between your hands, and elevate their legs.
And then sew the pouch, which is the pouch of the testicles, to the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles throughout its length; and then place two lips of the suture in the wound according to how you indicated to close the wound with these.
And if the wound, according to the quantity that is possible for you, from which the hole has been made.
And then remove the foreskin that covers the testicles, until the white hard skin of each part is exposed.
Then insert the finger into that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white skin, which is covered by the skin of the testicle, and between the second skin, and loosen the adherence that is in the back part of the testicle.
And then bring the hand to the skin of the testicles to the front parts, and also extend the white skin with the left hand, and lift the testicle with the skin to the part of the incision; and command the assistant to hold the testicle in place and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with a complex solution.
And examine with the fingers if there is not any cause of the intestine being enveloped in the hard white skin. But if you find any cause, then push it back to the belly afterwards.
And then cut in the area below the cord of the testicles with a section from which blood and pus flow, as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then apply the wool soaked in oil, and put it on the wound; and apply the ligature that we have recommended (and some times the white cautery is applied to the navel, which we have said regarding the incision of the vein with flow of blood, because many times these things happen) and loosen the ligature so that it does not fall.
But if the evacuation of the urine is delayed, then let warm water be poured, and put it on that area so that it falls, as we have said.
And then treat the wound with the other cure for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
Of windy hernia or Of Hernia related to Gas.
In this hernia, nothing is seen that has been hardened under the cure of it with iron.
And the first ones said that it is made thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is with wine; which is that you lift the vessels near the section above that with facility of it; and near the middle place in the surroundings of the apostema with that which helps that, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
Of the disability that is made in the ankles.
Some swellings show a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and swell the place.
And they do not tell the knees any cause of the intestines to the knees; and if they do, it is little; and it returns to them every hour.
But if the time is prolonged with this, a fissure is adjusted in the spine until the intestine descends into the spine; and it happens that due to the extension of the spine, which is in the ankles as we have said, the cause is why the spine is stretched, and near the place is softened and the area becomes swollen.
The treatment of it is with a cautery thus that it is preceded by the narration of it.
And some times it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on their back between their two hands, and then dry the area of the rupture of the abscesses with a scalpel for the width according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white spleen that is under the ribcage until it becomes uncovered.
And then take the vein and place it on the prominent area of the spleen, and press it against the pressure of the belly.
And then sew the two prominent areas on the extremity of the vein of the spleen, and adjust with a suture one to the other.
And then extract the extremity of the vein, and do not incise the spleen at all, nor extend the hole, nor another cause thus that you will know to do in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then treat that one with the treatment of wounds, and as you incise the skin, clean it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the spleen is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, for it is more beneficial to health.
Chapter 68.
On the softening of the cords of the testicles.
When the cords of the testicles are wrapped in certain men it is softened by fat, because the tissues that are between them are softened, and their protection is weakened.
It is necessary for the one who is entrusted with the cure to make the patient urinate according to his need, and to cut all the cord which has been softened above the natural cord; and then to adjust the two lips of the wound.
And if you wish, sew up at the beginning the excess of the softened cord with three or four stitches and with a firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then cure by treating the other wounds until it is healed and the fevers subside.
Chapter 69.
On Castration.
Know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for a reason I am allowed to remind you of it in this book; and the reminder of it is not necessary except for two manners, one of which is that it be in the science of the doctor when he is expert in it, so that he knows the cure of it when it happens; and the other manner is that we sometimes have need of castration of other animals for our young, such as mules, and oxen, and pigs, and similar to these animals.
And thus I say that cauterization is done in two ways: either by attrition or by incision to section.
More in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the beast stay in hot water until the genitals of it become soft and flexible and hang loose. And then take those with your hand among them so that they are relaxed and do not appear to be touched.
More in cauterization done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the suspender, and make an incision above each testicle with one cut so that two testicles are separated.
And then cut those parts that you want to remove from each one. And do not leave on those of the scrotum any cause, except for a thin skin which is over the veins.
And this way of cauterization is better than that which is done by attrition, because attrition strongly leaves some cause for the testicles through which the beast desires to mate.
And then heal the wound until it is healed.
Chapter twelve.
On the cure of hermaphrodism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two manners: one is when it appears in that which occupies the space in the scrotum of testicles, in which there is between two testicles a figure like that of a woman, for whom there are hairs.
And some come out of that corrupted urine which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
But in women it is one species: and it is that the womb of the woman on the perineum is like two testicles of a man, a little altogether diminished, divided into a foreskin like that of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two of men and of one species of women. And it is that you should cut those adjusted flesh so that the pus of it flows out, and then you will cure it with the cure of the other plagues.
And in the second species of men, from which comes corrupted urine which is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Chapter twenty-one.
On protruding tongue and flesh caused by women.
Tight bandage is applied on natural causes within which it is strengthened and made, and the treatment is admired in some women to the point where it is spread like in men and seen in the act of intercourse.
Then remove the excess of bandage with your hand or with scissors and clippers.
And do not cut in the end, mainly on the root of the reason, so that there is no effusion of blood.
Then treat that wound with the cure of wounds within which it will be healed.
Meat born prematurely is meat that is born in the horror of the mother within which it fills that, and a bandage is applied to the parts of the belly according to the appearance of the body (and for this reason some first call it "fallen sickness"); then remove that we cut thus as we cut bandages, and cure that within which it will be healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the treatment of gout.
Gout is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or the hole is small. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and this is caused by improperly adjusted flesh or by a subtle or thick spleen.
It is made in the prison of the womb, or in the costs of it, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and prohibits coition and pregnancy and childbirth, and strengthens the prohibitions of the menses.
And the knowledge of that is made by examination of the matrix, if the obstruction is apparent, it is proclaimed; but if it is not apparent, then you search for that with your fingers or at the region.
But if the obstruction is due to a subtle cyst, and it is proclaimed to the two lips, then you cut and disrupt that.
And it is that dust is applied to the two lips with powders, and then you apply your fingers inside indicating both hands of the patient.
And the woman is on her back, the thighs extended, and then you extend the two lips of the vulva to force until that subtle cyst is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take a linen cloth and wet it in oil and apply that to the place, and keep it there all day so that the wound is not consolidated.
But if the cyst is large and thick, then it is necessary that you incise that with a spatula or with a knife of myrtle.
More often if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that with an ointment, and inject that.
And you have the medicines that stop the flow of bloody discharge such as hematolia, and dragon's blood, and juniper, adjusted with the white of egg.
Then administer a wide pipe of lead so that the wound is not consolidated lightly.
And hold that for several days and administer an ointment of dried plants.
Then it will be cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And some times accidents happen in the native birth of other flesh, and then it is necessary to inject according to this manner. But if it is due to cancerous abscesses, for the cancerous abscess which is in the matrix let there not be made a counter-irritation with iron in any manner.
Chapter 23.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of tailor's and of red botch that happens in the cleft of women.
Hemorrhoids are an appreciation of the openings of many veins in which from those openings flows continuous blood; and when they are ancient hemorrhoids, they are made into piles.
And I have said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say which ones receive treatment and which ones do not receive treatment.
Therefore, I say that tumors and ulcers when they are in the womb of a woman and do not appear to the feeling, then in those cases treatment should not be made with iron.
But those that are in the orifice of the woman on which feeling is detected, those are the ones that can be cured.
And it is good that you put the woman in a cold compress and then extend the tumor with the forceps, or with a rough cloth, and cut those at the roots.
And then sprinkle on those wounds the flow of blood of one of the incisive powders, which is mortification, thus as cassia and similar to them.
And then immerse the feet in water for an hour, and then dip that in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make that seat in a decoction of sumac and of seeds of millet and of walnuts and of similar things.
And then take flour of wheat and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster and apply it on the back of the patient.
If the blood is separated, it is good; and if not, then apply warmth to both sides of the abdomen, and scarify the breasts.
And then take wool and soak it in juice of colic root or juice of arnagloza or juice of guarravier wine, and apply it to the area; and then heal the area with an ointment until it is healthy.
And heal it until it is healthy.
Chapter 74.
On the accidental perforation of the intestine in the stomach.
Various kinds of abscesses that occur in the stomach, such as cancer and apostema of the liver, ulcers, and tumors, and also hemorrhoids, and fistulas, and hemorrhages, and ragadia, and pus, and other abscesses. And I have already spoken about these ailments and the types of those and the symptoms of those, and their treatments in the division.
And I say that I will discuss in this treatise on abscesses the one that appears in the stomach when it is of the abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know how the operation with iron is performed.
Therefore consider if the pain of the abscess in the beginning is sharp with percussion and flecma and fever, and sometimes that redness and if it falls on that sentiment, then do not try to perforate it, and cure it with that which helps with the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents cease.
And then make the woman lie on a chair that has two chairs; and recline on her back with her legs adjusted to the division of the belly, and her thighs spread apart, and place her arms below her shoulders, and tie each one with a ligature to something convenient.
Then the midwife takes the right hand and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the matrix is opened, the form of which will be described in those cases that will be made next.
And then when you want to administer this instrument, fix it on the presentations of the matrix of the woman, and that which of the instrument enters into the matrix should not be larger than the presentation of the matrix and the patience of the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the presentation of the matrix, then you should place a poultice on the texture of the presentation of the matrix so that the entrance of any instrument into the matrix is prohibited.
And when you hold the vertebra that runs along the instrument of the side, from above and below, and the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertebra until the orifice of the matrix is opened.
And when the excoria appears, and it is touched by the hand and is found to be soft and smooth, then it is necessary that you cut that which is above the head of the patient with a spatula.
And when the blood is evacuated, then it is necessary that you apply to the wound a medicated plaster submerged in heated oil or green oil in which there is some astringency; and apply the chalk to the section on the surface of the matrix.
And put on the matrix and over the perineum a clean cloth submerged in water in which there are boiled mallows.
And then it will be cured, within two days, provided that what is convenient for the disease is applied until it is healed.
And some times the matrix and the wound are washed with water and honey, and then with water in which there is boiled root of iris or of aristology, and then returned to the ointment.
And if the wound is deeply entrenched in the matrix, then it is necessary that you abstain from the cure of it with iron, instead cure it with what we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives in what manner the unnatural embryo should be treated according to a non-natural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes in the beginning the figure of the natural childbirth by signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman push out the placenta and desire to smell the air, and above that she is relieved by what is above her from the part, and hastens the exit of the embryo, then know that this part is according to a natural figure, and its exit is over the pubic bone, and the second one is either suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore when you see those signs, then it is good to compress the belly of the woman so that the embryo descends gently as it should descend over the pubic bone, and give her the second one, and it is cleaned of those superfluities with a good cleansing.
More often that which is another part is unnatural and inescapable, because when the embryo exits over its feet and the body of it is exited before the head of it and its feet, and one hand of it, or at the foot of it, or its head and its hand, or at the belly of it, and forcibly it is turned over the pubic neck, and resembling the figures of it inescapable.
A necessary cause for the midwife is to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard herself from error and deception.
And she shows the entire figure of those things, and what device is in those things so that it is signified by them and is established upon them.
When the fetus is situated above the womb by natural progression, and it is vehement in the woman and is made for her difficult part, and times the virtue of the already debilitated one, then make that which the women have, and evaporate the congealed humor with a decoction of fenugrec and ointment of humid things.
And then the midwife inserts her hand between the woman's thighs, a small spatulum, and with that makes an incision in the secondine, or cuts it with her nail, through which is expelled that which is in it of humidity. And press the woman's belly so that the fetus comes out.
But if it does not come out, then give that the woman be treated with a mixture of opium and decoction of fenugrec with cypress.
And then command her, and command the servant, that she be wrapped up, and make her throw up with a concoction; and tie her mouth and her nose for one hour, so that the fetus will be forced out as soon as possible.
And if the two parts of the fetus are joined at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them with facility little by little. If it does not obey the entrance, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and put the chair close to the ground; and let the woman be held so she does not fall from the concussion.
And if the hands are not skilled and the fetus dies, then cut those and extract the remainder of the fetus or tie the body to the hand of the mother with a cloth and extract that one equally, because that will be deformed.
When the fetus is above the two feet, then it is necessary that you push those upwards, and return the fetus to its normal position, and then you should turn it, and take one of its feet and stretch it little by little.
But when they are extracted from between the thighs, then you command it to be expelled, and make that one extend with condition, because it will be deformed if God wills it.
And if it is not deformed with what we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little until it assumes its natural figure, because it will then be deformed with a difficult extraction.
And if it is forbidden to use all that we have recommended, then take a mixture of high altar and dissolved gum, and strike the mortar with good percussion, and return the thread to the knot of the woman, the pus at the bottom of her belly. And put that mixture in lukewarm water, until it achieves the desired hypochondria.
And when the patient's divided parts are thus softened, then do to them the sub-fumigation of myrtle and apply that under their pause. And when you have done the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make a paste on a cloth, and return that to induce vomiting and clear the patient's mouth, and raise them from that, and press the lower part of their belly with gentle compression, so that the flatulence may be expelled.
A weight on the foot hangs longitudinally pending from one of their hands. Let it be put in reduction of the hand of the patient, but if you cannot reduce that, then elevate the woman and make her go up.
And if going up is not possible, then make the patient lie on their side, and strike the thighs of the patient with violent concussion, and then administer ointments to the places which are bruised and affected by humors.
And if swelling has come, then make the patient sit on a chair, and then attend to the reduction of the hand, and raise the foot according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to press inside until it is forgotten.
A weight on the foot rests on the shoulder with the hands expanded and the surface of the patient's foot is at the mother's (or woman's) two hips. Let the midwife hold the hand of the infant and gently turn that small one little by little, and thus facilitate that.
And when it is and how much it is narrowed, then pause on the joint of the one we have recommended oil and mucilages for.
And command to the one that he massage little by little, and when you have made it, then make that vessel sit on a chair and command him to be leaning on his right side, and command to him that he be compressed; and make that he purge with condition. The prepared fetus exits over the side.
When you hasten the horrific thing from the matrix according to this method, consider, and then you insert your fingernail between that which is evacuated of humidity.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and the neck of the one, then you insert that of the navel, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then embed the fetus in the divided parts within so that it pauses according to what it needs, and send to the woman that she compress several times, and it will be pushed out with ease, if God or nature wills.
Exit of twins or abortion of many. It is known that twins and many births are a sign of bad digestion, and some women give birth to three or four, but this is strange and unusual; however, I know the natural causes, and it is not alive.
And it is said that these, already being multiple, a second birth, and they are separated by the navel, distinguish those between the ligament in the navel of each one of them. And some women are aborting without giving birth, as if it were a natural thing to expel, and some women are expelled with an unnatural expulsion, just like we have recounted.
And if they are difficult to deliver, they hinder the birth and come to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you treat them as we have recounted.
And the midwife should be subtle and do what facilitates and subtlety, and with slowness, and she should be ingenious according to the entire figure as it is prepared for her by the ingenious art of health.
A remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Some women are formed with one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more, and already it has been verified by me that one woman aborted seven, and another ten, all of which were formed, the cause of which was made by measurement of the glorious wise men.
And so it seems that in the science of midwifery, a strong hand is needed for that delicate part, and thus one should do as one does with a similarly sensitive area.
Chapter 26.
On the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with the method we have described in the division of medicine and it is not an abortion, and you are forced to use surgery, then consider if the woman is of good virtue and not at risk for accidents through which loss is feared for her.
Then it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back on a seat or chair, with her head inclined downwards and her thighs elevated.
And the assistant should hold the two parts of her, or tie her to the seat, so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you should anoint the mouth of the matrix (womb) with oils, and with mucus of hazel and of wormwood and of pennyroyal.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucus, and then insert her hand with ease into the womb, and then seek with the hand the place where the fetus is situated.
And find a convenient place for this: then consider if the foot is prepared to be treated on the upper part of the head, and then fix the nails in the heels of the patient, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or on the beard, or in the furrow of the patient, or in the proper places of the ribs, or on the hips.
Maybe if the treatment is for the patient's feet, then in the instep, or in the middle of the ribs.
And take the nail with the right hand, and hold the curvature of the patient in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand with facility and fix the nail in some of those places which we have mentioned, until reaching the hidden cause.
Then put and fix on the patient's shoulder another nail, or the third if it is necessary, so that it is equally attractive, and not extended according to its straightness alone.
And let it be tied to the entire partition, so that the patient's treatment is alleviated thus as it is done for the eradication of it.
And take in the patient what is between them that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then take that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and inserts them skillfully and turns them in the retained matter.
Therefore, if the affected part of the foot is swollen, then the ankles should be bandaged to prevent it from getting worse; and do so until the entire foot is treated.
But if the hand is swollen on the other side, and it's not possible to reduce it due to its contraction, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and take it out until it's all treated, and cut it either at the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
And do so on the other hand and on both feet.
But if the head of the foot is large, or it adheres to its contraction in the swelling, or it's at the head of the watery part adjusted, then it should be inserted between the sharp-edged spatulas and the head opened and the water extracted, or that be scraped with an instrument which is called “alundat”, the shape of which will be seen among the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter which is relevant to this.
And similarly do if the foot has a naturally large head: then it should be cut with a chisel, or that be pierced with an "alundat" as we have said; and take out the bones with the forceps.
And if the head is elevated and constrained by the armpits, then be prepared to cut into where the humidity that is in the chest is drained.
More or less if it's not complicated, nor does it hinder elevation, then you will elevate the head as much as is possible to you.
And if the stools of the belly are inflamed or it is in dropsy, then it is necessary that you perforate that area through which runs the humidity that is in it.
More or less if the fetor (bad smell) is above the two feet, then the attraction of it is to be directed and its direction to the mouth of the matrix (womb) is to be directed.
More or less if it is constrained by the belly and the chest, then it is necessary that you extract that which you have wrapped with a cloth around your hand, and that you cut the belly and the chest through which runs what is in those.
More or less if the other members are stopped and the head is turned, then insert the middle finger of the left hand; more or less if the mouth of the womb is open, then insert the hand into the pregnant woman's perineum, and pull the head towards that place, and push it with the fingers into the mouth of the womb, and put one or two fingers inside, and pull it towards those.
And if the mouth of the womb is constricted by an apostemal cautery which causes it to stick to the urine, then beware that it does not create trouble for her; however beware then to administer effusion of humid and fatty causes. Then administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the pain is on the side of the back, then if possible, it should be pricked: and there should be administered what we have said in the case of the living wound.
And if that is not possible, then let it be cut into pieces, and extracted.
And beware that you do not leave any cause of discomfort within the second intestine.
And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure in the apostems that cause adhesions to the womb.
And if there is an discharge of bloody flux, then apply astringent waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in whose womb a dead child was made, and then upon that place another pregnant womb was formed, and the dead fetus is the cause of another affliction. It happens to her that for a long time an apostem forms on the navel; it becomes inflamed and inside that place a tumor grows, and begins to exert pressure.
And you have been called to treat them, and have treated them for a long time, and the wound is not consolidated.
Then you have placed on them some plaster of strong attraction for certain causes, and extracted from them a bone, and then passed a probe, and extracted another bone; and you have been very much astonished, as if there were no bone in the belly.
And then you thought that they were bones of a dead fetus.
Therefore you probed the wound, and extracted from it many bones, a woman existing in her seventh month of pregnancy, and had been ill in this manner for a long time, and a small arm came out of it.
And you did not think it strange, but rather that it is science and help to know what the skilled doctor has placed on the hand for the purpose of administration.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Shape of a tool with which the matrix is opened:
This is the shape of the extractor in which the limbs are enclosed, an enclosure that has two handles on both ends of two arms. It is better for this instrument to be made so that it is more subtle and slender, and to be made of ivory or of boxwood.
And the width of each rib is two fingers and the margin of each side is one finger, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle area of two ribs there are two adjustments of that same rib, which are already firm, whose length is a little more than half a palm, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additives should be introduced into the mouth of the matrix so that it opens to those when you administer the two prescribed virtues.
Make another one similar to that, but more subtle and lighter:
Let it be made from ribs of ebony or boxwood according to the similarity of strengths. More importantly, at the extremity of it, there are two additives thus many times, and the length of these additives is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the matrix with these, then make the woman lie on her back with her feet hanging, opening that which is between her thighs. And then take your hand with the instrument thus as you make an incision according to the quantity that you want of the aperture of the mouth of the matrix, until the meter makes it the size that you want.
The form of vertigo which the ancients described:
Form of swelling in which the foot is swollen:
Form of illness in which the big head is contracted:
And it is assembled with forceps to which the teeth are attached in the extremity, thus as times, and some times it is made long thus as forceps according to this form, thus as times, to which the teeth are attached thus as teeth of resin with which it is incident and contracted. Form of little illness:
Form of a wound having a spine or thorn:
Form of a wound having two spines:
Form of spatulum having two extremities with which the head is separated:
Form of two broad spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more the species of that one are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it is easier for them to operate and more useful for men because of their quantity.
And do not neglect those instruments, for it is necessary that you should have them prepared, because the need for them is inexcusable.
From the extraction of the secondine.
When the secondine is retained, it is necessary to command the patient to retain their breath, and then make them induce vomiting with a condition, and strengthen your hand over their mouth and nostrils, and if by this means it is expelled, it is good.
And if not, then take a flask and perforate the cover of it with a hole and place in that herb opening of the mouth of the mother, such as calamint and rue and anise and camomile and scicados arabic and cassia lignea and santuary. Put all these herbs or some of them submerged in water in the flask, and place that over the fire.
And then put a cane tube in the mouth of the mother, and hold it so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then make her vomit as we have said, and the secondine will be expelled with speed.
But if the Roman method does not work, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in oil of sesame or in a mixture of altea, and then insert that into the womb and search for the secondine, and when she has found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the placenta of the mother, then insert the hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the secondine, extract it slowly so that the mother does not fall into vehement pain. Let the right and left costs be loosened with ease.
And if the womb's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with purging and medication of the belly with herbs.
Unless it is forgotten with all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not perform on that one in iteration of abstraction, but rather it is necessary that what comes out of it from the mouth of the womb to the thigh of the woman, and then anoint that one with plaster and tetrapharmacon; for that will make it rot and will be dissolved and will be forgotten.
But when it rots, it rises from it to the head and to the stomach, and that harms the patient; and then it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered to that.
But some of the Ancients already knew about sub-fumigation of Nazareth's powder and of dried figs.
Form of an instrument with which the woman is fumigated for the retention of menses and of the secundine:
It must be done with sight or by feeling.
And let the subtle extremity be placed in the pot and the wider extremity over the focus, and the sub-fumigation be placed on the arms of the focus.
And hold that inside until the sub-fumigation is consumed and then insert another one.
On the treatment of the navel of the unperforated infant.
Some infants are born and their navels are not perforated, which have a thin and closed-up scab. Then tell the midwife to pierce that scab with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the liver.
And immediately apply on that place a woolen cloth soaked in wine and oil; and cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear that it will close up, then put a small tube in the wound for several days, and remove it when the infant is about to be weaned.
And also closure of the navel occurs due to consolidation of a wound or an abscess; then it is necessary that this consolidation be cut, and immediately treated with what we have said about treatment and plaster.
On the treatment of fistulas that occur in the feet.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the foot cause swelling and thickening, which occur near the ankle or in the space of one foot.
And it is a fistula or a boil.
And when this swelling is old and rotten with moist whitish or subtle purulence, and some of these fistulas are penetrated.
And those that are penetrated are known by what comes out of them through discharge and flatulence; and some times the patient is forced to discharge, and often what comes out of them is worms.
And some of these fistulas that penetrate in the space penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of those that penetrate go into the joint of the thigh and into the knot of the hip.
And the sign by which a penetrating fistula is recognized as entering into the anus and not entering, is that you put your finger in the anus, and insert a thin probe of iron or needle into the fistula when it is not suppurating.
But if there is suppuration in it, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into which you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel that the entire bowel or any part of the passage causes any reason for purging or worms or bloating, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then proceed to the treatment.
When the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the significance of it is excessive urine from that and prohibition to him from going to that place where medicine should be applied.
More so if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the tendon penetrates here, if there isn't a fracture in the bone, and cause of pain in the circuit of the affected area; and that from it comes pus and abscesses; and that medicine is not effective on it, nor is consolidated with plaster.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all, and the treatment of them is labor and vanity of foolish doctors about which they boast.
But in the one that is not penetrating and not chronic, healing with iron is expected according to what you have recommended, and what you have already done and proved.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on the back of theirs, and lift their legs up towards them, the thighs bent to their belly, and then insert a probe of lead, or of iron if there is a fracture in the fistula, so that you can feel the place where the tendon penetrates.
And if that sensation affects the patient around the neck, then it is good that you insert your finger inside the neck.
And if you feel with your finger the already mentioned uncovered tendon to penetrate, or what you feel between the tendon and the vein or flesh, then know for certain that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, because it is not in that healing, as we have said.
More perhaps the emperor said some things that are healthy for some men to swallow.
And of the medication by which it is hoped to cure the young man, that you apply subtle cauterization according to the size of the fistula, as has been previously stated, and insert that fire into the fistula until it penetrates around the neck; and then repeat this action two or three times until you know that all those adjusted and fistulized flesh have adhered, resembling a feather's down.
And then heal that wound with bandages wrapped in gauze until all the adhered flesh has grown together, and then heal it with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it is not healthy within a certain time for another healing.
And if the needle enters, and does not penetrate entirely through the thigh, which is in the buttocks, and between that and the needle which is only a layer of flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula is in what is the surface of the codena, then cauterize the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you will cauterize with the needle, and it will be in the fistula so that the section penetrates to the place where the extremity of the needle appears, and through the needle it is liberated and healed.
Then carefully clean those fistulated flesh wounds which are assembled with a tube of pen or awl and do not break those or any of them.
More often if there is a flow of blood that comes between you and your operation when dissecting those flesh wounds, then milk that should be and of the pus the sharper instrument is to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, for cautery with fire adjusts good habits: it is adjustment of those adjusted flesh, and removal of the blood and excision of humidity.
And then treat that wound which is covered in bandages or in dressings within the place where the arm is, and then treat the wound with soft flesh growing and consolidating.
These medicines are stipulated and administered in the same quantities; when the hour is restored, it is already healed and does not fear relapse.
If the fistula has already entered into the rectum and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert the aforementioned finger into the anus and examine it.
And if you feel the tension and between you and it is a veil of cartilage or flesh, and is ready for penetration, then it is not an operation in the hand but rather a matter of trust and hope.
This cause is administered in one of three ways: either to cauterize that area as we have said; or to cut it so that you achieve the cavity of the body, through which it is possible to insert the instruments and the proposed cure; and do not proceed with too much cutting so that you do not injure the lacert containing the intestine, and approach the patient with calmness and gentleness of action, according to their will; and then treat it with what we have said before, for it will be strong and healed; or to extend that veil and clean the pus that is cut from the area near the anus, as we have said, either with the finger or another sharp instrument, and cleanse those fistulized carnifications that are in the cut area where you can make a perforation; and then strive to make the restoration of the entire wound with cutting, and if the pus underneath is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, it will be easier for the patient. And some fistulas are finished in this manner: it is when you insert the thread into the fistula, and it is in the flesh of the buttocks around the surface of the body with the codena and in the margin of the buttocks, then take a thread of perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the cures according to this form:
and insert it in that vein wrapped with 5 veins or around those; and then insert the thread into the vein in the fistula until you achieve the cavity of it.
More if it penetrates the margin of the buttocks deeply inside, then you extract the vein from that hole like you insert your finger in the buttocks; and extract the extremity of the vein and adjust the two extremities together, and tighten each one, and leave it like that for a day or for two, and when you notice the vein has grown into the flesh, tighten again until those pieces of flesh are grown between the two extremities of the vein and which fall.
And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
More if the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate, in whatever manner you have prepared, but let it be soft in the pressing, because it is not for you to do that which prevents the flesh from growing; and then do so with that one until it is healed.
The shape of the spatula is thorny at the place where the fistula is cut: the curvature of which is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not insert anything that is not necessary, thus as needed.
Of the stitching of congealed blood in which runs a vein at the incision of those.
Congealed blood is according to two methods, for or on the skin surface it seems that there are carbuncles, or those are like a layer of rough fat. And of those, small and large, and the blood that runs through them is one, and it is very abundant, and it is outside the skin, and in the extremities of it.
Worse are those that are outside the skin according to the measure of little humidity, from which runs yellow water or a little blood with continuous flow, and it is according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is next to the skin is that you command the patient to sit and to squeeze so that the blood comes out and the congealed blood appears to you. Then you will take and suspend with force or that you hold those with your fingernail, and then cut those according to their roots.
If the ulcers are not held in place by the humidity and softening of those, then take those with a rough cloth or with a cotton swab or with a flannel of wool, and extract those with the fingers, and return them to their place, and sprinkle some powders on them, for they can be used in place of cauterization; or cauterize them as it was previously written in the chapter on cauterization. And then heal those with another cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then treat the patient with a suppository in which there is a small prickling, and let it be washed with that water that is in the bowel and which will facilitate evacuation gently when the patient presses.
If the hemorrhoids are painful near the anus, then the cause of them is removed, and it is that you take those with your fingernail, or that you take those with a needle, and insert them, and then heal them with the water that we have mentioned until they are healed.
And for the one who has undergone an incision, see that you administer suture of them in this manner: take thread wrapped and thread it through the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the separated parts, and make that penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap the two extracted threads of the thread around the separated part beside the needle, and tighten lengthwise; and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong structure, and then tie the thread and extract the needle.
Make a cut on the entire area, and let out one of them and not touch it, so that the excess blood flows from that place.
Then put a poultice on the buttocks made with rose oil or wax; and put that on the buttocks and command the patient to rest. And let out what is inside the wound; and when it is cured, treat those wounds with an ointment or another cure that may be healthy.
And since they are antiquated and of no value in that medicine, it is advisable to apply these with the point of a spatula or with your own nail so that they are made humid and so that the pus is drawn out from those ulcers, which prohibits those from consolidation; and then treat them so that they are consolidated.
Then apply these with a violent purging that first cleans the wound and are scraped off; and then treat them so that they are healed.
It is known that indigestion, thus it is clear, and it is not if not noticed according to the color of the body resembling a head of carnation, and it is made in all the body and mainly in the parts behind the feet and in the thighs, and it extends with those pains to the ankles.
And then consider that the thing which is in the circuit of the claw, should be cut with scissors or with a nail, and should be eradicated from its root; and then treat that.
And if you want, cauterize the following which is mentioned in the previous chapter.
More warty growths are small rough rounded fistulas on the surface of the body, and similar warts appear on the hands of children.
And the treatment for it is to stretch and cut that, or to tighten it with a thread or a needle that holds inside. And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
More warty formations are small feathery or fistulous growths on the surface of the body, especially on the groin, and when you touch it, it is felt as a burning of ant bites, and it is made around the body.
And the treatment for it is to take a needle of elder tree or of willow, and make it sharp, and apply it on the warty growth until it contains the circle of the needle with the parts that are affected; and then rotate your hand with the needle so that you cut what is in the circuit of the wart, and press it into the flesh of the groin, and eradicate the wart from its root.
And if you want, make this with a cane of iron or of wood according to this form:
Let the end of the cane have subtlety, be blunt (that is, not perforated), enveloped so that above the said thing the apprehension of it is abolished and the revolution of that thing.
And if you want, cauterize the woman according to what is said before in the cauterization of atheil in the chapter on cauterization.
Of the form of instruments that are administered to give a purging.
Some suppositories are made of silver or of gold or of iron melted or alloyed; and some suppositories are made from those small and large instruments according to those for whom they are administered, because that which is administered in the treatment of little children should be small; and for those whose bottoms are fragile or delicate, their suppositories should be small.
The form of large and few suppositories:
The head of the cane at its end where the bag is tied should be wide in this manner; and let the distinction be where the bag is tied, thus many times.
And the extremity of the stick that is inserted in the bottom should be blunt (that is, not pointed), smooth like a file, and subtle; and on one side of the stick there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and let the width of the hole be according to the thickness of the threads and the thicker the thread, the smaller the hole.
And let the bag in which the medicines of bladder of beast or sheep's skin are placed be one palm.
And let it be perforated by many holes thus as it is rolled up; and if the space in which is between the holes the thickness of the said.
And then insert into those holes a strong thread of crude wax which should be of twelve threads, or surround those; and adjust to it the bag; and when the bag is placed on him, let it be tied at the head of the sick person between two distinguishing signs with strong constraint, and then tie around each hole: Moreover the quality of tying around that is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it not be too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be lifted up on his back, and raise his legs in air and place under them a cushion on which are the men or a blanket; and anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with white of egg or with mucus of fenugreek or with similar things; and then insert that into the anus with facility, and then the minister takes the bag and squeezes it with two fingers and presses with vehemence until all that is in the gut is evacuated from the bowel; and then remove the gut and the patient lifts his legs to the wall.
And if medicine forces out the excess, hold it in as much as possible; and if sleep comes to that person for a whole night, it is more beneficial in treatment.
More so if you treat that person for illnesses of abdominal discharge and their excess, then you will repeat the cautery until they are healed.
And if there are painful hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then let the treatment be subtle and gentle, one of the treatments with which the children will be treated.
Of the cure of wounds.
I have already spoken in the division of the cure of wounds what was suitable for the book, and I will speak thus to the cure of those with medicine according to the complaint.
Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the place where the wounds occur.
And the causes for which many wounds are made are like so: a blow with a stone, or a cut with a sword, or with a knife, or a hit with a lance, or with a fist, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
More wounds that are in the places of the body are like so: a wound on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar to those of the limbs.
And thus we recommend the cure of certain wounds for which one pauses this reasoning and rule over the other wounds.
And we will begin with the simple head wounds, for the discussion of the compound ones will come to the understanding of the third chapter.
Thus I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from a blow with a stone or something similar, and the skin has only been scratched and it is a large wound and you fear the onset of an aposteme, then you should apply a compress and perform a cephalic bloodletting as soon as possible, and do not delay; and extract from that vein according to the quantity of the virtue of the patient, unless there is some prohibitive cause for bloodletting, especially if the blood that exits from the wound is minimal.
And let the bloodletting be on the opposite side of the wounded part; and protect the patient from indigestion and wine and coarse foods.
But if a minor cause prohibits it, then let the diet be diminished and not approached with meat nor wine.
And apply to the wound, if an aposteme occurs, cotton pads soaked in rose oil or wine in which there is a styptic.
More certainly if the abscess is caused by a hot cauterization, then pause on the wound, if it is recent with blood and pus and the air has not changed that powder which you will recommend to apply little by little.
And if the air has already changed it, then pause on the ulcers' ointment until it is healed.
More if the wound is large or is due to a cut of flesh and of similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted by threads, then adjust them with suture as you will be advised regarding the suture of them.
More if the wound has already exposed the bone and tendon, and it is not retention of it but a small suspensor, then cut that and cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of deadness, and command the patient to abstain from foods in which there are roughness: cabbage and beans and similar things to them, until it is composed.
And if you find in the deadness putrid flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut all that rotten part and throw it away, and properly cure what remains.
More if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which a flow of blood can come, and it is not stopped by medicines, then press on the artery, and if you find it uncut, then cut it with a spatula, or tie it; and if necessity provokes you to what we have said does not help, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is rheum; thus that you powder over those wounds a powdered substance, which consolidated, will stop the air from affecting those.
And the method of the powder is this: take oil of iris one part, dragon's blood two parts, and three parts of unextinguished lime; grind everything together and crush it, and fill the wound with it, and constrain it with a good bandage until it adheres to the wound, and coagulate it with the blood.
And then tighten that dressing with bandages and lay it thus, and do not remove it while it is so, because the medicine is not eradicated from it until it is healed.
And sometimes this sole treatment is sufficient, when you do not have at hand iris and dragon's blood.
And this medical operation is performed on large wounds when it is convenient to place it on them and they are constrained, and the wounds are recent with their own blood, which the air has not yet altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially in summer, then it is not suitable for the application of this powder, but rather cure them with what we have said, thus that you apply on them certain digestive ointments, or that you apply on them dust made from flour of barley mixed with water and honey until they form a poultice; and then cure them with another treatment until they are healed.
More often if a fracture occurs in the bone and it's broken, then you extract that with gestures.
And I say the cure for head fractures is something that is poisonous.
Of the sores of the neck.
More often if a wound occurs in the neck, then it's not different in medication, and between a head wound when it's simple.
More often if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it's a nerve, it's not in the remedy but rather the treatment should be avoided with that which causes vehement constriction, thus like congealing and cauterizing, which are similar to glass and seem to prevent urination, and contrary to those nerves. And don't apply anything on the wound that causes total freezing, because the substance of nerves is fragile and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest of all members.
And if it's something that is cured with gentle medicines, such as a wound washed with warm water, some ointment rubbed in with oil, whether rose or non-rose, and honey when it's washed with warm water and the other plaster applied according to this manner, and anointed humidly.
If the wound is large, then administer a suture, or stitch the lips of it, and carefully treat that with powders until it is healed.
If the wound has depth or reaches to the lower most part of the buttocks, then puncture that in the place most depressed.
If in the wound an artery has already been cut and a flow of blood is obtained, then separate or constrict it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity compels you to do so.
If the tendons of the ankle or all have been cut, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the wound with a suture on the bone of the ankle and do not touch that; but equalize it and return it to its natural figure, and place it in a decent structure, and keep it still for some days; and treat it with an ointment in which there is stippped and excited until it is healed.
If the wound has already made an impression in the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone, extract all that you can; and what is not visible, leave it until the wound suppurates, and be separated and the impression of it be alleviated.
And if the wound is recent, then powder on that powder which you have recommended. More so if in the wound there is made a fistula, then treat it with that of which the memory will bring back closely in the following chapter.
If it is a piercing of a lance or of a knife, and observe the depth of it, then consider more so if from the wound comes pus when the patient urinates; then know that the wound is mortal.
And if in it there is no depth and the wound is recent with its blood, then you apply on it from the first hour powder, and do not squeeze that which is not retained blood in the depth of it and which returns to the heart and which helps the patient, more apply on it a contracting ointment, and divide those two doses into four parts of the day.
And if the ointment is not at your present, then apply on the orifice of the wound a lot of cloth to suck what comes from the humidities; and make that the patient sleeps on the wound so that what is in it can be drained.
If the plague has already passed three days or more and does not cause spasms or tremors of the heart, nor strictures of the gut, but instead shows other good dispositions, then it is known that the plague is salvageable; and therefore treat it with heat and with the other cure until it is healed.
If the healing of it is excessive, and too much time has passed, then it is known that a fistula has already been made; therefore treat it according to the seventh chapter.
And if the wound is by cut of a sword or a knife, and is simple on the surface of the foot or the back, then treat it with water that is preceded by stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If there has already been made an incision in the bone, and some of its fragments are loose, then you must turn the wound and cut to extract those fragments, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound heals, because the extraction of them is alleviated.
And for other accidental wounds in the other limbs, the treatment for the young is the same as what we have said.
Of the ailments of the stomach.
The indisposition that occurs in the stomach is either great, or slight, or moderate.
And small disruption is made difficult by another handling, and thus it is that the reduction of them is more difficult, if not done at the time of the interruption of them to their own place, so that it swells and becomes enlarged, because the instrument of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is moderate, because in that one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two special cases mentioned before.
And you should know that the suture of the stomach is according to four methods, but two sutures are common which are suitable for sutures of the other ailments of the body.
And two other proper sutures relate to the other ailments, but however they are more proper in the suture of the stomach.
And I recommend to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the ailment is small and it comes from a cause of the intestine for this reason, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two methods: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has come to inflammation due to the coldness of the air.
And then when that happens, it is necessary that you scratch the area in such a way that you submerge a sponge or damp cloth in warm water alone, or that you take a broom in boiling water, and cypress, and spike lavender, and apply them to the intestine so that the inflammation may be resolved.
And some women have seen that it helps with the condition, and it is better than just water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And then when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which is cooked altaea and mallows, because by that the inner part of it is alleviated with little cause.
But if the inner part of it is excused from this cure, then you should make an incision with a small instrument with which the inflamed parts are cut.
And the primary cure is better, when it is proper that there is no section, and no occupation to section, but only necessity and gentle handling.
Of the instrument, know its shape:
One part of it is sharp and pointed, and the other part not pointed, and the extremity is subtle, but not as subtle as a spatula, rather a little blunt.
And thus when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is outside, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the natural form, in its proper place, if possible, for it is better.
When the rupture is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and hold their legs up to their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then hold the patient's head and chest up above the affected parts.
And similarly if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pay attention and consideration to this fact, that the affected part where the wound is, be higher than the other.
And thus it is necessary that you administer this in severe wounds and in moderate wounds.
And in small wounds, hold that which is your preparation, and see to it that the minister be among your most trusted, who should have the rupture entirely in their hand and adjust the lips of the wound, and see to it that they uncover from that wound to the one who knows the suture for another cause or reason.
And this is the common method of suturing: one that takes the needle, or thread of needle according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and place it at the extremity of the disruption of the said ankle, and tighten the needle once, so that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the codena, but rather in the two extremities of the ciphac which is held by the codena of the parted edges, until you make that part penetrate; and you have already added the two extremities of the codena and the two extremities of the ciphac, and so made four orders.
And then tighten with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some watched parts together, and add the two lips and the wound for decent addition; and place the thickness of the said one and fix another needle in it, and tie that one with faith as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be moderate between thickness and subtlety, for the subtle needles easily enter the flesh; and the thick ones are of difficult entrance in the codena, and therefore it is necessary that they be moderate in subtlety and thickness.
And it is not advisable for the needle to be placed in both extremities of the knee joint, so that the flesh is not excessively injured and the wound heals before its consolidation.
And they should not be prolonged with stitches so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And then cut the ends of the threads so that the patient does not feel them while sleeping; and you will place expansive powders on the entire suture, which hold the ends of the threads; and leave them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And these species of stitches with needles in what manner are more convenient for small wounds, for which one or two stitches are sufficient.
But the second suture is communal: and it is that you administer with a stitch the four extremities, of the knee and two extremities of the hip, in one way, with a needle in which is wrapped thread in subtlety and thickness.
And then when you have the needle penetrating these four extremities, return the needle from the middle part from which it began, so that the thread is pulled back from the deepest part to the wound, so that the stitch is like a stitch of cloth in which the cloths are tightened.
And stop between each suture the amount of thickness of the said finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And in this suture I treated the wound which had been inflicted on a man in his lower abdomen, which had been wounded with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was more than a palm in length, and it was two palms from the intestine in the middle place, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that pus which the intestine had formed outside the wound for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and I cured that one and it is healed; and then I visited him often for many years, and he conversed in his own faculties.
And the other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by miracle it was, for I did not cure it with ointment, because it was in a place where ointment was not effective, nor any medicine, but I placed on the wound a cotton pad twice a day and assiduous washing with honey water until it was healed.
But I will describe two special types of suture according to the narration of Paraula.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the intestine, and insert the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
And thus when the needle penetrates into the coding and in that doctor's lancet according to rectitude and in length of all the body, and it leaves the extremity of the spleen where you have inserted the needle; and make penetrate into the other extremity the needle from the part of the intestine to the part of the kidney in the other extremity of the liver.
And then when you have made that penetrate, then make it penetrate again in that same extremity of the liver from the part of the kidney to the part of the intestine; and leave the extremity of the spleen which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity of the part of the intestine to the part of the kidney.
And make penetrate with that your penetration, with which you made it penetrate in the spleen, in the extremity of the marrow which is in the part of it within, where all that penetrates.
And then start with this doctor's treatment and sew with the extremity that is of the spleen on the other side, and pull out the needle from the coding which penetrated, and then return it to that coding and stitch the extremity of the spleen which is on the other side with this extremity of the marrow; and pull out that one from the coding which is part of it.
Make one poultice and another, and make one poultice in addition to another poultice, so that you cover all that is defective according to that example.
And the sum of this method of sewing is that you cover with a sewing of pellicies in which you sew the skins, so that you also make a poultice on the extremity of the codena, and that you place another poultice until the wound is completed.
More, the second special kind of its own sewing, which Galen specifically mentions, and this is to be recommended by him and for him, is that you make a second similar thing with which all medicines are sewn, so that they add one part to its comparative part in what is convenient by nature; and apply the extremity of another of it and the extremity of the treated to the other extremity of it, and this is done according to what you have recommended.
Take the needle and fix it at the extremity of the thread to your proportion of the defective part, and make it penetrate the inner part in that sole, and leave two extremities of the stitch; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two extremities of the stitch.
Then return the rolled-up sleeves, and make each of the parted areas from the inner part penetrate to the outer part in two extremities of the mirror image on the opposite sides that are in the contrary flank.
And this manner of suture is better than the common suture, it is the suture about which I mentioned earlier in memory.
This is the sermon of Gualia
And more I say to you, the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles, it is that you will insert in these each one a thread, and begin with the insertion of the needle from that which you have, and make this penetrate to the other side according to the suture of those who sew the guts together.
And know that when disruption is in the middle place of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than of the other places of the belly.
More the judgment of the treatment of a wound is a judgment of the other wounds.
The cause is that when you touch the recent wound with your blood before it dries, altering it, and returning the intestine and sewing it and adapting it properly, then put on it a powdery dressing to promote flesh growth.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause on that tender spot and apply such things to your presence so that they make hard skin and cauterize the veins, and let them consolidate and be treated; and treat that wound just as you would any other wound until it is healed.
But if your medicines are not present, then pause on that spot for a while, because it starts to throw out arm, cut away the dead skin, and change the dressing twice a day, just as you have instructed, until it is healed, since you do not need another medication in most cases when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound will communicate its lesion to the principal members, then take a woolen cloth and submerge it in oil of tempered quality, or in rosated oil, and apply this to the circuit of the places that are between the ankles and knees.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestinal bowels, because many times this happens, then anoint it with a black styptic medicine, and especially if the corruption has spread to the intestine and makes penetrating ulcers into its cavity.
And know that the one which is of the large intestine is of easier cure than the one which is in the subtle intestines.
And it is of difficult healing because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and the magnitude of it that is in those, and the subtlety of the body of that one, and the proximity of that one to the nature of nerves.
Maybe if that which proceeds from the wound is the tissue, and you obtain it recently, return it according to your rule with which you reduce the intestines inwardly.
Perhaps if it has passed to the tissue and already becomes green or black, then you stretch that with a thread over the area that is stained by it, so that there come flows of blood, because in the tissue there are veins and arteries.
And then cut that which is another ligament, and place two extremities of the thread hanging from the part of the wound outside of it, so that on you be alleviated the attraction of it, owing to the release of the tissue and emission of the arm of the wound.
Remembrance of the wounds when they occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it be restored in some men, for I have seen one who was wounded in his own belly with a thrust of a lance and it was a wound of the right part of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and came out of it feces and swelling.
Therefore we shall pursue the cure of what has already been begun, so that it is not confused in the healing, but rather we shall subtly introduce what focuses on healing and the area is consolidated.
And we have applied and seen the area already consolidated, then put on the patient what is to be applied for the accidental evil in their own belly; and do not apply anything for that evil accident, but rather let them rest in their own will, eating and drinking, and return to bathing and exercise in their own words.
And already said some experimented that when you apply a patch on the intestine, and it is small, then it is necessary to be tied in this manner: and it is that you take thread-like strings of large stitches; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those strings with its mouth open over the two lips of the wound; thus when you pull on them and tighten their mouth, the head of it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then put another string near the first one, and do not stop applying strings until you have applied as many as there are in the entirety of the wound.
And then return that and close the wound; and let those attached stitches remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine is tied with a subtle thread which is made from the intestine of a beast annexed to it, since it is sharper than a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of this thread of intestine, and it be very delicate, and return the extremity of it to the thread of the intestine, enveloped, and then insert that thread into needles and sew it to the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this manner of sewing with fingers is not but according to a way of trust and hope.
But if the wound is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, then it is not an engineering but a subtlety, and it is not a healing of it at all.
Of the cure of ulcers and fistulas.
Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes old and chronic, and it becomes an ulcer, and it is not consolidated and it takes a long time and it is not separated, however, universally it is named fistula and we call that one azukem.
And fistula, according to truth, is a calloused, hard, and white nodule, to which there is no pain and it is accustomed as it is accustomed to the pain of hearing; and for this reason it is named that ulcer "pena", that is, pain.
It is in certain humid places, which cause sweating; and for this reason the humidity is dried up in a few hours. And some times this humidity is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
Already I have shown all those causes, and the signs of those and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
And it is suitable for you to know the treatment of fistula, which is made by way of operation with the hand.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that affect the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the liver, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the composite joints made up of the hand and foot; and of these, some give proximity to the main member and resemble it.
And therefore one of these fistulas that follows this manner is among the illnesses of difficult healing, and does not receive treatment, and its occupation is labor and ignorance.
And if one of the fistulas is of such depth that it does not reach to the places that have been said, and you have hope and confidence in its treatment, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, then inquire about it with the probe.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a lead probe, because lead, due to its lightness and flexibility, follows and bends according to the twist.
And if the fistula has caused horrible motions, it is not possible for you to make signs on the patient with a tent.
Therefore, purify the openings through their respective openings, because the humidity by which you will purge that one goes to the other openings and corrects them.
And inquire carefully, according to the manner in which it is possible for you to know if there is a bone or nerve here, and whether the fistula's cavity is long and deep, or if it is a fistula with many openings and this is above all at the sum of your strength, at your penetration, at which you penetrate the patient, and the invention of pain through your compression on the area, and judgment of the signs and of the accidental causes of the abscess.
And when you have established yourself firmly on all these causes with a steady gaze, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near the surface or in a salty place, or one of joint, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which I have told you.
Then you dry the fistula according to what has been said about the narration of it, and remove that which is in this filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the opening of the flesh, or of the heel and of the similar things, and cure that which is inside until it is healed.
If the fistula is of long and profound depth, and it is following the rectum, then it is necessary to insert this into the wound as much as you can, and carefully remove all corrupted flesh; and administer hot poultices wrapped in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have previously understood with an iron instrument.
And make that some poultices are placed inside so that the acute medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula, from the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments which produce healthy flesh so that it will be healed.
If it is not healed by this, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is a bone and you are certain of this, then you should inquire into it and cut it according to what we have recommended, if you do not hinder any cause of a vein or nerve or main member, as we have said.
If the bone is discovered by you and there is some corruption or necrosis in it, then scrape that until all the corrupted part is removed; and then treat it with what will heal the flesh so that it will be healthy.
And if it is not healed and the arm is thus as before, then you know that you have not arrived at the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover with great care and scrutiny the reason for it and the purification of it with the last strong tie, and then restore that which is proper.
And so if it is healed, that's good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the deep and lengthy part of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore in this case it is not cunning but to leave that alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to reach it, then you will reach it with subtle and gentle forces which are suitable for that.
And if there are many bones, then carefully carry out the extraction of all those, and do not leave any one of them behind for any reason due to your lack of strength.
More so if you encounter opposition from some cause of humidity, and in their treatment there is no fear or mistake, then cut through those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and release the bones.
More so if you are not prepared to reset the bones at that time, then place a dressing on the wound which will soothe the wound, and leave it until it is near the bones, flesh, and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and the section that you have cut in your operation is constricted.
Habantz, if you fear, place a poultice on the submerged wound with olive oil, or submerged in Egyptian wine, or in an ointment of green plants, because when those limbs are purified, and the bones are separated from the abscess, and from that attraction the alleviation is eased.
More often if it is a large wound similar to the bone of the leg or thigh or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the skin, then scrape only the surface with a raspatory tool until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
More often if that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and to cut into the area where the corruption has spread, and then treat that until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that which helps a man with his thigh, so that you place a similar and auxiliary device on your operation.
There is a young man of about thirty years of age, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and of the internal parts most affected it is especially the matter within the body where the matter has reached the thigh, and it is a matter of an abscess with a large abscess, and not from an external cause.
And then they extend the time for that error of doctors until the abscess is opened, and a gathering of its putrid matter, and its cure is delayed until the fistula is formed, and made in the rotten mouth are the things that all took away filth and humidity from the body.
And then the multitude of doctors gathered around for two years, and did not put faith in those remedies but in the skill, until I was called.
And I saw the fistula of it and the matters that flowed from it through those rotten holes with great force; and already the body of that man was completely corrupted and the color of it was citrine.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and passed it through to the bone.
And then I probed and examined all the openings and found that they led to a cavity within, from all parts of the fistula.
And then I cut and incised above one of the openings until I uncovered a part of the bone, and I found that corruption, and it was already decayed and rotten and discolored; and a part of the fistula had already become corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I will show you how to prepare and uncover that which was previously hidden from me regarding the bone.
And I will investigate whether it is not in the bone but that corruption which I will cut away and uncover, and I had already destroyed.
Then I will apply the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
And then I will treat and uncover again the bone, building upon the initial discovery, and I will apply a continuous corruption to the bone.
And I will uncover that which appears to me from that corruption, and then I will make a perforation for the purpose of curing it and restoring it, and it is not restored.
And then I will discover on the other side and will not cease to make the small bone fall apart bit by bit, particularly and make a perforation for its restoration, and it is not restored until I have made an incision around a palm of it, and that which I extract from its marrow, and then I will restore with medicines, and it is consolidated lightly and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on it and its section except for the disposition of its fragility and for the lack of tolerance of it and fear of death, because acidity comes to it at all hours due to an excess of evacuation of bad syncopy.
And therefore healing is for whole health, and nothing is in place of hard flesh; and the arrangement of it in the body is good and returns its virtue; and it is changed into its dispositions and does not make contradiction in walking nor harm in any cause.
If there is a prominent bone in the body that has been injured, then it is necessary that you splint that bone in this manner: and it is that you take a bandage and tie it at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to stretch it over its parts; and place that bandage made of wool thicker than the first bandage; and apply that bandage over the flesh that is beneath the bone, and stretch the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the areas beneath, and you uncover the flesh around the area where you want to make an incision so that the incision does not harm the flesh.
And put a cloth or board beneath the bone properly, because when you do that, it is not prohibited for the saw to cut through the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the sawing be on the corrupted area little by little, because if the corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the feeling, force the sawing from the other side.
If the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then one part is continuous with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it; then you discover the flesh of all parts entirely; and you stop the blood flow, and you cut that from the first part where the corruption is until the cutting of the other part is continuous.
And let the cutting be small according to the place of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut out that corrupted joint, and cut the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in the bone but in the ligament.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or of the foot, it is most difficult; however, it is that you inquire about the corruption in whatever manner it appears to you, and that you open it, and you show it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and with a straightened ligament, when it does not cause you discomfort or numbness.
And you should know that the cutters and the saws to cut these bones are suitable according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and the subtlety and greatness and smallness of them, and the hardness and their rarity; because it is necessary that you prepare all kinds of equipment convenient for that operation.
You know that this operation refers to your expertise on the subject of the instrument you have studied; when you have great knowledge and understanding of the techniques of this art, and evidence of techniques for treating illnesses, then you already have the means to apply what is convenient for each illness.
And you will be forming at the end of this chapter the names of the instruments which you will use with simples, and with which you will proceed to your examination, which you will conduct on the other cases. Shape of a saw:
Shape of yet another saw:
Shape of a large saw:
Shape of a rasp: Let the head of this rasp be according to the shape of the head of a star-shaped key, and its points be according to the shape of the aforementioned points.
And it is not suitable unless the ends of those are rubbed against the joints when they are swollen, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Shape of a smaller razor:
Shape of a broad razor:
Shape of another properly made saw: let it be made with an arched back and the sharpness of iron, and its handle well-made in wood. Shape of the body
Shape of the roots in which there is a hollow or cavity.
Shape of the root or another subtle thing/form.
Shape of another root of a curved extremity.
Shape of a small root resembling a tendril or thread.
Shape of another smaller cutting instrument.
Shape of another cutting instrument; this one resembling a saw, and the extremity of it is like a serrated edge, and it is shown in many places in the root of the bones.
Shape of a saw that suits the root of the one that has holes in the bones.
And its extremity is triangular and of sharp point.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly covers all the causes that we have said about roots and cutters and saws.
Of cutting extremities and of the sawing of the bones.
The extremities are putrefied either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or as you yourself medicate that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure does not help, or sometimes the corruption goes to the member which is not perceived by any cause, then it covers that you cut that member within that bone where the corruption has reached, so that the patient escapes from death or evil which is a greater defect of the member.
And the signal of that which happens to him, is that the member becomes black until it seems that fire has already consumed it, or one places on it a plaster made from a certain black substance that penetrates into that member and takes hold of the entire body; thus cut away the affected part.
And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous sources, such as from a scorpion, a viper, or a rue plant, and similar things.
And if the corruption or the blow is in the extremity of the said member, then you cut away the member and do not give space to the corruption so that it may not spread to the hand.
And similarly, if it happens to the hand, then you cut away that which is near the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption so that it takes hold of the wrist of the arm.
And if it swells up, then cut away the arm at the elbow joint.
And if the corruption and swelling reach the elbow, then it is mortal for the patient; and to administer another remedy in treatment is a matter of great virtue.
And similarly, if corruption swells up the toe of the foot, then you cut away that part up to one of the toes.
And if you take in the sole of the foot, then you inject all of the foot. More pain if it enters into the tooth, then you inject the leg into the joint of the tooth.
And if corruption has already spread to the tooth, then it is not an injection but a dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
The technique of injecting the member or of sewing it, is that you stretch the ligament at the partition where you want to inject, and stretch another ligament over the area; and extend the minister a ligament to the partitions where you will inject, and extend the minister another ligament on them; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that the spatium is entered where all the flesh is discovered; and then it is injected or sewn.
And let a cloth be placed over the limb of all parts so that it does not touch the area itself, and let the adjusted lesion and cauterized aposteme come to the patient.
More if you stop the flow of blood when working, then you cauterize the place gently, or apply to them some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then tie the affected limb with a bandage in a convenient manner, and cure whatever is inside that needs healing.
And I recommend to you that which relieves a man in his gouty foot, this remedy is an accident that I and you have recommended, which is why it occurs to the black bile in the foot with adjustment that was assembled from combustion of fire.
And this corruption occurs primarily in the said interior where the entire foot tends.
And then that man prepares himself for medicine so that the cure goes to the member with the violence of what attacks with pain and adjustment, and it affects that foot inside the joint, and fire heals.
Long time occurs to him that corrupted disease in the said part of the hand.
And then comes to me, and it is necessary for me to report that surplus with what I pause on the hand of medicines, after the purification of his body; and not is rejected the surplus but begins to go to the other part where it begins in the hand.
And it pleases me to affect his hand, and I do not want to do that thing concerning the rejection of that surplus, and more than I fear the cutting of his dead hand, because the virtue of the disease was about evacuation.
And then he departed from me, returned to his land, and came back to me with the prepared and instructed hand of that man, and he was healed.
And this narrative is not added except to be an aid concerning what is said about this disease, and that it may be a signification for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
Of the cure of sins and the quality of purging with medicines.
When abscesses form on certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of blood, and then it breaks and perforates, and the blood comes out, and the place is left empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that covers it is like a thin cloth, and it does not reach to the deranged corruption, nor does it impress on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and not named a fistula.
But it's worse if the space is prolonged until the corruption affects some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the cure of it is that you cut out the entire skin as it is revolted, and especially when it is made thin and like a cloth, and make sure that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
More if you hope that the cecum adheres and that corruption has not been achieved by bad sequence, and in the cecum there is excrement of feces, then cure him with a clyster.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that is of foul odor, then clysterize him with Egyptian medication which is of oil and bitter vinegar and ginger receiving divided portions, and being adjusted in a vessel, and being applied to the focus until the medication makes a flow and comes to the spit of honey.
Then take of him the water that is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and clysterize it in his sinus, and strengthen his orifice, and let the medicine be in him for the quantity of two hours.
And then extract that thing with precision; and do it for as many days until the sinus is cleaned and the foulness is removed.
And sometimes it is clysterized with water of cinder, when the medication is not present; and it is that you take the cinder of vinegar, and put it in the water; and then mix that and clysterize him with it until you confirm that the sinus is stopped.
And if the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or the water of cinders, then administer a cluster with water and honey mixed with ground ginger, and administer it with wine and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it soothes and cleans, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of dryness and constipation in the wine.
And when you do those washings and you confirm that the sinus has already been healed, then administer a cluster with water that makes the flesh in it grow again.
And take plasters of diaphonic ointment and dissolve them with rose oil and astringent wine; or administer clusters with some medicines and other plasters that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on plasters.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow where the cannula of the cluster cannot be received, then you will enlarge it with a small iron, little by little, and apply to it a hot poultice wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is large, then you will bring together the lips of it with a suture and lessen the quantity in which the cluster is introduced.
And if the orifice of the patient from which the arm emerges is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that area in the pus and base location where it is in the patient for which the arm curves inward, because when the arm is constricted in the depth of its own flesh, it becomes engendered within.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the environment of the bone and base according to your wishes, then prepare the member with preparation for which the arm emerges gently according to what is apparent and that nothing should be retained in it, any cause of the arm.
More often that which is on the orifice of the sinus, which you should cleanse every hour so that it comes to be adjusted in the arm. And to know if that which flows from the arm is movement or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
And then you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is an abscess.
And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the material that is thrown on the orifice of the sinus already adhering, or taking adherence, then you may touch it with your hand on the third day, and when you touch the wound, then change the dressing for another and renew the ointment.
But if from the sinus there comes a subtle and thin pus, then do not despair of its adherence, because the healing of it is near, because just as in some wounds there is slow generation of flesh in the wounds, and in those in which the opposite is done.
And if from the sinus for many days there comes indigested arm matter, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust with desiccation of the medications, and if the medications are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried like ointment of diafinion, when there is adjusted a surplus of addition of excess.
And the most effective remedy for which it is treated, is that you take a plaster of resin and dissolve it in heated rose oil, and apply it to the affected area with an antique ointment of its substance, and bind it tightly to the body, and use it as a poultice.
And it seems similar in that action, when there is no arm, take the resin plaster, as much as it is possible to thicken, and use it; or take myrrh and wool and ashes, and pound all and powderize over the honey which is on the fire, and bind it tightly with a cloth and tie it on the skin; and bind that which you have thickened on the honey, and powderize on a cloth and tie it.
And some treated areas are given aristolochia, roots of heavenly lilac (that is, heavenly lilac) and flour of centaury, and use those simple or adjusted, pound them and sift and powderize over the honey which has been recommended; and use it.
And if the sickness is prolonged, and it is not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the patient's abdomen, and it has already spread to the bones or to the other hard members or to the ligaments; then you will cure it with a fistular treatment, as it is said previously.
Of the treatment of ailing nails and worn-away finger ends and the cutting of additional fingers and the division of toes.
Panarici is an abscess which begins on the nail of the thumb or big toe, and also appears on other fingers, and as it progresses its treatment is highly regarded, or it is cauterized with a hot iron, or it becomes corrupted, and releases a discharge that corrodes the root of the nail, and then corrupts the entire nail, and then perforates the bone beneath which has a foul odor, and forms an ulceration on the outer layer, and its color turns dark.
And then when you have that wound which we mentioned in the division and do not trust its treatment, then it is necessary that you remove with iron all the excess material that remains from the nail and then cauterize the wound properly, for a hot cautery is beneficial in this case.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already penetrated the quick of the finger, and begin to cause pain and damage, then it is necessary that you apply a subtle remedy under the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and gently raise it and remove it with ease, and apply on that which remains of the flesh medications that burn and corrode, so that it be completely removed; and properly treat that wound with ointments until it be healed.
If the corruption has already penetrated the bone, then it is necessary that you incise the bone and extract it, because no time is a healthy one in which the corrupted bone remains in the body.
And if the corrosion and corruption increase in the finger, then you incise that one in one of the nodes according to where its memory is pressed, and then heal it from the inside until it is healthy.
If the nail receives a blow or an injury, and it causes severe pain in that area, then it is necessary that you begin by applying a poultice to the patient, and immediately dry the nail with a sharp spatula, cutting transversely upwards, and be careful that the cut does not penetrate the flesh beneath the nail, because you would cause the patient severe pain, and this could lead to the growth of superfluous flesh in the area; and then heal that place with a remedy that calms the pain.
But said joint is one that is born in the hands of some men, for it is all flesh, and it is also found in the bones, or it is found in the nails.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the growth of them in certain nodes of the fingers. Worse than that which is born in the bad nights of the said sickness is not, and that which is born in the joints hurts more.
And of those that are born fleshy growths, the section is lighter, and it is that you should cut their root with a spatula to the side.
Worse than that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of the amputation of it.
Worse in that which is born in the said nights of the sicknesses, it is that you should cut at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then sew with one of those convenient sewings suitable for this, and then cure that which will be sanitized.
Worse the consolidation that occurs to the said things between their rotten parts or by nativity of the man who is born in this way, or by consolidation of the wound or by combustion of fire, or by resemblance, therefore it is that you should cut that consolidation so that the said things return to their natural form.
And then pause between the dregs of the said things with oil rubbed so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between them, or pause between them a thin layer of lead so that it is consolidated as it is fitting.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of the palm, then you should dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suited to the shape of the member.
Of bad habits, they are variable.
Bad habits are variable, and they are swollen veins full of melancholic superfluities which come to the extremities of the body, and their main occurrence is in the thighs, mainly in the thighs of travelers and laborers and porters.
Therefore, we suggest that you administer a purge of the body for black bile with some gentle evacuations, and then let blood from the patient's basilic vein.
The cure of them with iron is according to two methods: one is that the bad habit should be cut out and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and everything extracted.
The section of it is according to this method: at the beginning, wrap the thigh with hot water until the gross blood is dissolved, which is purging the thigh, and then tightly bind the patient's thigh to the upper part of the hip, inside the navel, with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide incision, and then raise the black blood with the hand that holds the lower part of the thigh, upwards and downwards, until the quantity of blood that you want is discharged, and which the strength of the patient can tolerate.
And then apply that, and command the patient to abstain from foods that cause black bile.
And proceed with the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this does not help the patient.
The elevation of the limb is done in this manner: you raise the patient's leg, if it can be moved by itself, and then put it in a bath and wrap the leg with hot water until it becomes red and the veins are filled; or it should be exercised with strong exercise, if a bath is not available, until the member is warmed.
And then make an incision on the right of the vein for drainage in the loin or in the back of the elbow, or at the lowest part of the elbow, near the joint.
And then uncover the cord with an incision and purge the vein from all parts until it becomes apparent to feeling, and it is necessary for the appearance of what seems to be a dark or black vein declining.
And then as you remove from the cord, you will see that white thing which is called a ligament.
And then put your hand under the limb until it is elevated and separated from the cord, and suspend it with a bandage or sling.
And then cut another section, and then cut that section for three days, and then scratch the skin of the affected part of the vein until it appears.
And then lift that and insert it in the last section of the heel, and then extract it and lift it until it is ejected through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
And make it so that you extract it from the section that is most superior or highest of all sections, until everything is ejected; then insert it.
And if it does not obey to extract and lift, then introduce a strong double-threaded needle and tie it and extract it, or introduce the tool and turn your hand in every direction until it is discharged. And beware that it is not inserted, for if it is torn, it will be difficult for you to lift it and it will come out on the patient because of that nuisance.
And when it is all discharged, then apply on the place of the wound a woolen cloth soaked in wine and oil, both raw and refined, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vita is constricted having twisted the area which is enveloped by the partitions, and it's not according to rectitude as we have said, then it's necessary that you make fents on that entire partition of twisting of it and on the areas of envelopment of it, and return that suspended with an ointment entering so that you elevate that entire.
And beware that you do not cut the vein and that you do not harm it, for it would be difficult for you to elevate it; and preserve your discretion in that.
Shape of the incision by which the vita is cut:
It is not sharp-edged like the points nor of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of coarse flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; but rather it has a surplus of coarseness as we have said.
Of extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in cold lands, just like in the land of Arabia and in the dry and arid lands of little tenderness, and in which there are neither herbs nor trees.
And often it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is of putrefaction that comes from the decay, just as worms and snakes and lizards are generated between the skin and the flesh.
And the sign of its reception is from this vein that violently inflames the leg; and then the area becomes blistered; and then the vein starts to come out from the place of that blister, which seems like a plant root.
And then when the extremity appears, it is good that you wrap around that limb a piece of lead weighing one or two drachms, and anoint that with, and let the suspended lead hang from the leg.
And as many times as you see that something is coming out of it, wrap it in lead and anoint that. And if the movement is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not incise that root until it is completely out, because if you incise it, it is contracted and enters into the flesh and causes apostema and pus in the area and bad ulceration.
For it is good that it be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the back of it and no part of it remains in the body.
And from this vein, it exits in some men who are in their length of 5 palms and 10 toes, and it has already reached me that it exits one of 20 palms.
And if it is inserted at the time of its medication, then introduce the needle into the hole of it and perforate that long channel through the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that place for the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein, in some occasions, has many branches, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to it with many openings, and it exits from each opening a branch.
And so treat that thus as we have said in the division and with the things that are mentioned above.
Of the section concerning worms generated under the skin, and it is called cattle disease or cow sickness.
This disease is named in some lands near us as cattle sickness, because many times it appears in the animals and it is a worm which is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes throughout the body pushing and swelling, and it shows itself to our feeling with a bad smell from member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
The generation of it is from the putrefaction of certain humors, thus as accidents occur with worms and serpents and intestinal worms and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and is elevated to the head, and reaches the brain, then it strongly attacks the man, and enters and destroys the brain, and this brings forth vile and visible signs.
And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, then do not do so unless you first prepare the sensitivity and appearance of it to the feeling, and then take care that you strongly hold what is above it and what is below it with a bandage and strong constriction, and place a dry plaster on it and extract it.
And if it is deep in the flesh and you cannot touch it, then apply a cautery with fire on the place where it lives, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
But if you see that it has reached the head near the brain, then bind strongly above the eyebrow with a tight bandage, and apply a dry plaster on it, and extract it; and take care that the patient uses purging of their body with medicines that evacuate bad putrid humors, and guards himself from foods that generate putrefaction.
Of the cutting regarding the ailment of the naval area.
This sickness is called nafir in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then spreads from member to member.
And already I have seen that thing which I will recommend to you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the venous fold of the arm, and after it had been broken for an hour, I saw that inflammation move thus as it went increasing to this point, moreover with a more pleasant sensation than being painful, thus as if it were silver seen flowing from place to place.
And then I put the needle in the pain of that place and fixed it in the muscle, and then I left it there for an hour.
And then I ran to the other side of the body into which I passed to the other arm.
And then I recommended to myself that it revolves throughout the body according to what I had seen; and it was very marvelous of the permutation of it and of the speed from member to member. And I had already seen this beforehand in my wells according to that manner, however I have seen many cases where the pain is transferred from member to member. More pain is not seen with these humors than in women.
And it is not thought to be because of this, but rather that it is due to the fact that the woman is of fragile constitution and with uncovered veins, and in this appearance the distorted swelling reveals the sentiment.
And it is necessary that it not appear according to this curvature in those who are delicate and have a body with humid veins that are weakened.
And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear to them as we have said, but rather press strongly on that spot and place a dry and tight dressing over the area where the swelling is constricted, and cauterize the location.
More if you do not clean the ulcers with the tongs, then cure that one with a discharge from the body and with this that expels swollenness, and remove those foul pills and pills of serape and similar things.
Of extraction of arrowheads.
Arrows are diversified according to their species, and according to the locations of the body in which they lodge, for their diversity is that some of them have large points, and small ones, and concave, and blunt, and solid ones; and some have three angles, and some have barbs; and some have a tail.
And of the signs of the wound, it is when the arrow cuts into the flesh, and pierces the bone, and there comes out from the siphus, which is above the brain, for there occurs through the violent concussion, and scotomia, and vertigo, and pain in the limbs, and inflammation and pain of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and the speech is greatly impaired and the voice is destroyed, and there comes out from the place of the wound a white humidness resembling a poultice, and it seems that the flesh is affected by the proximity of the carnification.
And thus if this appears to you in this way, then abstain from the treatment and from the extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
More signs of the arrow when it enters the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and it seems that it is fixed in a hard cause, and not a hollow cause; and indeed the movement of the arrow resembles the movement of the pulse, and the coldness of the wound is black, and dry, and chilled, and tremors; and thus know that death descends from all over.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are expectoration of foamy blood from the wound, and the veins that are near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient is changed, and they exhale a great amount of cold breath, and demand attraction of cold air.
And if the arrow falls in the membrane which is in the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it is made with great and vehement pain and sighing, and not all the members of the muscles are moved.
And if the arrow falls in the stomach, then forth comes from the wound a green and undigested matter.
And if the arrow is in the stomach, and it's fixed in it, there will be some wound or tear in the fabric, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope for a cure except for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow is in the bladder, and urine comes out of it, and because of this some cause comes to the parts before, and for him there is severe pain on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
But the other members such as the face, the neck, and the throat, and the shoulders and the arms, and the vertebrae of the back, and the ribcage, and the hip, and the leg and their similar parts, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not touch a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I recommend to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you understand by this about your own cure.
For this reason, if an arrow hits a man in the tear duct of his eye at the root of the nose, and you extract it from the other side, leaving the grey matter of the brain intact, he will be healed, and no harm will come to the brain.
He extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into his eye socket, leaving the eyelid behind, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be retrieved except for a small extremity to which it adhered to his bone, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, made of iron in which there were no wings.
And the Jew fainted, and did not happen to him any worse accident.
And he extracted another arrow from a Christian man, which had fallen into his throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and this one had wings; and then he sat down on that between two guides, and it was already submerged in the man's throat; and then he was very skilled with that, and carefully extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And he extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his belly, and they thought that he would die from it; and then, after thirty days passed and there was no change in him regarding any of the causes of his condition, he sat down on the arrow and worked on it, and he was healed, and no worse accident happened to him.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and after he had been treated for seven years, the arrowhead remained at the root of the thigh.
I see a woman in whom an arrowhead is lodged in her belly, and the wound is consolidated within her, and it does not change its position or location, and the woman does not suffer discomfort in some of her natural functions.
I see another man in whom an arrowhead is lodged in his face and the wound is consolidated, and the arrow breaks, causing little pain, and showing few symptoms of this.
I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes that was lodged in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called to his treatment because of the lodging of the arrowhead that had entered within three days.
And then I found the wound of the arrowhead very tight; and then I probed it with a subtle thread, and did not feel it; but when I touched his right ear, he felt pain, and then I suspected that this point was due to the extremity of the arrow.
And I applied a plaster to the place with an emplastrum in which there is attractive and digestive virtue, trusting that the place would show me where the arrowhead was, so that I could cut above it.
And it does not happen by chance in the location of the accident that the arrow has reached that place; and you continue with the plaster on them for many days and it does not happen by chance; and the wound is consolidated meanwhile, and the patient frees themselves from the extension of it for a space of many days until one day they feel the arrow inside their nose and touch it with their hand.
And then you will place on the wound acute corrosive medicine for many days until it is opened, and with the probe you will test that, and you will extract the extremity of the subtle arrow, which adheres to the fist.
And then you will adjust in the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until it appears visibly to me the extremity of the arrow, and you will pass to me time with that for the space of time until four months.
And then since the wound is enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I will manipulate that, and do not obey excess, then you will not cease to subtly contrive and engineer on that with skills of engineering, until one day you will climb with those skills of engineering, hanging them with forceps and descent, made in various ways, as will be seen in the form of those at the end of the chapter, until you extract it; and then restore the wound.
And some doctors believed that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but if it is restored and the wound is consolidated, then the patient is cured by complete health, and nothing else can harm them in any way.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain sayings for which pauses are made on this rule and significance about what has not been said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not comprehended by narration nor do they comprehend them freely.
And the wise craftsman compares little with regard to motion; and what is present with what is absent; and finds new operation and new instrument for the descent of the strange causes of the art when accidents occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not ejected from the members in which they are lodged, but rather in two ways: either by attraction of the place into which it enters; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is ejected through the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding to a fleshy place, and is attracted and ejected.
And if it does not obey the evacuation at the time when you take it, then it is good that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes purulent, and the attraction of it and its ejection are alleviated.
And similarly if it is fixed in the bones and does not obey your efforts, then leave it for several days and return to it with attraction and friction every day, and already it will be dislodged.
And if it does not obey your efforts for several days, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow in that bone of the entire affected part with a subtle taravel until the area of the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
If the arrow is already lodged in the part of the body, and it is lodged in a sensitive area, then you inquire about that sensation, and if you feel it, then remove it with instruments suitable for the attraction of it.
And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are neither bones nor nerves nor veins, then make an incision on the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it has reached the ears, on which it is held, then cut the flesh in which it is embedded with all the skill you can; and operate above that, if you cannot operate on the evacuation of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and twisting of them until you obtain obedience.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it is, then use your hand with twisting and force on all parts until it makes that obey; and be subtle with great subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and so that it is made difficult to attract it and to extract it.
And if you cannot operate on that at your hour, then leave it for several days until the parts that are in the circle of it can be cleansed, and then return to it when it is alleviated. But if you find an opposite condition of blood flow, then administer what we have said about treatment in the previous chapter.
And guard your virtue of incision of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer ingeniously in all manner possible to you the evasion of the arrow; and do it with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness as you have recommended and advised.
And then make the arrowhead contract so that the patient is in accordance with the figure, according to which you previously mentioned the removal of the arrow from them, which is most juvenile. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But the arrowheads that are thrust outward by the opposite of the other party, or which already proceed from it to the outer parties, or which make the extremity of the arrowhead visible by sensation of the part most disposed to the propounded and vexed codena, and times when that is imminent; then you cut upon that; and let the incision be according to the quantity in which the forces take hold; and then draw out that, for it is made lighter by extraction.
But if it is retained in the bone, then twist the lamina according to the opposite condition under which the arrowhead presses into the bone, and increase the measures, and then extract that.
And if not, leave that for some days, and then return to insert it into what will be.
And if the head of the arrow is in it, then you should push it out with your hands.
More if the head has fallen and you want to administer an injection, then introduce and put in it, if it is numb, push with a blunt instrument so that it enters the cavity of it into the body of the arrow and then push it out with your hands.
More if the arrow is curved, then you should push it out with a strong instrument entering into it, because the arrow is loosened by it.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then take care to remove all the flesh in which it is, if it is possible for you, and then treat it with what is suitable.
And if the arrow is lodged in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribcage, and it is near so that you can touch it with your fingers, and it is possible for you to cut above it, then cut above it and beware of injuring a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then dress the wound if it is indicated, and treat it until it is healed.
Shape of forces where the arrows are directed:
The extremities of their body are like a bird's beak which is made when they grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of these are made many special treatments, large, small and moderate, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and of its poverty, and of the width of the wound, and of the constitution of the patient.
thus as a rod so that it relieves the inside of it in the arrow's concave and is implanted with that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy, in which it is customary to perform phlebotomy, of the ones that are in the head 16, there are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, I mean the temples; and two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimals of the two eyes that are called aspicientes; and the vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and two guides that are at the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are under the tongue. In the veins that are swollen in the arms, there is one called cephalica, and it comes from the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it's also called the middle vein, and it's composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalica; and the people call that one "the vein of the whole body", and the basilica is the vein that is in the domestic lettuce, and it's named "citillar", and the commoners call it "the vein of the belly"; and there are funis of the arm, and it's placed above the elbow, and it's the one that appears swollen, and it's the one that appears on the skin by manifest appearance; and salvatella, which is the vein between the ear and the little finger, and there are two branches in it.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of them is the one that is at the curvature of the knot of the wild lettuce; and the second is the sophena, and its place is at the leg of the domestic lettuce; and the sciatic vein, and its place is at the leg of the wild lettuce; and in the leg there are other similar veins to those.
The junction of the veins that are near the ears is affected by chronic catarrh, and emigration, and sahafati, and ulcers of the bad head, which are ancient evils.
And the quality of bleeding those veins is according to what you have recommended to me: it is that the head of the patient should be raised, and the head of the patient should be rubbed on the occipital area where the two veins are located with a warm and gentle friction; then tie the patient's neck with a bandage so that the ears and the areas around them appear; and seek that vein with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of that vein with your finger, then try to stop it.
Then take the surgical knife, and it is the one that is inserted, and then insert it into the vein in the cubital fossa so that blood flows from the opening. And then elevate your hand with the vein and the cubital fossa to the separated parts and make an incision in the vein with an incident cut. And let the length of the incision be two fingers' width, or about that; and let as much blood come out as you wish.
And then tie with a poultice and bind it so that it heals.
And already in the beginning of the book, I have discussed the incision of those things and also their cauterization.
More of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, youth of phlebotomy is an ancient immigration and badly governed and assiduous eye disease and body of acute superfetations poured out to the senses.
And the quality of phlebotomy on those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's vein with a tight bandage so that the two veins appear at the sentiment by apparent manifestation and it is demonstrated by the pulse of their arm; then you will feel it with your fingers.
And then you raise the needle above the vein to the divided parts of the arm, and insert the phlebotomy needle, and raise the vein in its place; and cut that one just as you did on the other two veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the constraint of the patient, and place your arm on the vein for an hour, and then place a poultice on that cut and strengthen it with a strong bandage, and leave it until it is healed.
And already the memory of them has been preceded, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the treatment.
Therefore the treatment of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient facial ailments and for migraines, soreness, and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is according to what you have recommended to you; thus it is that the patient holds their arm with a bandage so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, of which this is the form:
Pause the prominent point which is at the head of the lancet on that vein and strike it with a pin or other metal in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you want; and then release the pressure from the patient and hold it tight so that it heals.
And some times it is opened with lateral phlebotomy, however it is not suitable that the phlebotomy be of acute extremity like the others phlebotomies, but rather of broad extremity, and perform this one according to the transverse, because the bone is prominent and the tendon is strong in it, when the phlebotomy is subtle.
More importantly the treatment of the two veins that are like the lachrymal veins of two eyes for scabies of the eyes and soreness and boils in the eyes, and for facial ailments.
The quality of the bloodletting is that the patient should hold the collar of the shirt with one bandage, and then apply the bloodletting instrument to those areas, and you stand over the head of them.
And let bloodletting be done according to the transverse length of a little bloodletting instrument, little, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the bloodletting instrument is subtle, then the extremity of them is cut.
And then make the blood flow as much as is necessary to you, and stop on those cuts, and hold them for a night, and then dress those.
More, the bloodletting of the vein of the nose is convenient for acute fever and for violent cough, and for the ailments of the face and migraine and pain that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the bloodletting of them is that the patient should hold the collar and then put the collar of their nose on your left hand, and take the subtle bloodletting lancet and place it in the middle place of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and because the blood begins to flow at once.
Take care that you touch your hand to the bloodletting instrument little by little and make the blood flow according to your necessity; and then dress it for a night, because it is restored lightly.
More often the treatment of phlebotomy of the veins guides to a contraction of the skin and a beginning of leprosy and to mottoes diseases and putrid and malignant corrosive ulcers, as with herpes.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient holds each one in their hand with a ligature; and let the artisan be above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
Then phlebotomize the vein at the length with a small and ample phlebotomy, little by little; then extract blood in a tempered quantity or according to what is needed, that is to say according to necessity; and then do the same on the other vein.
And then release the ligature and hold both veins with a moderate tightness so that the patient is not suffocated, and let him go to bed because the wound is healed.
And the treatment of phlebotomy of the Algerian veins relieves small aposthema and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the region of it.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck with a bandage, and then turn out their lips and look at both veins of which one is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of them, and this is more evident because in the region of those there are thin black veins; and then make an incision on each one by incident incision.
If there is doubt in you, and you do not know which of these it is, then understand the most serious incision of them, and the most manifest one.
And make a similar thing to the two veins that are in the lips above.
Moreover, the cutting of the two veins that are under the tongue is close to the phlebotomy of the cephalic, which is preferred for afflictions in the throat, for the disease of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy for those is that it follows the disease between your hands in front of the patient, and raises the patient's tongue, and observes behind the tongue, on one side of the vein and on the other side of the vein, and the color of each one is declining to black.
And then phlebotomize each one; and beware that you do not cut your hand while phlebotomizing them, because behind them are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are in the ones where it is customary for all men, and their phlebotomy is done according to two methods: either they put on the phlebotomy a martyr or olive to subtlety declining; or they apply to the phlebotomy a lancet, and call it "alnessil", and this is its form:
Let the thread of the same size pass through as many times, and it is suitable to open the concave veins that are full and apparently thick, and also those that contain thick blood or pus.
And this bloodletting is of lesser width and of more subtle extraction, and it suits the bloodletting of subtle veins that contain subtle citrus-like blood.
Most of the treatment of bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts the blood of the illnesses that are on the left side and the colon, and also that which affects the chest and the belly.
And it is suitable for the bloodletter, when performing that bloodletting, to be careful with that and to be in fear of that, because there is an artery nearby, and if he makes a mistake and hits the wrong spot in the puncture of the bloodletting, he will cut that artery and cause an outflow of blood, so that it is necessary not to perform bloodletting with a pointed instrument, but rather with one that is blunt.
And if the basilica does not appear through obvious examination, then it is necessary that you leave that one and move to another, or search for a certain branch of the vein, or make an incision in place of the end of the arm, because that is obvious; and perform that incision with careful consideration, as we have said.
If you want to perform a venesection on the middle arm, then it is necessary to tighten the band above the arm so that you touch the place where you constrict the area of the pulse, and put a needle on the inner tender part; and tie the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision in a careful manner as we have said; and beware that the percussion does not hit any space near the artery.
And when you see, with the ligature strained, an inflammation in the place where you have made the incision on the tender part, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore evacuate that.
And if you see the blood flowing in the venesection like the urine of a child, and the blood is subtle and red, then you should know that it is arterial blood; and then take and hold your finger on it for a long space; and put your finger on it, and if the blood is separated, because many times it is separated, then tighten the arm and let go of that.
Watch over the patient's urine, and be fearful of it, and do not touch that for several days until they are healed.
If the blood does not stop, and you think that medicine is not present, then you will cut the artery if it appears to you; because the extremity of theirs is contracted, and the blood is stopped; or you will take a string of thread, and make a ligature, and take one bandage and tie it tightly over the place of the vein with strictness and with pulvils between the other day.
And then if the blood is stopped, it is good; and if not, then treat that with the treatment of which it was previously mentioned to remind the place of the powders that stop the flow of blood.
And the stopping of their blood is difficult in many situations due to the small place of the wound and the possibility of loosening of the arm.
From the dark vein, phlebotomy is a procedure that removes blood from the subordinate part of the head and the right part of the body; for this reason it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
And warn the one who performs phlebotomy to be afraid of that in the phlebotomy, because there is a nerve; and therefore if they make an adjustment in the puncture of the phlebotomy and hit the nerve, it will cause them stupor, and the healing of them will be difficult, and it will be hard for them to be completely healed. And this nerve appears many times to feeling; and if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and not shown, then warn that you should place the phlebotomy with which you perform phlebotomy with care to avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then make a cut in the vein along its length.
The benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it draws out the blood from the head and comforts the ailments of the eyes.
And consider this specially, if you want to perform phlebotomy with an olive stick or myrtle stick; for it is the safest of all veins, since there are neither arteries nor nerves.
Moreover, it often happens to some men that when they are not subjected to phlebotomy in the primary percussion, there is no touching of that abscess.
The first thing you should know is that phlebotomy is not administered except in conservation of health and for hope of it and caution of the occurrence of ailments, and that phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins that are in the arm, namely: cephalic, median and basilica; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter after eating, when there appear signs of repletion.
And let a phlebotomy be done on the third day or first hour after three hours have passed from the beginning of the journey.
The more phlebotomy is administered, the more it causes convenience and necessity for that, either at night or during the day, at all hours and at all times.
And it is known that if a child is under 14 years old, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month or seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized who have already passed 61 years.
And when someone wishes to be phlebotomized in any manner, it is known that one must cleanse the intestines beforehand with a flebotomy or an enema, if there is retained fecal matter, so that the veins do not attract the superfluities during the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are purified, and so that they do not reach the principal members.
And those who are nauseous, or have diarrhea, or a craving, nor should they be phlebotomized if they have a disease or a fever until it has been reduced in them, nor those with dropsy, and more so because phlebotomy is to be avoided near colic pain and vomiting, and abdominal discomfort, and multiplication of cough and fatigue and exercise of fasting or vigils and all causes that dissolve virtue, either corporal or animal.
And then consider in subtlety of humors if the blood is thick with food and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible for that person.
And then enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or it is excited by some exercise so that the blood is thinned.
And perform the phlebotomy on them in the vein of the arm, around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
And it is necessary that the arm of that person be protected on that day from all bad animal accidents, as well as anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as turmoil and excessive grief and concern for them.
And in their presence, make the causes known through the use of that which customarily belongs to men with aromatics and fragrance and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And let the one performing the phlebotomy sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
And then extract the blood from the arm, and let the phlebotomy doctor touch it with their hand two or three times; and then tighten the ligature with a strap and wrap it two times.
And if it is a tempered narrowing, because the narrowing when it is not equal, or the narrowing is with excess, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is with softening, and then it prohibits the body from excessive blood.
Then apply the narrowing, so that one who should be a bloodletter, rubs their hands together between them, so that the veins become inflated, and are declared to the sensation.
And then the bloodletter applies a little ancient oil to their lancet properly; and then places their right index finger on the vein, with their left hand holding the area where the bloodletting is desired, so that the vein swells a bit, and the percussion is calmed because of the veins which you find there like a cord, since the bloodletting makes them run, and of those it is full of air, and when you apply the lancet on that one, it is contracted before the bloodletting, and the bloodletter is discovered; and the lancet does not wound the vein, but if it does, it is a slight one.
And so, for this reason, it is necessary that the bloodletter be stopped and solicited in all these cases.
And then proceed with the phlebotomy, if the vein is exposed in a suitable area, it is good; and if not, you will make another incision in that location, or above the patient's arm, depending on whether the area is inflamed.
And if the area is inflamed, or the patient is prone to spasms, then leave it alone for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, lest you aggravate the inflammatory abscess, nor enter into bath.
And then proceed with the phlebotomy if the case requires it.
And if the perception is small and you fear that you will not be able to get the quantity of blood you want, then proceed with the phlebotomy in that vein according to the rule and adjust on the aperture a little stopcock, and make it with caution so that the area does not become inflamed, because an inflamed area is very bad for many men due to small aperture.
But if the area has already become inflamed, then do not proceed with it, because it does not excuse any cause of yours; and apply to that affected part of the olive oil dressing, because it alleviates the body from blood. And it is better in this case olive oil than other oils.
Similarly, administer a bandage of oil in the entire phlebotomy to which phlebotomies the veins are forbidden from the body's prohibition of blood, and make that theriaca with almond and sagenea when it is placed on one of those areas, because the blood is subtle and is revolted when it is coarse.
And if in the area of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, because many times it happens, and mainly to that one who has not been bled but only this time, or in the vicinity of the little vein, then cut it, and place on the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warm, and hold for an hour, so that it is dissolved.
And it happens that this is applied near the sentiment of the blood of that vein in agreement with it or with another vein.
And if a black or greenish color remains in the area for some days, do not worry about it; and if you want, place on that area some cause of rosewater and of dissolved mirra, or some cause of mint juice or of chamomile or similar to it.
And many times it happens that abscesses and swellings from phlebotomy of the basilic vein occur.
And then place your hand over that area, and if you find a softness there, apply compression to it, for that prominence is bad and evil; and therefore be careful what you do to that area, because the flow from the arterial blood is strong.
And make a plaster for that area where there is stiffness, so that the place becomes hardened, and then treat it with another cure until it is healed.
And take out of the blood everything according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color that appears on the surface of the blood, as it seems.
For if the blood is black, then let it come out until it becomes red; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it come out until it becomes thinned; and similarly if it is sharp, until the sharpness of it is blunted.
And take for the one who is full and strong and needs a blood extraction in a single vein, that phlebotomy of the vein should be amplified and the phlebotomist should be skilled.
And in the one who is frail, do the opposite of that, and take out that which is extracted in many veins, and let the trachea be narrow.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of a vein is that it should be a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is saved from flow of blood and cutting of nerves, and it is more useful and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And to whom it is accustomed to happen syncopes after phlebotomy, and it is good that you cure that before the phlebotomy with a little of warm infusion of milgranas or simple oximel; and extract from the blood in three or four times.
And if it is a coldness of complexion, then take before the phlebotomy an infusion of electuary of mirra or electuary of honey aromatized with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or an electuary aromatized and of pleasant odor.
And if syncopes occur after the phlebotomy, and it is caused by the issue of much blood, then it is good that you take in drinking water of flesh and electuary of subtle pleasant odor; and use aromaticity with almond, and anoint the chest with that.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
And whoever wants to evacuate the blood from their arm and dissolve their second blood, take from them through phlebotomy for motivated evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, as is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
But whoever wants to evacuate their arm, and shed their second blood, and if their body is strong, then do this close to the seventh or ninth hour of the first phlebotomy.
But whoever wants to attract the blood of their body against the area where it is declining, take that it be evacuated on the second or third day.
But that body in which there is much blood already corrupted and it is sharp and causes fever, take that blood be shed from it in one sitting and let a great quantity of it be shed and let the perception be amplified until syncopy occurs, since you have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and put your hand on the pulse of the body where the blood flows, so that death does not occur in place of syncopy, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not attempt when you want to release the arm and evacuate the second vein, since the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult to extract blood, that you press below with vehemence and the elbow is extended, because this is very bad.
Have the assistant make an incision so that it is a secondary bloodletting; or let this be done with the sharpness of the bloodletter that coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place upon it tyriacal alum or sagenezene, and compress it with gentle compression so that the blood comes out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then let it be and do not touch it until the inflammation is settled.
And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the blood again, and it is not an excuse, then prick that spot on that location or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "cord of the arm" is bloodletted in place of the cubital or basilic, when they are not blocked or narrowed, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the bloodletting of it is that the patient immerses their hand in cold water so that the vein becomes more visible and the vein appears manifestly.
And then tighten it over that limb with a moderate strictness; and make an incision following the transverse direction, not crosswise nor along the length.
And let the opening be wide and let your incision be such that you make it above the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is stopped, then put the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from immersing the hand in warm water, and it is the same to soak the body of the blood in cold water in winter.
And the incision of this vein is less dangerous than all the other veins, because it has neither a pulsating vein, nor nerve.
And the incision of the little vein of the right hand is suitable for the illnesses of the liver.
And the quality of the incision is that you hold the hand with a ligature or with your own hand, after you have put it in warm water, until the vein is inflated and is demonstrated to the view; and then make an incision transversely; and if you cut it not at all, nothing will be felt in return.
And be careful not to cut your hand during phlebotomy, because you will be close to the nerves of the dissected flesh.
Then immediately put your hand in hot water and let the blood flow in it, because if you don't do that with hot water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and it is forbidden to flux.
And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of need, then you apply oil and salt on the vein, so that it does not consolidate too quickly; and similarly you should do in all constricted veins.
More often the phlebotomy of the left hand is preferred to that of the right hand, as it is convenient for the diseases of the left side.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of the arm as you have done in the other.
And the vein that is chosen for phlebotomy is for the diseases that are on the left side of the body, such as diseases of the mother, and retention of menses, and for the diseases of the kidneys and ulcers of the thighs and legs, and for similar things among the diseases.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of the arm is that the patient should put their foot in hot water and make a friction on which the veins appear; and tie above the ankle joint with a cord; and in the place of the vein, the apparent vein that you see between the toes, and from it branches are spread out on the surface of the foot to the lower parts.
Therefore, I recommend a poultice on the infected area or place the leg in a warm bath to reduce the swelling of the wound, which is better and more beneficial.
And if you apply a poultice on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath the surface of the foot, and place your poultice with the one by which you treat through the middle, as if you wanted to make an incision.
And let the poultices be visible.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse the patient's foot in warm water and let the blood flow into a container until it is evacuated.
And if the poultice applicator makes a mistake on the first dressing, then put the poultice on for a short time, because the place is sore; and do not fear the patient's pain, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do the same with the swelling of the other foot.
And for the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is behind the heel and down to the hollow of the divided buttocks.
And the junction of the poultice application is at the hip joint when it is for bloodletting.
And the quality of the fleubotomia of the patient is that they enter into a bath, and tighten and strengthen the thigh of the patient from the side of the wide entrance under the heel under four fingers with a long subtle bandage, which does not appear except for that.
And then when it appears, the fleubotomia is according to each engineer's ingenuity that is possible for you and according to the nature of the wound, which is better; or cut that by incision or section that by section, because the place of the patient is salty.
And it is in many homes a remedy; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the feeling of everything, then the fleubotomia takes some branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot towards the said auricular and anular.
And beware of the nerves, and make flow from the blood the quantity that you want.
And then release the tension and pause over the place of the fleubotomia, cut and strengthen the place, because gentle handling is health.
Of purging and of the qualities of using those things.
Purges are from hems, or from wormwood, or from verbena.
Ventozacio is performed according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventozacio without scarification.
And this ventozacio without scarification is according to two methods, either with heat or without heat.
And the ventozas that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen locations on the body, among which one location where ventozas are placed is behind the ear, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle location of the two parts of the neck together; and ventozas on the jaw below the mandible below the mouth; and ventozas of the two spallae; and ventozas of the spleen, which is at the end of the ribcage; and ventozas of the two axillaries, and they are of the two arms; and ventozas of the two hams; and ventozas of the two thighs.
And venozation does not extract blood, but rather from the thin veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not take effect through those, just as it is done by phlebotomy; nor is it necessary that venozation be performed with heat or without heat in any disease caused by excess, until the body is entirely evacuated.
If there is a need to provoke purging due to illness or continuously, we will administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle, and at any time.
And therefore when in any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then we command purging to be done since two or three hours have passed.
And it is said that purging of the neck is when it relieves heaviness in the head and that which is poured into the senses; but we rather think that it should be evacuation of the whole body.
And this swelling is in the area of phlebotomy of the head.
And it is not advisable to use on him that which is of cold complexion, or in which there is catarrh, because it brings great harm.
And for this reason, it is not suitable to use that on the old people, and on the heads of those who have cold maladies.
More to the one on whom it is continually applied, forgetfulness is caused; and for this reason, it is advisable that you command the swelling-reducer to put his hand a little while on the swollen area of the feet, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Greater swelling of alkahol is in the area of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the basilic vein: and for this reason, it is conducive to asthma, and to the constriction of the spleen and to the scission of the spleen's ligament, and to coughs, and to flatulence.
And it is advisable that the alkahol swelling be wrapped a little, because if it is touched by the feet, it generates debility in the body and in the stomach.
And the swelling of alhagdahan contributes to accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and to migraines, and to forehead pain, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the area of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And tell the surgeon to press his hand with a scalpel so that he does not cut the artery and cause an outflow of blood.
And the operation of the mouth includes the gum in the mouth, and the corruption of the gum, and the symptoms of the diseases that are in the mouth, and are in place of a surgical procedure for abscesses that are on both lips.
More, the operation that is done on both spatulas includes the cupping, which is done for replenishment of heat.
And the operation of the two parts that are opposite the navel includes the cutting of the three veins, which are the basilica, cephalica and jugular, because it attracts the blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins of the other large veins so that the attraction comes to the three veins.
And tell the surgeon to proceed with caution in the incision, because the area is devoid of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries.
And it is an operation on which the operation is performed on the hips and includes the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers that are inside.
And tell the one who administers the treatment to make a large incision, and let it be of iron, for the location indicates a strong constriction; and strongly let the subtle purging incisions be made with a scalpel.
Lesser purging of the thighs is made with evident minuteness, for it attracts the blood from the whole body, and alleviates ancient pains of the kidneys and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and provokes the menses, and alleviates bothor and ademil; and they are in the place of flebotomy of two sophas, and of the ahorc, and of two cavities.
The emperor's remedy reaches the whole body and makes the syncopes accelerate in many men.
And of the purgings of the ahorc, the youth is given to the youth by the purgings of two thighs.
And the quality of the position of the purgings is that it stops the purging at the beginning of the abscess and closes by a tempered suction, and does not prolong the position of the purgings, but rather raises them gently, and holds them quietly, and so that the humors come to the place by gentle coming. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already reddened, swollen, and inflamed, and that the rigor of the blood appears.
And then you will slowly and carefully extract a little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
For that man who has tender flesh on his hips, beware that you do not scrape it once and for all, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the bloodletter to amplify the scraping and to cut a little deeper, and then extract with ease.
And if the blood is thickened, then beware that you scrape two times, for in the first scraping the path of subtlety to the blood and its thinning is opened. More so in the second (scraping) the acquired examination of the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then a third scraping should be done so that the dregs are cleared.
And gently, when we want to extract a little blood, it is enough for us to scrape just a little.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we will scrape with a deeper scraping; and if we know that the blood is thick, then beware that we scrape with a deep scraping.
And the term of scraping is where the depth of the vein is only as much.
And if the patient's skin is thick, hard, and dark, and their pores are very tight, it is advisable to apply gentle, loosening, and resolving treatments to the areas of the veins; if it is summer, then use almond oil or violet oil, or melissa oil, or fig tree oil; and if it is winter, then use narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or sandalwood oil, and apply these to similar symptoms.
And if the swelling is thick and cold, then the oil should be bitter almond, or balm of Gilead, or sweet almond oil, or anise oil, and apply it to similar cases.
More often if the wound has large pores with tender flesh, then it is advisable to prohibit oil, and it is advisable to apply to these wounds a lavation of warm water or cold water from a solvent, or water from a decoction, or water from borlago, and similar treatments for such cases.
And for the one whose wound is of moist humidity, wash their wounds with sour wine, or water of myrtle and sumach, and apply similar treatments to such cases.
And for the one whose swellings are thick, wash their wounds with old wine, or water of sage, which is marjoram, or a decoction of anise, or chamomile, and apply similar treatments to such cases.
And it is desirable that the ventilation be kept away from the bath; also desirable is that it be administered close to the bath for an hour or two, and desirable that one sleeps close to the ventilation.
What is it that should be governed by bloodletting before purification.
It is desirable that you consider the beginning: then if the purifier or he who must be bled is bilious and has sharp and inflamed blood, then it is desirable that he takes cooling causes, such as milky sweets, endives, bitter and sour drinks, and similar things.
And give him food such as poultry, and meat of small game birds, and seasoned food with sour sauces, and similar things to him.
And for one whose temperament is cold, it is desirable that he takes in drink honeyed electuary, or electuary of dried and seeded hemp, and sumac, and with pleasant smelling spices mixed with hot and warm; and it should be recommended to him to use moderation in drinking and eating, and give him food of poultry, rabbit, partridge, and small game birds.
And it is desirable that on the day of purification and bloodletting, the drink be greater than the food.
It is suitable to give in drink, for certain hours to certain men, tyriac or alpharac, or medicaments of musk, which is muskad, or to anoint the stomach or to perform a flebotomy or to apply, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is subtle; and it is not suitable to take that scaldfit.
The stomachs that are to be scarified are the ones that are placed under the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the areas of the joints, and the skin of the thigh, because these members do not suffer from scarification upon themselves.
And it is not sought for those but to attract blood from a member, just as we place a plaster on the breast in case of flux of blood of the nose; and we use that to dissolve cold viscosity of the member, just as we place it on the stomach and the navel; because that rarefies the member and scarifies it and brings down the pain when we resolve the viscosity.
And it is placed on the joints when there is opacity or pus, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out the opacity and eradicates the pus from its place.
Similarly, it is done when a poultice is applied on the liver and the middle to reduce swelling in those enclosed areas.
And these swellings are administered with juice alone; some treated areas are administered with heat from a fire.
And some treated areas are filled with warm water in the illnesses of the abdomen.
And this is because the swelling is filled and becomes larger, it is warm water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been cut and added.
A warm poultice applied to the body: its thickness should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the plaster should be half a palm; and on its surface, in the area that is in the circuit, let its thickness be small enough so that a needle can enter it.
Let it be made of rough pumice stone or citrine, with coarse edges, lion, and thorns, so that it does not let the member move from its position on it.
And let there be in the middle of it a transverse rod of pumice stone or iron, where a candle is placed at the fire.
And let this poultice be greater in size than the one we have recommended; and the smaller part of it according to the illnesses and the age of the person who uses it.
The flatulence of elderly people and those who are thin is different from that of young people and those with large bodies.
And the quality of treating this flatulence with fire on the member is that it extends the stick with fire decently in front of a small candle made of wax, and place that over the middle of the transverse vein in the middle location of the flatulence, so that the fire is kindled around the affected part without burning the body of the patient.
And apply it to the member of the patient, and let it be on the hole that we have mentioned, until when we have the flatulence and we indicate that they should let out the saying and the vapor should escape through that hole, then the flatulence will be dissolved.
And ignite the stick according to its manner, and repeat this if you are indicated to do so by that.
There is also a type of flatulence that is administered in the disease of bladder problems, with water, in which there is no transverse vein or hole, and it is not administered except that it should be filled with water, and placed on the member alone.
And this is its form: And this flatulence, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter 97.
Bloodletting is not administered in many members except in the members where it's not possible to apply cups, due to their smallness, such as the foot and gum and their surroundings; or in a member devoid of flesh, such as the said nose and its surroundings.
And the quality of using those that you have found to be bloodletting cups in the armpits or the hollows of purified dust.
And then let them be applied during the day and night in armpit water until they are hungry, and so that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then let the body be evacuated at the beginning with flebotomy and with cupping; and then let the member of the patient be rubbed until it becomes red; and then let them be placed on him.
And when they are filled and fallen.
And if it is possible to suck from the place with a cup, it is better in judgment.
And if not, then wash the place with sour wine and then with hot water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed out.
And if the flow of blood is prolonged by the application of the bloodletting cups, and it is that which is overflowing, then you should put a cloth of linen in cold water, and place that on top until the flowing is diminished.
If the blood is multiplied, then powder the vitriol trissat, or similar substances to the stiptic causes, until the blood is dried; or place the warm poultices of fava excocicated on the area, and leave them until the wounds adhere to the location, and the blood dries.
And see, if necessary, repetition of bloodletting, when it is possible to change those things.
And if bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle in the areas until blood comes out; and then apply poultices, for these when they feel some blood will adhere quickly.
And when you want them to fall, powder a little of triturated aloe, or salt, or cinder, and apply immediately.
Thus begins the project of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations of the bones.
Or, son, know that the foolish doctors and the common people mock this chapter, and those who for a long time do not respect the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
Because of this reason, it is done that this manner of the scholars in our land is private; and you do not forget it at any time; and I do not adapt what I learn, but rather through long duration of reading the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of them, until I extract the science from them.
And then I direct my experience and study throughout the duration of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my experience has passed; for I have abbreviated it for you and others, and freed it from the occupation of length; and I will abbreviate it at the end of the abbreviation; and I will show it at the end of the declaration; and I have formed in it many forms of treatments that are administered to it, as is done by addition of declaration, just as it was done in the two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
A summary and collection from the essence of bone fractures, from which a necessary introduction is, before we begin the reminiscence of fractured members and various ones of each. Therefore, I say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of those which at the beginning are forged by the artisans and a station about the truth of them; so it is you and those who are prompt that know or learn this noble art, others of you.
And therefore I say that when there occurs a fracture or dislocation or sprain or fall, it is advisable to begin treatment with phlebotomy or to release that, or whatever seems best at the time, if no circumstance prohibits it, such as lack of virtue, or if the person is prone to fainting, or is in a state of great decrepitude, or it is a time of intense heat, or of intense cold.
And then be content with a diet of fresh herbs and lean meats of birds and crab; and prohibit gross meats and filling up on foods and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are assured of a safe apostemation, and if you do not fear an effusion of material to the member.
And then return the patient to their primary regimen, in which their custom consists.
And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is advisable that the patient be fed with nutritious foods of soft and gentle nourishment, in which there is viscosity, such as warm bread soaked in water, and rice, and cabbage, and peas, and calves' stomachs, and cows', and fresh fish, and similar foods, for with this regimen is made coagulation of fracture, pus cleansing, and mending.
And it is known that the brittle bones, when they are in the old people who are in the first weakness and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of the members of their body.
But the dominant nature adjusts and joins above the broken bone of any separated part a similar cause to glue in which there is grossness that adheres and strengthens that joint which then becomes conglutinated and joined together, until it reaches the end of strength and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, until some cause does not prohibit it from its own works.
And for this cause it is necessary that you apply the dressings to the patient, dressings in which there are gravity and viscosity and grossness, as we have said.
And it is known that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the back; and likewise all the other members are diverse among themselves.
And I come with a reminder of the entire species of fracture, explained in the seventh chapter distinctly from the others.
There is a diverse multitude of fractures in the body. And the species of fractures of the bone are diversified in their body; for there is made an arch-shaped fracture and another that occurs in the stars; and some views are made of a fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagitta and astellia and proceeded and non-proceeded, thus as it is done in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with a plague and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And each species has its own proper anguish or torment in restoration of the thing, according to what will come as a reminder of it distinctly in its places.
There is a signal of fracture of the bone. And thereby is recognized a fracture of the bone: it is a twisting of it, and of that a prominence and appearance to the feeling, and so of it when you press on it with your hand.
And therefore when there is not an apparent twisting in the place nor does it seem so by touching, you should touch the bone with agitation and if the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that there is a twisted or small fissure, and it does not matter that you put your hand on it with compression of everything; also place above it one of the medicines of which you have memory at that moment when it suits the location; and apply it strictly with subtle pressure.
And know that the location when it is curved and not divided into two or another thing that does not occur in the sagittal area, as the entire part of its comparison is reevaluated, then it is suitable to begin from your hour for rectification of what occurs to it with an apostema cautery.
And if an apostema cautery occurs to it, then apply it for several days until the apostema ceases; and also wrap it according to whatever method you can of lightness and ingenuity.
And be aware that restoration of it and thinning of it is preferable to removal of the bone in which the sagittal wound occurs.
And then strengthen it according to the method that will bring back its memory.
More so if in the bone there are sagittal wounds, then extension of this broken member is necessary from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and the hand.
And let your position be the one in which you hold the limb in its natural shape, while the extended parts of the limb are stretched, then you will perforate so that you make the additions return to their place and according to each manner that you can put them in their places.
And be careful according to your strength that you do not fall on the patient during their operation nor injure them; and perforate yourself according to your own power so that you apply one bone to the other as their best companions according to their best forms.
And it is advisable that at that time you touch with your hand, and if sometimes there is a different cause, correct it and adjust it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, just as foolish doctors do who cause abscesses through their operation, or cause contraction in the limb, just as we have seen through the operation of their foolish practices.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil member is that which you should recommend; for you should know that the constricted members are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And for those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the elbow, it seems good that the wrapping should be of a very fine soft cloth.
But for those that are large, such as the thigh or the leg, it is good that the wrapping should be tight and hard, because a tight bandage connects the large member and strengthens it on the whole part with constriction, in such a way that no bruise enters into it.
And then begin, and begin your evacuation of excretion, apply a convenient poultice to that, on the place of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to what the member merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the bandage.
And then come to that part above the place of the fracture, and strengthen it so that you do not loosen the constriction which you have applied to the place of the fracture. And then extend yourself to the wrapping of the place of the fracture a little, and loosen the constriction little by little, until you take from the place a large part.
And then take another bandage and wrap the other wounded area around the place with a bandage, and take the bandages to the affected part of the fracture; and be your operation in the tightening of the bandage and in softening of that one according to what we have said in the first bandage above.
And then place a sponge or cloth between the bandages of the stop, which should absorb the crookedness of the fracture, if there is crookedness; and if not, do not put anything in it for any reason.
And then put a poultice on the other bandage, and absorb with these decently made bandages as much as possible, if in the place there is no inflammation or cautious aposteme, then put it on the thing that causes the aposteme or that produces the inflammation; leave that for some days; and then you will strengthen with the things the bandages.
And let the bandages be of hemp or flax rope, and be formed wisely; or be of pine resin; or of palm tree fibers; and let the width of each bandage be according to this form and figure:
However, it is fitting that the bandage which is placed on the fracture be a little thicker and more dense than the other bandages, and the length of the bandage according to what is suitable for the limb in size and smallness; and then strengthen with another bandage over the previous ones according to your first tightening; and then loosen above with a thread decently as we have said about tightening, and it should be your tightening according to the place of the fracture itself, and the more it is far from the fracture, the looser the tightening.
And it is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and be made of soft material; and if the threads are too thick, as I have seen in the operation of removing foolish lumps from the tort, it is a great error when the constriction is not equal.
And likewise, very thin threads are not suitable, because you cannot achieve with constriction what you want, and it is not necessary that between star and star there be less than a finger.
And if the patient is hurt by the extremities of the stars, tighten the constriction in their respective places, then place under them a stop or pad made from wool or flannel so that it does not cause harm.
Certain fractures are like a wound, and cause disruption in the coding, and I find it memorable in that chapter according to uniqueness.
And know that every broken limb is not aligned with the stars on the first day; the reason being that the limb, when it is large, does not require to be placed on the stars but rather for two or seven or more days, according to your assurance of the advent of an apostema cautery.
And this is the method of the plasterers by which the Ancients restored, which are placed on fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manipulation of plaster as a restoration of fracture, convenient for many complications and especially for women and children, because it is something that doesn't produce heat or cold: and it is made from powder of flour, and it is the marrow of the flour that you should take from the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
And shape that dough as it is, but rather sift it with a sieve of wool, and pause the preparation of it not being coarse or subtle; then use that one.
Another manipulation of plaster for restoring fracture and dislocation and sprain: recipe of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is extracted from millet seed, all in equal proportion; of myrrh and aloes in equal proportion; alochil in double proportion; all ground and sifted and mixed with water or wool if the preparation of the patient is delicate; then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores broken bones easily, and suits many men.
Another manipulation of plaster which you prepare for fracture and sprain: recipe of migrach and half of white altimana, one part; of myrrh and aloe, two parts; of acacia, six parts; of Armenian balm, twenty parts.
Let all things be triturated in a mortar with a motivated contraction, and let them be sifted, and let them be bound with water or with white of egg and be administered.
Manual of plaster to joints and separated bones from their places, and accidental pain in those and in fissures and fractures: let the woolen cloth be taken and submerged in warm oil and cut vinegar and let it be placed on the area.
More in this plaster there is virtue of restoration, of caustic abscess and properly expelling pains.
Another manual of plaster that restores the fractured bone: take flour of fig tree and flour of wild poppy; mix all and make a plaster of it.
Manual of plaster abbreviated administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: take roots of lavender, of chamomile and flowers of violets, flour of peas, all in equal parts; let all be triturated and bound with wine, if the member is not scalded.
But if it is scalded, then bind it with water of colander humid or with water and use of it.
Another manual of plaster more strong in resolution than the first one, when there is a hard abscess for the restoration of the member: take roots of lavender and seeds of linseed, and balustia, and honey, marjoram, flowers of violet, of chamomile, all in equal parts; let all be triturated and bound with water of sage or with sweet water or with wine, according to the quality of the member and the repose of its color.
According to the great Hippocrates, it is not advisable to place a poultice on the free member unless there has been a previous restoration of it, but rather make a cerate of wax and oil, and no other cause; and recommend that it be moderate between coarseness and subtlety.
In Galen's opinion, it is seen that poultices should be placed on the broken member after its restoration and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat, such as myrrh, resin and gum, similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Handmade plaster to confuse lesion and pain: take equally, wax, human skin or partridge's brain, and salt, mixed together; let them be crushed and sifted, and then kneaded, and make a plaster.
But the quantity according to which it is necessary that the ligature be broken and then disentangled, is that you consider if there isn't acute pain nor swelling nor the bone is fractured, then you should not remove the motionless joints. And if a violent pain or swelling or inflammation occurs at the location, then you should either constrain or remove it immediately, and put on the plaster.
Take a cloth and a maritime sea sponge humidified with Leon water, and submerge it in warm water, and with this wash the area where the discomfort and pain are calmed; then place the limb at rest for an hour; then apply a poultice made from wool soaked in vinegar or oil or rose oil, and lay it on the area for nine nights until you are certain of the apostume's cure, and the inflammation of the limb is reduced, and the pain of it is soothed.
And then apply a thin and subtle plaster, and a small bandage that is not too tight for its primary construction, and subtly shape it to the area until it is healed.
And if at times the apostume and redness and pain and inflammation and all accidents are completely soothed, and you need no longer a plaster or bandage, then apply thus as you have done from the beginning of the treatment.
And if no accident happens to the limb of any of the causes that we have mentioned, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or six; and some times leave all that on for twenty days according to what appears to you for the liberation of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
Then adjust in the stricter manner of the primary stricture, and adjust in the swelling of the patient's food intake, according to which is preceded by the memory of it.
Mostly if you have previously cleansed and drained the area of the fracture so that it is not covered, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; and thus moisten it with warm water that has been well-boiled, and let it be applied for three whole days; and loosen the stricture a little, and through this operation run to the member the nourishment, and it is lightly healed.
But that which foolish restorers of the fracture of the limb do with another poultice when it is not restored at the beginning, according to how it covers, and it is restored according to crookedness, is error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were to increase the Ancients in their free writings would agree that this work is done badly.
And I have not seen any of them do anything similar, for which it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
Chapter according to: Of fractures when they occur on the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are made by percussion of the spine, and the percussion or blow breaks all the bone within the siphac, which is called the false rib, thus as it is made in the chest, and for this reason this species is named comminuted; or the blow strikes a part of the bone, and strikes the flesh of it and does not pass the break beyond the rear of it; and this species of fracture is named absolute levation.
And the wound of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is bruised or crushed; and the cause of it is percussion with stone or fall on stone, and accordingly its symptoms.
And this fracture is penetrating that approaches the peritoneum which is near the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures is great or small.
And from fracture that is bruised in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason it is named this species hairline fracture.
And it is a fracture that is made or by fall or by percussion of stone and to its symptoms, which makes enter some layer of the bone into the divided parts within, and it is made in the concave place thus as accidents to the parcels of the brain when accidents happen to their percussion and it is separation of their entry into the divided parts within.
And mostly it happens in the bodies of humid bones, thus as in the heads of elephants.
And all these species of fractures are called satagias, and they are weighed as separated vertebrae. And it will come back to its place by the restoration of all that in its location.
We recognize all these species of fracture by detection on those and by inquiry of their pain and by feeling of corrupted flesh that is on them.
The species of hair-like fracture is known by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and is rough to the touch, and is anointed with oil, for the fracture appears black.
In the cure of fractures, consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that they signify by manifest sign over fear, such as vomiting of choler, and stretching, and loss of understanding, and absence of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and evacuation of the humors and stiffness of those, and symptoms similar to them in the major dispositions, it is doubted if there is no health.
And if you see non-threatening accidents, then you hope for health, and you begin the treatment of it.
The cause is that if the wound comes to you in the beginning as it is wounded and this is in the days of winter, then you should study on the fourteenth day, following the entire disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should anoint the bone on the seventh day, having that which is above the bone be corrupted by the pancreatic membrane, and that the accidents we have mentioned occur.
And if the fracture has already perforated the pericardium covering the brain, and it is in a place of tender and fragile tissue, then it is necessary to suture the wounded and damaged part, according to what you have been advised.
And it is that you shave the head of the patient with the wound, and discover the bone according to custom and technique available to you according to the shape of the wound, and that it be easy for the patient.
And if it happens to you that you need to uncover the bone, or if there is an abscess or a cautery wound, then you apply to it what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with warm poultices infused in wine and rose oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess is discharged, and be sure of the flow of blood; and then begin with the circling of the bone and the removal of it.
And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you cut the bone with an incision of strict measure, and this is the shape of it: Then administer another incision, a little wider than that one; and this is the shape of it:
And then administer more incisions, wider than the previous one, accordingly.
And it is known that you have received the name of various incisions, some of which are longer than others; and some of these are shorter than others and are at the end of the extremities, and are made of iron or felt.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incision so that it does not touch the head and that thing.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then it is known that you should perforate in the circle of the tooth that you administer the incisions with the trowels, which are called non-deep trowels.
And they are not called thus but because those do not touch the term of the bone of the skull to that which is near it, so that the trowel has a round extremity or edge over that which is placed the head of the needle resembling an edge or a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a large number of these trowels, each of which is suitable for the thickness of each bone, while being present in the whole head of the skull, the extremity of which is sharp, and the length and shortness are according to the quantity of thickness of this head.
And this is the form of three types of probes: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the probe on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is penetrated; then return the probe to another location, and pause there where it is between all the holes the quantity of the thickness of the radius or environment of it.
And then insert the incisions in the incisors that are between each hole of the bone, and make a subtle pus above it with the tip of levity, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or for some other reason due to various instruments which will be prepared for this purpose, like tongs and subtle forceps.
And take care that you guard with all caution that the incisor does not touch any part of the siphac (likely referring to a nearby or related bone or structure, possibly the spine or hip).
And thus when you have perforated the bone in a circuit, and it is separated from the hip if it is continuous with it, and you have extracted it, take care to scrape and smooth out that roughness of it which is on the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but take care that it is sharper and more subtle than the other incisors.
If any of the small bones are broken and dislocated, then take that with ease which is due to you from the instruments; and then cure the wound with ointments and bind the ones that we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is lighter, far from pain, which is called Gualia and is done with great ease; and this is its procedure: necessary for you at the beginning to begin discovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and most evident, until when you have discovered that part and have placed your hand under the extremity of this gentle and quick instrument, of which this is the form:
And it is that the smooth part is rounded and does not cut any cause, and the sharp part is of it in two edges before in length, thus like knives; that the smooth part should be adjusted to the head with the face of the sharp cutting edge on the bone.
And then strike on the cutting edge of one part with a small hammer until it cuts all the bone with ease, as if it were revolving, and you should be secure from the pain that no accident happens to you in this manner, and if the medicine man was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was asleep.
When a cause is attached to the bone of the pancreas in any location, it will affect that part of the body, and particularly the extremity of the affected area, as well as the area with facilitated movement, because it is freed from its discomfort and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the pancreas, and that which is cut off or obstructed by the bone is the surface of it, and remains in its roughness and subtle scratches, then it is necessary to remove that roughness and subtle scratches with subtle files, for which you have prepared the name, of various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer those in every location the most convenient for them and the most right for those according to what you have perceived in your operation on the broken bone and its shape.
And it is necessary that you administer in your file the one with which you sharpen the bone at the beginning the broadest of those files, and then use progressively the most subtle ones, and do not cease to do this continually until you reach administering the thinnest and most subtle of all.
More, in each of the other small fractures, blood vessels and subtle fracture, it is necessary that you administer care according to what you have lost in order to correct it.
It is a cause that is not lessened for all those who have studied in that art. And it stops on what we have written and shown in great fractures.
And if the dressing is applied when you have reduced the bone, then take a cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it on the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first cloth, and do so repeatedly as much as you can without gravely harming the siphiac; and then administer a warm poultice on it, and do not remove it except for the quantity that the wound requires.
And leave it on for the treatment for one day or two until you are sure of a cautious aposteme; and then remove it and administer medicines to which superfluous dryness is suitable, such as roots of linseed and flour of vetches, and powder of anise and aristology, and similar things.
And it is that you make from these medicines a powder that is powdered over the wound, as they are dry; and universally, administer on it all medicine of property by which it is that it cleanses and does not bite.
And beware by your virtue that the plague in your treatment is clean; and it should not be on the surdity of gums or other; nor do you allow to aggregate virulence in it; for when it is adjusted on the pancreas of the brain, it corrupts that and poisons that, and adds to the patient that malicious evil.
And it affects the siphac of the head, since from it the bone is revealed and mainly when the treatment of it is neglected, and it is blackened on its surface; and thus consider then if it affects the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is perilous to be touched.
And if it does not affect blackening but from the medicine that is applied below, and it is by virtue of that medicine that it makes the blackening, then take from honey one part and from rose oil three parts, and mix those with a cloth, and apply that on the siphac; and apply treatment with the species of cure that are convenient for it to be healed.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not broken in two parts together above the surface, or one of those having some visible signs, because there are two bones in it, since the part you have is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not affect it except for bruising and twisting and bending.
If one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert the small instrument into the nasal passage, and bind that fracture tightly with the aforementioned bandage on the upper part, and with the same bandage below, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this for your own convenience, and beware that you do not fall into trouble because of your operation on the patient's ailment.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and the instrument does not reach it, then you should be equal with the extremity of the rod on which the thickness is inserted.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should do the same as for this.
And concern yourself with the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then apply the sixth or tenth day of rest from the apostemated cautery.
And insert into the extremity of the nose a thread of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or put two clamps, if the fracture is in two parts, and let it be on the clamp a thickness of such quantity that it fills the nasal tract.
And some of the ancient restorers said that the clamps should be soaked in borax, and should be applied for the whole day, but it is not seen by me; however, it is known that the thread should be soaked in a plaster made with powdered mulberry; and apply it so that the bone is stabilized and the cartilage is strengthened.
And some remedies are inserted into the nose, in place of heat, a poultice made from lion's wrap, because it is enveloped in a cloth of flax; and it should be that you already have a fracture of the nose very vehemently and that the patient is not prohibited from inhalation.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, apply heat.
And if another remedy is applied, a caustic plaster on the nose with wax or with cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diaquil.
But if the caustic plaster does not work, then it is necessary that you plaster the affected part with flour of fesus and powder of crushed eggs mixed with white album of egg; and place a poultice on the stopes, and do not lift the nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then it is necessary that you split them apart, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for that; and place a dressing on the gash, and treat it with something that will knit and consolidate, and apply a plaster suitable for that.
And if an ulcer appears within the nose, then it is necessary that you treat it with heat and administer suppositories of lead until it is completely healed.
Chapter four.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not a serious wound, consider then if the fracture is only displaced and not broken in two and is curved to the separated parts within, then its union is easier.
And do this, if the fracture is on the right side, that you insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger of the right hand; and press with it the curvature of the fracture within to facilitate the displaced parts coming together, with your other hand holding the displaced part of the bone; and decently direct that one.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then it is necessary that you administer extension to both parts according to rectitude, so that their union is possible.
And if it happens with conjunction of teeth to disruption, then stretch those with which you expect will remain tied with wire of gold or silver or thread; and place a bandage over the fractured jaw, and place a doubled cloth over it, and decently made large starched cloth, or a sole leather strap along the length of the jaw; and tie this above according to what seems suitable to you for the binding and what is convenient for the application, so that it is not destroyed.
Order the patient to use rest and tranquility, and stop the victim from eating sour or bitter foods.
And if you think that the condition has changed in some way, then take note and separate that from the third day; and then rectify what has changed in it and apply a plaster made with powdered moly, or album of egg, or flour of cypress, after you have applied the cerate to it, and stop placing wool on the plaster.
And then when the plaster is annexed and adjusted on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, that you do not remove it until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; because many times seen, this fracture is strengthened in three weeks.
And if another occurrence of a hot abscess happens, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed, and the abscess is reduced.
And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider if it is a piece of bone separated or shards, then you should subtly choose those shards with what is convenient for the removal of those from the wound.
And if the edge of the wound is strict, then you should amplify it with a flebotomy according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then return to the place where you have stopped those hemorrhoids, and from those do not remove the blood, then you put on the orifice of the wound if it is large; and if not, place on that one of the plasters that suits that thing and incorporates it, until it is healed.
Chapter five.
Of the restoration of the intestine when it is wounded.
When the intestine is torn, it is broken from the part in front of the navel, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
For it is either torn, or separated, or separated into two parts which do not touch the hemorrhoids; and it is easier to restore; or it is so that it touches the hemorrhoids, and it is difficult to restore; or it is so that the fracture is with a wound.
And the operation in this case, when the fracture is with a wound, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the intestine and sews the torn intestine, and the other stretches out the skin with that part.
And then sew up the fracture with the threads until it takes the shape that it should have, and there is neither too much elevation nor concavity in it.
And if you indicate more extension, then it is good to place a small cloth of wool or flax on the patient's spine, and its size should be according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the fork and constrict the cloth with your hand until it forms an angle as it suits.
And if you cannot reach the extremity of the fork to the separated parts beforehand, because it is bent towards the chest, then it is good that the patient be placed on their back, and a cushion be put on the muscle of one thigh in size.
And the assistant presses the muscle of it to the parts beforehand until the fork's end is elevated that is in the chest in itself, and then you correct the fracture and bend it with the ties or bands.
More often if you feel constrictions of the fork and they are swollen, then it is good that you make an incision over it and extract those constrictions with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision on it with one of the incision tools that you have prepared for this, since you had previously placed the fork on the instrument that serves the ciphac; and the instrument is made of wood or iron, of which this is the shape:
It is similar to the intestine of which this is the cavity; and let its width be according to what you have need of it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
Make the length of it be according to what is possible for the operation; that it have two extremities thus as veins, and one extremity be large and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have made when you have extracted the abscess of the bone is large, and there is a risk of apostema or cautery, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear apostema or cautery, then you apply to the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the split of the wound.
And if an apostema or cautery occurs, then put on a dressing made with sour wine and rose oil, and apply it to that area.
And that, the splint should not be removed from the fractured bone; and so that you see the patient every day, when the ligament is softened or the splint becomes loose, then you correct this and tighten the dressing.
And then stop the patient's sleep on their neck, and place a small cushion under their arm in the night, so that when raised is the helper of theirs from the side of that one, and thus the fracture of the collarbone is elevated by the elevation of the muscle; or their arm is tied to the neck of that one.
And do not untie the dressing if there isn't an accident in the location or abscess, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen that it is attached to that, and adjust in the constriction and restore it, and let it be until it is restored and the fracture of the collarbone is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and several visits in several houses are made in months of time for that.
Chapter six.
On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
The blade is broken in the lateral location and it's not that it's broken but rather its edges.
And so when the area of it is broken — and it is broken in the middle area of it — and not joined except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture or outward appearance of it prepare it and reduce that according to its natural shape in every way of art which is possible for you.
And then put powder of ground alum on the wound, and stop with double-layered cloth; and then put subtle thread of tableted substance according to the quantity of the whole spatula or a little more.
But if the thread is concave in some of the areas of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with cotton, and then tie the thread according to equality.
And then strengthen them with long humidity from gentle constriction and firmness of the thread so that it does not move from its place.
And check the dressing every day; and all visits that it should be softened, remove another visit and strengthen it and tie the thread if it has moved from its place.
And let the patient lie on their own side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And then when this procedure is completed, you dissolve the ligament, and make sure you understand that the beginning of this process is not urgent nor its dissolution concerning the bones.
And if you proceed to the place of the bone of the foot and you put a bandage on it, then you cut above it, and remove it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula, with caution of abscesses, if accidents happen here.
Chapter 7.
On the restoration of the foot's fracture.
The foot sometimes is broken in the middle part of it and this pain extends to the ends; but the extremities of the movement are not broken that are shaken and communicated.
And of the accidents of it when the middle of it is broken, it is that it declines to the internal parts and an accident happens to it with great pain, and difficulty in walking, and coughing, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and it is not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be supported on their back, and a cushion should be placed between their shoulders; and press the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it with the hands of two attendants, and proceed subtly in the operation of it and in the adjustment according to all manner that is appropriate and convenient for it, until the shape of the bone returns as it should.
And then pause over the plaster and stopper and pause about the subtle table of salt or of warm sand and of its similar things in levitation, since you envelop that in a cloth; and then subtly apply it to the broken bone so that it is not hurt; and go with ligation according to retention on the back some strengthened veins, and strengthen that one with decent strictness; and then consider the ligation at all times, and when it is softened, strengthen it.
And if necessity provokes a dissolution of that which causes corrosion or pruritus, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then cut and separate that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what occurs through that with the manner of cure of the patient; and then return the plaster, if it is necessary for the face; and adjust to the strictness inside so that it may be healed.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
It is known that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in coarse locations which are on the back; and of their extremities, from the part that is in front, nothing occurs to those contrary but because they are cartilaginous. The knowledge of the patient is not hidden from the feeling of pain during the examination of the parts of the body.
And the restoration should be such that it unites the fracture with the fingers according to the possible method, until it is united as it should, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel, if necessary for that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the internal divisions, then it causes the patient vehement pain and puncture, just like a puncture that occurs in one who has pleurisy, and because of this the bone puts forth the blood; and it causes difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of bloody mucus; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Remedies are applied to that with many applied remedies.
And from them it is said: it is good to give the patient foods that cause inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly may be inflated and expanded, and the fracture may be pushed away from the affected parts.
We would have avoided that for what is not a slight cause to generate a post-operative abscess, if it didn't happen; and if it does happen, then it already helps with that.
They say that some of these should be applied to the navel and tightly bound; and it seems like a rational treatment, but it is feared that the binding will push the excesses to the area due to weakness.
They say that some of these: where the area is covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and powders are applied between the ribs until it is filled, which should be the binding wrapped when you envelop this according to the treated condition; and then treat the patient with care of fullness of life and medicine.
And if a vehement contraction of the patient causes one that cannot be borne, and the bone pierces the veil with a pointed puncture, they fear for the patient, then where they make an incision on the area, uncovering the broken rib, and place upon it an instrument that holds the chest, the remembrance of which is preceding, and that they penetrate the bone with ease, and extract this.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess appears, then cut it and push powders into hot rose oil and apply to the area, and treat the patient with that which is suitable for the internal abscess.
And let it be raised on the bed on which it sleeps, until it is healed.
Chapter nine.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine and the neck.
Some say that a fracture of the neck bones is due to an excess of phlegm, and similarly for the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider this: for if the members are already softened and numbed and deadened and cannot be moved or stretched or strengthened, and when you constrict them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, you do not feel pain in them, then you should know that it is not curable, and in such cases it is often fatal.
And if you touch them and feel tension in the fingers and puncture, then you should know that the knot of the bone is saved and that the disease can be cured with treatment.
And if you see a similar thing in the vertebrae of the neck and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider the weight of the body.
Then if you see that it is already softened, the same thing happens to them as in the others, and also when they lie on their back, there is vomiting and evacuation outside of their will, and some say that it is raised on its back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is mortal, and therefore do not bother with the cure.
More often if none of these causes occur, the cause is better and the disease is easier.
And the treatment of it is that you perform a cauterization on the aposteme, placing it on the rough spine or with olive oil and rose water, or with mugwort and hazel; place it for several dressings per day until the aposteme is cauterized.
Then place one of the comforting and expelling plasters, and tighten it with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where they feel pain until they are healed.
And if it happens that the bone slips or any cause that has already been separated from it, then cut on the cartilage and show that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then cure it with some ointment to promote healing until it is healed.
More often if the skin of the bone is broken, and it is the end of the pain, then cut so that you insert your right thumb in the anus, and join the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible for a second setting; and then place on it a plaster and bandage, if needed, and then tighten it.
If you feel shattered kidneys in him, then apply a dressing on that, and remove it, and treat the wound with the cure that is preceded by what will be healed.
And if the fracture is not united, or if
Of the restoration of the width.
The bones of the hips are often fractured, and if they break, then the fracture of them is not but a communication in the extremities of those and are cut in length and decline to the disjointed parts; and it happens to the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is numb when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over him until it is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is in the extremity of it only, then you bind that according to what is suitable for equalization until it is assembled into its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the hip or that already declines to the disjointed parts, then you make the patient lie on their belly until it is prepared for you to restore that fracture. And then when you have bound that, put a plaster on it, and place a splint of wood or of fabric on it, and tighten with a bandage over which you do not fear puncture of fracture nor movement of the splint.
Engage the concavity with what fills it so that it takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their side or over their side of the ribcage.
If there is an acute abscess, then you cease the extension of it and its restoration until the acute abscess is settled, and place upon it what settles according to what has been previously stated; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen thus as is suitable.
And if it happens in the joints or they are dislocated, then treat them.
Chapter 11.
On the restoration of the fracture of the helper or assistant ( possibly referring to a type of injury or surgical repair, but more likely
The adjutori is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners, of which one is that you take a wooden splint according to this form:
And bind them with two ligaments, and then let them be suspended from the elevated place.
And let the patient sit on a chair; and then put the broken arm outside on the splint until it reaches the joint of it in the middle place to which the curvature of the splint is attached.
And then lift the minister above that heavy cause, or extend the treatment to the parts of the body; and at the same time, let the doctor adjust the fracture with the hands together, until the fracture returns to its proper place.
And the other manipulation is that the patient should be lifted above their own neck and the hand of the doctor's collar with a bandage; and then instruct two servants that one of them should hold what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other should hold the pus from the wound; and each of them should extend to their respective part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen above the fracture with a bandage and also above that with another bandage, and each of the two servants should extend to their own parts.
And so if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, it is good that half of the bandage should be placed on the skin and the other part above the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, it is good that the bandage should be placed on that location and also above the elbow.
Wrap that with ease and without trouble, and then as soon as it is wrapped as is proper and applied with good application, then tighten it if there is not an accumulation of pus.
More often if the aposteme abscess forms, then apply the strictness inside the infected area, and let it rest on a woolen cloth soaked in warm oil and rosewater until the abscess breaks, and then you will remove it.
And the method of removing it is that you apply a plaster on the fracture, and then put a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that aid, and place your hand opened over the shoulder muscle.
And secure the cloth and tighten it around the aid of the arm so that the arm stays in place, unless some cause related to the broken bone prevents it.
Then use a splint.
And put on the fracture that splint which is the thickest and strongest of the other splints; and put between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers from the entire affected part.
And then tighten around the splints with the strictness that was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your tightness on the place of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture is more aligned, then the tightness should be less.
And so if you examine the position of the stars and the strictness as we have said in the hour in which you restore the member to its natural position, then you do.
And if you fear a hot abscess, then loosen the strictness and the stars within the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no acidity or inflammation occurs in the location; or it is prohibited for food to reach the member due to an excess of strictness; and thus correct all that according to what we have said.
More, if you are confident that no cause of that will occur, then do not undo the ligature unless after three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands be on their stomach.
And place on the assistant a full pillow of woolen material, and consider at all hours of night or day that the figure of the broken member not be deformed or dissolved, or that the ligature be softened, thus correct all this with your virtue.
And give the patient food in the order we have mentioned before, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it is strengthened; and then take care to thicken the patient's food.
It is customary for the assistant and the patient's leg to be strapped for nine days; then it is necessary that they be unbound and a bath and medication with ointments be administered which rectify that condition.
And if the fracture is a pulled apart one, then do not untie from that the ligament and the staples for ten days or up to two months.
Chapter twelve.
On the restoration of arm fractures.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forks; of which one is small, and it is the one that is called the radius, and the other is large and it is the one which is placed beside the small one, from the part above.
And it happens that only the larger fork is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes both are broken together.
And when the smaller fork is broken below, then the restoration of it is easier, and the healing of it is also easier.
And when the fork of the arm is broken in the lower part, then the fracture of it is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller fork below, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to restore it, to make a small extension with ease so that it can be straightened.
More often if the large intestine is what is constricted, then it's good that you apply a warm and violently acting poultice.
And if both intestines are constricted at the same time, then it's good that you apply a stronger and more forceful external treatment.
And it's good that you place the figure of the hand for the restoration of it and the extension of the stretched-out part on a cushion, and let the palms of the hands be at the divisions above, more elevated than all the other fingers, and the hearing finger being lower than the others, and the patient be seated on a low, decorated chair.
And let there be a cushion in front of him in the height or depth of it, so that the patient does not lean forward with difficulty.
And then the assistant extends the arm of the affected part more towards the right hand or to the left, and another assistant extends similarly above.
And then the doctor puts the bone in place so that he reduces it according to the best shape that he can.
And if the bone is shattered in the fracture, then you will perforate to reduce all the weight in its own place with your own virtue.
And if it appears in the fracture that the bone is separated and does not hope for restoration, then you do to it and apply this according to the method that we have spoken of above.
More often if the fracture is with a wound, you have already made a special chapter for it, and therefore take the cure of that.
And if an abscessed cautery occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then anoint a cloth made with wax, olive oil and white wax, and be moderate between thickness and subtlety, and apply the cloth strictly with subtle pressure until the abscess is discharged; and then remove the wax and apply a plaster prepared from powder of moly, clay and dove's dung, and put staples; and let the staple be that which is placed on that fracture, clean and strong.
And know that the name of the staples of the arm is seen in the major preparations, or it is a fracture in one splint or in two splints together.
And apply your pressure on the place of the fracture strongly and vehemently, and when more is the extraction to the parts above the fracture or to the lowest parts of it, apply the pressure a little softer according as it is preceded by the reminder of it in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not harsh nor rough, and the thread with which it is tied should be moderately of its own proper size between fine and coarse, just as we have recommended.
Examine the limb and the ligament closely for several days. And if a cause arises that requires correction, such as swelling of the limb, then it is necessary that you immerse the limb in warm water until the swelling subsides.
And leave the limb unconstrained until it rests, and then apply the bandage or dressing.
And if the fracture is already softened and the bone is already reset and resembles its original shape, then correct all that with your skill.
And consider more that the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess of bandage, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little and leave it for several days until the flow returns to the limb, and then tighten it.
More so, if to the patient no cause of those that we have mentioned happens, then it is not necessary that it be untied for about twenty days or around that.
And then let the hand of the patient be suspended by its own power of agitated movement, and make it sleep on its back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all that depends on the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter thirteen.
On the restoration of fractures of the knee and fingers.
It is known that in the knee and joints of the fingers, fractures often occur, and they do not heal by themselves unless treated with manipulated movements.
And when a fracture or injury occurs in the knee, then it is good that the patient keep their leg straight and their toes aligned with equality, and place their hand on the extended limb.
And let the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor adjust those that are to be joined with a good joint.
And then it is good to apply a plaster and a dressing, unless a hot cautery is applied; and place a bandage underneath according to the size of the location, and you have already wrapped it in a linen cloth.
Moreover, if the crack is in the inner parts of the palm of the hand, then make a figure of a sphere with cloth, and command the patient to grasp it with their cracked palm; let it be tightly wrapped with long cloth.
And let the bandage of cloth be such that it allows for movement, so that the bandage is applied to the palm; and tighten it as needed.
If the fracture is in the outer parts of the forearm, then it is necessary to place a splint on both sides of the fractured area and under the palm, so that the hand can be opened and straightened; and then put a bandage, as if the hand were wrapped in a sling between the fingers with a ligament.
And if a fracture occurs in one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be wrapped according to what is necessary and properly secured on the palm with straps, if you wish, place a small splint to support it so that the fracture is elevated and not bent.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle one, or the index, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be wrapped and tied around the finger itself; or all the fingers can be tied together in a row, which is better; or a small splint can be placed on it, just as we have said for the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and then apply that, the disposition of a hot poultice and oppose it — in your operation — to what is necessary when any of those causes occur, as the narration of it has been repeated.
Chapter fourteen.
On the restoration of a fracture of the thigh bone.
The thigh bone, when it is broken and fractured, is declared by the sensation according to which it is converted into the front part and the worst pain.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed below the fracture, and the patient is placed prone on their stomach and on their face.
Then the minister extends the entire bandage to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
More, if it is approached to the root of the thigh, then let the bandage be brought near to the bottom at the part of the knee, so that the extension comes in itself, and the other bandage is below the fracture.
And similarly if the break is near to the knee, then let the bandage be made near to the knee, and let the extension be to the parts below.
And then the doctor should oil the bone with both hands entering as far as possible to reduce it according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then put a plaster and bandage, if nothing abnormal happens to the limb. More often if there is an abscess in the wound, then you should leave it alone for several days until the abscess has been drained, and then return to your treatment.
The dressing of the wound should be made in this way: take a bandage that wraps around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove its excess; then wrap the leg up to the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long fillet between the thigh and the leg near the knee to the separated parts, and let the ends of the fillet protrude from the upper part of the two parts, and then wrap around the leg and the thigh what is left over from the bandage.
And then put a splint on the thigh in the place of that fracture itself, and put one of them as a splint on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the empty spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the fractured area can be immobilized.
And then start dressing with a strong bandage on the place of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you tighten it more around the area of the fracture, your dressing should be less tight and softer.
And then extend the two extremities of the thigh to the separated parts of the foot until it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the muscles of the other part so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
And then put the structure on that, so that it does not cause corrosion or abscess or cautery or swelling to the member, and if any of these things occur, then remove the dressing from them, and rectify what occurs, just as we have said many times before.
More so if in the bone there is a piece of bone that can be put back, then take it and join it according to what is possible for you; and if not, sew over it and keep it in place, and cure with what is preceded by the remembrance until it is healed.
And several times this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by other things that are adjusted to its muscles, just as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
But in the restoration of it in such a way made, it does not cause lameness to the patient; and if it is restored alone, another thing that must be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he limps from the defect.
And you know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a few months or a few weeks, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and of the other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of the fracture of the tooth's root.
And you know that a fracture of the root of the bad tooth is painful, especially when the rotten parts are touched or irritated.
But if it hurts at the fracture, then it is not just a crack or a hole in its parts, and this is with a wound or six wounds, and about that all has been said according to sentiment.
And the restoration of it is so that what is broken from its parts should be united with the teeth, joined together as much as possible for equilibrium and facilitation and fabrication.
Then apply a plaster and put it on that rounded stick, if needed for that purpose; and bind them strongly with a bandage to hold it in place.
And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures, similarly as it is applied to those cases in which it is opposed to all accidents, so that what is convenient for it may be healthy.
Chapter sixteen.
On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
You should know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large and is named for the leg itself; and the other is slender, and is named fibula.
And the treatment for each of the types of fracture is the same as for the two bones of the arm, and thus the restoration of it is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
And if both bones are broken at the same time, the leg is turned into many fragments.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg is turned into pieces in front (or: towards the front).
And if the larger bone is broken, it brings great danger, and is one of those causes that cannot be neglected.
Then administer extension and alignment and ligature of the splints according to that treatment.
But especially beware that if the fracture of the leg is an old and established one, that the extension should be less and more gentle, and relieve your hand.
And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you put on the splints and complete the entire treatment, then you will take pieces of cloth from the thigh, which are placed on the areas where the causes of pain are located, and are made similarly from branches of palm; choose from those the ones to which a small thickness is requested, and not be of the rough cloths, and their length should be according to the length of the leg, from the knee to the thigh.
And then wrap each cloth in two wraps according to the length of it, and place one on the front part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be tight from the knee to the bottom of the foot.
And then tie the two strips in three places on both extremities and the middle place, so that with this structure the leg is prevented from bending to the right part and the left part, and it remains in a good position.
And already a splint of wood has been administered according to the length of the leg; and it should be placed on it, on the leg, so that it conserves that movement.
And moreover, take care that you do this in a fracture, and when you apply a plaster properly.
And then consider each day the leg and examine it for previous study, and you keep it from abscess and from inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those causes occur, then apply to it what is necessary so that it may be healed.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Not all ankle fractures occur completely; but rather some bones of the foot are subject to fracture; and for the toes of the foot few fractures occur, and they do not occur except as a result of awkward positioning.
And if the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and those bones need to be elevated above them, then the patient should place their foot on the ground prepared in this way beforehand.
Then put the one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and press those, and squeeze, and bind them together so that they turn into their proper places.
Then apply a plaster and dressing to the underside, and place on the belly of the foot a small table with two flat plates.
And tighten that bandage around the foot with a downward tension, since you have wrapped it in cloths and other dressings which indicate its needs.
And when three or four days have passed, then undo the ligature, for you will find the bones joined, or if they are fractured, or if they are dislocated, and the operation on them is thus completed.
But if some of the toes are fractured, then restore them, and bind them in the same way as you did and were advised to do in the restoration of the hand. Then apply a splint to the fractured toe according to its length, and let it be slightly raised from it; and place on the foot this table that I recommended to you, and tighten it with a downward pressure.
When it is that which is broken from the bones, two or three or more, then you pause on each of these things a quantity wrapped in lion's cloth, and stretch the table at the lowest part of the foot, and be standing over one of the ends of the table for the belly of the foot to have good retention.
And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes that I have told you about in other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and apply yourself to every accident that suits this case.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the knee of the thigh and the bone of the hip and the rod of the man.
When the thigh of the woman is broken, then make that plaster cast on the hip, and incline it towards the back of the two a little, and let it be held from behind.
And let the midwife put a plug in the thigh of the Cot, and make it in the thigh of the patient like a spear; and let the woman be bound, and lift the back of the little one little by little, until all that is forgotten so that it is seen in front of the part of the thigh like the spear and the broken bone returns.
And then put powders on the back of the patient, and when they want to urinate, remove the cot with ease and let them urinate, and return and bring back that second according to the method according to which you mixed it at the beginning, and then return to the first poultice.
And make it so for seven days or around that, until it is restored.
And if you want, take a piece of owl and pull through the hole of the patient a thread of hemp; and insert all the bladder into the thigh of the patient, and blow into the thread with force until the bladder is inflated inside the thigh, so that the fracture returns.
And then let it be filled with cot and stayed for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the hip bone of the man or woman is fractured, then administer in the restoration and piercing of the water that we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And this water that is applied is not hidden in these nearby fractures and what little is gained, mainly to the one to whom some study and use and understanding of my free speech is; for that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions via the right direction in restoration and in the strictness of it, and therefore understand well.
More in the rod of the man when it is fractured, take a poultice of water, and put the rod in it; and then put a pause on the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and then let it be left for three days or around that, and it will be healed.
Chapter 19.
Of the restoration of fractures of bones when they are wounded.
It is convenient for the one to whom a fracture with a wound occurs, and mainly if the bone is large like the bone of the thigh or of the arm, or similar to that, that you should cut and make an incision as much as the conditions of surgery require, or testify as we have said before.
And if the plague flows with blood, then it is advisable that you take care to retain what is discharged from them, so that you powderize over the wounded area, if another cause is not present.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, unless an abscess occurs.
But if a hot abscess occurs, then you should delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day at all, lest you cause bad accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin exposed, then it is advisable that you force to reduce it and push it in with your hands made easy and with little extension.
But if extension is not at your disposal and the preparation of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers and the width of which is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the doctor to take four of these instruments according to the quantity that is indicated in the treatment of all kinds of fractures.
And let it be reason, and let it be in the small groove so that it is not doubled over the comprehension during the time of the operation.
And let it be of sharp extremity to which there is margin on the six extremities; and let the thickness of it be tending upwards, and of its mass entering into the divided parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which is little spade or small shovel.
Because it is necessary that the extremity of the pointed instrument be elevated above the extremity of the prominent bone.
And insert that into a cavity so that it returns to the bone, and let it be adjusted with some adjustment.
And then make an effort to adjust the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of the broken one is subtle, and it does not take the instrument for good reception, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely to what we have recommended, then cut it to what is necessary for it, with one of the saws in whichever manner is possible for you.
And then return that which remains in the bone of roughness and of worn-out cartilages.
And when the bone is returned, and the return brings the patient violent pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and so do what you confer with the patient for great relief.
When the restoration you perform on the bone is complete, then submerge a black cloth dipped in warm vinegar, and specifically if it's summer, and do not apply cerate or other causes with oil, so that it does not induce putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer stars ( possibly balms or medicines) at the time of the complement of the bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that scar tissue forms with forced exertions and uses of bandages according to the quantity of the wound.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not touch the wound to the fracture, because many times this is done by foolish doctors, and causes death or a corrupting illness, or putrefaction to occur on their patients, which is unhealthy. And if the aforementioned structure (or bone) relaxes, becomes soft, different from the structure of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear those accidents we have mentioned earlier, and you find pain in that area, then it's not advisable to put a dressing on it, but rather make a covering of durable cloth in place of a dressing and tighten it with straps.
And when you have already dressed the wound one or two times and you see that pus has formed in it, then remove the cloth that you had applied on it, and administer warm poultices, with which, according to our custom, we treat wounds, such as a tetrapharmacum ointment and similar things.
It is suitable for you to loosen the bandage and inspect the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that pus can flow from it to the outer parts with ease.
If the wound takes many days and is not consolidated nor has the pus been separated from it, then you should know that there are small abscesses here that need to be opened in order to probe the wound with a probe. And of those abscesses, those that are separate, remain and extract, those that do not separate from them and touch the member and cause pain, you should try to cut them according to what is possible for you.
And if it happens to the wound with pus or ulceration, which is an indication of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to apply one of those things that are convenient for its cure, as preceded by the narration in the previous chapter.
And of this, in which it is necessary that my sermon be and you present your weight: when the bone is fractured, apply a poultice on the member thus as the bone of the thigh and of the hip and similar to those of the large members, and do not presume attraction of it, nor its extraction, for which four seen motives happen due to this death; having laid aside that which puts you in danger, because the pain will be strong for itself for twenty days or thirty; and then cure the wound if it is visible to you, and if not, lay aside that.
Chapter 20.
Of the cure of swelling that happens in the vicinity of some fracture.
Many seen causes happen to this swelling in the vicinity of healing of a fracture, and mainly that it is near the joints, and it is hidden by the shape of the member; and furthermore, it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer to it those medicines that have been stipulated as such, like aloes, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similar ones; in this way that you take some or all of them, and mix them with six or eight ounces of wine, or with album of water, or with sharp vinegar, and apply it on the swelling in a poultice, and constrict them around it for good constriction.
Let the affected limb be bound with a tight bandage for several days; and place on it a poultice made from another plaster, until the swelling is reduced; or apply a sheet of lead to it, since lead has the property of reducing all inflammation in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into a stone and the necessity to provoke a crisis is urgent, then cut it with the most superior part of the instrument, and cut out the excess and prominent parts, or shave them with a razor until they are reduced; and treat that area until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and the bone is rejoined, the member becomes subtle and fragile not according to its natural state.
When a fracture of the bone is restored, and the bone is rejoined, the member becomes subtle and fragile, it is not done so except for many causes: among which one is the multitude of solution of the ligament and of the bad joining of it not according to what is necessary; or due to superfluous strictness of the ligaments until the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member; or due to a multitude of superfluous embrocation; or due to excessive movement not at its proper time; or due to lack of blood in the body of the patient and due to weakness of it.
The cure for this is to give the patient something to eat and to make their heart tender until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer a bath; and apply warmth and joy to them.
And then apply a plaster on the member, so that the plaster draws out the nutrient matter, or continues to extract it with warm water, until the nutrient returns and recovers its natural figure.
Chapter 22.
On the cure of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibited is the operation of their re-breaking.
When it happens to a member that has already been restored, then apply the healing of its crookedness and swelling to the broken bone and knot, and it is for this reason that the shape of the member is spoiled, but however the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, therefore it is not suitable that you receive the word of whoever claims that that member is newly broken.
But already many foolish doctors and restorers have done this in our land; and this operation is very shameful, causing great fear, the signal of which is mortal.
But if the lameness and knot are recent, then it is suitable that they be wrapped in warm water in which have been cooked softening herbs, such as leaves of altea and roots of it, and melilot, and similar things; and let a plaster be made with mollifying plaster, such as diacalloben made well; or let there be applied a poultice of root of altea and let it be bound with wool of gualina or with oil of cyrimum, and let it be plastered with that; or let there be crushed fat figs and let them be pressed with women's milk, and similar things to those of the medicines which are called consolidating remedies.
And in some cases it is dissolved with assiduous friction of the humid places, and administration of movement of the limb to be applied at all hours.
But if there is already a tortuosity that has been formed and is strong and converted into stone and necessity requires treatment with iron tools, then it should be the most discreet cauterization and the continuation of the bone should be dissolved, and what is in excess from the nodes of that member should be cut away with subtle incisions, and facility should be administered to that which is solicited and studied.
Chapter 23.
On the subject of dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of a joint from its proper place, whereby it is deprived of movement, and the shape of the limb is distorted, and it brings to the patient great pain and large sores.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the area becomes inflamed and strong with what has been done, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason it is not advisable to massage or stretch during the time of inflammation, because many times it brings about spasms and pains.
More often when this happens, then it is necessary that you proceed to the pathology of the patient, and place on the outside what will help the abscess; and place the member in warm water and oil, and place it reduced with ease.
And let every member be cured with the water from which the memory will come to its place.
And already order the chapters of displacement according to what is preceded in fracture; from the upper part of the body to the lower part.
Chapter 24.
On the cure of displacement of the lower jaw.
If the two jaws are dislocated and do not articulate; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are returned to their places with minimal movement, and slightly loosened; or they are dislocated by complete dislocation and compression, until they are loosened at the joint where the saliva of the patient flows and so that he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in a cloth.
More often when the dislocation of it is minimal, then in major conditions it returns by itself for a minimal cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and complicated, then it is necessary that reduction of it be administered promptly, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the assistant holds the patient's head, and the doctor inserts the thumb of one hand in the jaw at the point of dislocation of the jaw inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or inserts both thumbs together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of their hands are outside with the ones that hold them; and commands the patient to relax their jaws and release those muscles on each side; and the doctor holds the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, until the reduction of both becomes easier and does not delay the reduction of both altogether, as we have said.
And then when they return and are held in place, and the patient's mouth is closed and not loosened, then apply on those areas of pain a poultice of wax and cerate, made from wax and oil mixed together; and bind it with facilitative bandages that allow for easy movement.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be held between two pillows, so that they do not lean to the right side nor to the left; and do not force them to chew any substance; having forbidden food that is harmful to them, until when the pains are alleviated and the jaws are settled, then let them eat what they want.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth unless there is eating and drinking and occupation, until the jaw is massaged and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some time and not converted to their proper places, then show gentle movements and daily fevers and continuous soda, and let the stomach of the patient be evacuated, and let it also be vomited with pure colera.
And when you administer this, then know that it is beneficial; and gentle movements show that death will occur to the one to whom this happens in x days.
Chapter 25.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder and of the extremity of the muscle.
The shoulder is not dislocated from the part that is joined to the chest; and some times it is dislocated at the junction in front, and this is declared by feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should lie on their back and extend the two arms. And then bind the place with your palm with strong binding, so that it will return to its place.
And then apply a plaster on that and sprinkle powders and strengthen that.
More on the extremity of the one who has had the thigh continuously bandaged, it is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and adjusted as we have said and as it appears to your preparation.
And then stop on that plaster, and powders, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest so that it may be healed.
And in this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its own place.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated in one way, but rather in three manners, of which one is dislocation at the part of the tendon to the part of the bone.
And the second is that it be dislocated at the part of the muscle itself, and this is done harshly; and it is not dislocated at the back parts due to the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts due to the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and forced outward at the parts of the bone away from the tendon, and mostly in those where the muscles are few, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there are many muscles, it is forcibly pushed outward with difficulty.
And strongly strike the affected areas with a mallet or hammer, and the muscle of the patient is cauterized with a branding iron, and it is done for that which has already been dislocated.
Therefore, take care that you press what is above the patient's vertebrae, and then proceed with the treatment of the patient.
And the dislocation of it is recognized when it is in the parts of the body that you feel the vertebrae; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you find among them a manifest difference; and you find in the head of the dislocated muscle the vertebrae of the body and the feeling of the head of the muscle is like a hollow tube, and the patient cannot move their hand to their ear, nor can they do so with any movement.
If it is dislocated from the foot or ankles, and then you find a visible and palpable tumor, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation a lighter reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand to the parts above; and then places the tied cloths behind the vertebrae of the patient, and raises the joint with strength to its own place, and the minister raises the patient's hand, and extends it upwards; and then holds it in place until it returns lightly.
Unless what we have said does not work, and it is because of the beginning that causes dislocation, for several days, then it should be that the patient is bathed in warm water and given a drink that loosens and softens, such as cooked roots of altea, and fenugrec, and melillot in water.
And then the patient should be placed in a supine position on their back and a cushion under them in expectation of urine that is held between relaxation and tension, and then the doctor places their hand on the patient's lower back, and elevates the head of the muscle with a virtue, and pulls the patient's hand so it is not separated from the other parts, and another servant holds the patient's head, so it is not separated from the other parts, because that soon returns to its place.
And if you want, return to that method: it is that you make a man present who is longer than the patient, and stands on the side of the bed, and places their muscle under the patient's little leg and lifts the little leg up to the other parts behind so that the patient is suspended in air, and another servant pulls the patient's hand from the other parts of their belly. More often if the patient is lightweight, then it is good to have another cause suspended, so that gravity affects it, for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is reduced in another manner: and it is that a wooden stake be fixed on the ground, the top of which has a rounded figure, similar to a mortar pestle, that is neither thick nor thin, and place the patient's feet on it; then place the patient standing on the top of the stake with drapes, and the patient should stand according to the length of the stake, and extend the hand of one side to the divided part of the other side; and the body of the patient from the other side should be extended with force, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if the reduction of it is difficult for all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stake the quantity of which is in length two arm-spans, and the width of it is four fingers, and the thickness of it be smoothed at the tip of the pincers according to this shape:
And then place on the rounded top linen cloths, so that the stake does not hurt the patient.
And then the thigh of the patient should be placed, and the hand or arm extended over the stake between the divided parts, and the stake should be tied to the hip and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm on a ladder-shaped support according to the width, and the hand should be extended to the parts of the shoulder, and the other thing should be suspended from the other part, so that the joint is held in position.
And when the instrument of it is completed according to each manner that is possible for you, and then you take the wool thread of flax of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared from powder of mulberry and white of egg on all the muscle, as it is dissolved underneath, and then strengthen the thread with strict bandage; and the ligament is turned over the plaster, and the hand of it is attached to the neck of it, and let it be, and do not move the hand of it for seven days.
And that the food of the patient should be mild, until the member is comforted, for it is easier for the healing of it.
And then the food should be given more abundantly after seven days and an exercise of movement; and so if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that happens to it or for another cause, then it should be administered a cautery with three touches, as it is previously said in the chapter of cauteries.
And if the injury is such that it has been done and after seven days the ligament and the joint are not strengthened, and the plaster and the bandage are placed over certain areas, but it is not fixed and the arm cannot be lifted to the separated parts, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been inserted or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is done to the heel and the shoulder or the back parts, the reduction is made with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And let it be administered in the other bandage, and cure it until it is healed.
And if it happens that the healing is slow in the member and tardy in its movement, then the patient should use warm baths several times until the slowness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter 27.
On the treatment of dislocation of the hip.
Know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and likewise returns with difficulty; and this is dislocated in all parts, and mainly in the part in front of the back part, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you, for whether the hip falls forward or backward, or touches according to whatever figure it may be dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip with the shoe, this is declared manifestly to you, that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that the upper muscle.
And when you have the thigh in place, reduce the dislocation as much as possible before it comes to a severe boil, because if it comes to a severe boil, the reduction of it is difficult, and not easy to heal; and especially when it is in the rear parts, for it is worse than all other kinds of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many times death results from that.
And the restoration of it, when it is that which can be reduced, is that the hand of the patient should be extended with two others, and the arm of the patient should be stretched out, and the hands of the doctor should be on the hip and the patient's, and the doctor's elbow should be pressed against the joints with the tips of the fingers, or at the root of the palm until it returns to its place.
More often if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns thus that the hand is doubled back on its own hand, until it strikes the hip with the root of the palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer a vigorous extension and strong movement.
And it is that two assistants stretch out the arm, and hold that same limb with two assistants so that it is not moved back during the extension.
And then wrap the arm from the elbow down, since it is enveloped with doubled cloth wrapped long over the hand of the patient.
When the doctor touches the joint with their hand, anoint it with some oil so that it may be those causes that help with lubricity of the joint for ease; and then strongly massage the joint with vehement rubbing until it returns.
And then the reduction of the patient who is placed on that plaster in which there is stipicity and evacuation with white of egg, and it is strengthened with strict descent, the arm is suspended from the neck, and it is left for some days.
And then it is loosened; and so if the joint is formed in its own place, then you loosen the bandage of the patient and leave that.
And if you see the joint is not strengthened, then you apply the plaster and the bandage again, and leave it for some days until it is fully strengthened; and then loosen it.
But if it happens to the patient a worsening, then the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, administer humidification in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is alleviated; or apply an aleiatic poultice on the joint, so that it is a moving fat pad; and then it is bound, and leave it on the bone day and night. And then apply this paste, and put that in a bath; and when you sweat, then rub the joint with tempered friction, and apply it repeatedly to that alleviated area, so is the movement of motion, one time, and the second, and the third. in the midst of a bath, until it becomes smooth.
And if you want, place on that wound of the cow's humid and scratched area with paste and stretch over it; and do this several times, because it is humid and returns to its natural condition.
Chapter 28.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, it is concerning the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
The shoulder of the hand sometimes is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy, and the opposite is for the other joints, but it's necessary that there be speed in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated, before the place becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the minister or servant extends the hand of that one, and the doctor places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint, and presses it in until it returns to its place.
It is most important to consider if the palm has already been applied to the belly of the hand, when the patient places the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation precedes the back of the hand, then let the position of the hand of that internal injury be on the table, so that the doctor's hand grasps around that prominence of the joint.
And then if it returns soon enough, that's good; and if not, then reinforce that with a plaster cast supporting the abscess and relieving it; and do not touch this, because if not, neither suffering nor power will be on the reduction of the pus that passes into the days.
More importantly, the joint is bent according to its curvature; and do not tell the patient any cause, but rather that the hand is loosened and cannot hold any cause; then know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then it is not an art in it but rather a cauterization near the evacuation of it and strengthening the confidence of giving some cause.
Therefore when the dislocation is returned, then put on it the plaster that we have recommended, and let it be relieved and strengthened for several days; and then let it be unbound and relieved, and the hand of it be exercised.
If the movement of the urine is hindered and there is acidity in the bladder, then apply warm water and friction to certain affected areas, until relief is obtained.
Chapter 29.
On the treatment of displacement of the fingers.
Certain injuries can dislocate the fingers entirely.
And when a finger is dislocated from the palm or the back of the hand, then stretch the finger and push the dislocation with the thumbs until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend it above the area where it is dislocated, and let it rest for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it becomes straightened in that same day.
And when it is night, bind it according to this method, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise it with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it becomes strong.
And do the same with this, if it is dislocated on the back of the hand, and bind it to that area and perform the first operation in the same way, until it is healed.
And similarly do the same with this when it is dislocated in the other areas.
Chapter
On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When there is a complicated dislocation of one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and movement of the vertebrae from their proper place, then in that case there is no cure, for death awaits the patient.
And the sign of this is that the evacuation of the patient is outside of their control, and they cannot retain it; and some members of theirs are weakened, such as the thighs or legs or arms, or one of these; or a vertebra is dislocated from its place, because many times it is dislocated and many times the displacement of these to four parts occurs.
Then that one is already dislocated to the back parts and is called a prolapse or falling through, but more likely it refers to  "gibbosity" or hunchback.
But the treatment of it is that first consider if the hunchback occurs in childhood, because then there is no cure nor complete healing for it.
But in that which happens by fall or by shock or similar to these, the Ancients have already spoken about the methods of treatment at length, from which the most returns to profit; but I, having already written extensively on this, will abbreviate, for fear of being too lengthy, due to my closeness to the subject matter and my intention to explain it, to which I have dedicated myself, and using various instruments, with which I will show and demonstrate.
And of those, none are cured except the one that occurs on the back itself with what I have recommended.
And it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face on a high bench near a wall, and a cushion should be placed under them to prevent their foot from being moved.
And then a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bench near their head, and another stick in the air to hold their feet at the other end of the bench.
And one minister should hold the stick, and not be fixed in a pit; and another minister should hold the other one according to the same method.
And then wrap around the head of the patient and under the armpits a firm bandage; and extend the end of the bandage to the stick which is near their head, and tie it on them; and then tighten the other bandage over their hips and near their knees, and near their legs; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick which is near their feet.
And then extend the minister's hand to the ligament at the part of the thigh, and do not let the two thighs and the ligaments of the above-mentioned places be restrained, but rather hold them firmly as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine for strength until it returns, or he places on that one table, and then adjusts on the table the aforementioned feet until they return.
But if it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose width or length is about three arm lengths, and carve on the part of which we have said that is proper for the patient a place in which the extremity of the table. And then place the edge of the table on the spine, and the doctor places the feet on the other extremity, and tighten well until the spine is constricted and returns to its place.
And if you want, take the turn which is wrapped around the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground at the end of the bed two feet, the length of which is one arm, and at the end of the bed also two feet; and let the length between each foot be a palm, and already make in each foot a hole through which the turn passes, and each one is firmly held to the ground so that it is not moved.
And let there be a wooden stick in which the turn is made, and let it be wrapped around the two trunks of the two sticks.
And at the extremity of it is a trunk in which the stick is formed, the length of which is one palm where it is wrapped; and in the two other sticks is similar to that.
And then tighten the ligaments that you have tied on the chest of the patient in the stick which is above their head, and the ligaments that you have tied on their thighs in the turn which is above their feet.
And then for each turn there should be a minister who will turn it with their hand, and the doctor will anoint the spine as we have said.
And then when the spine is returned, and the area is anointed, then take a plaster made with egg whites and vinegar, and apply it; and put it on the plaster as a piece of tape, the width of which should be three fingers or about that, and the length of it should be the quantity that covers the place of the pain, and on the part of the spine above.
And then let it be tied with a ligament as we have said, and give the patient subtle nourishment so that they may be healed.
And if there is any weakness in the area at the end of the treatment, then it is advisable that medicines which soften and prepare for the administration of the tablet for a long time be administered; this has been recommended, and already administered in that place is a layer of lead.
And some weakened parts are found in the lower back of the spine, and it is suspected due to that dislocation; and it is that bone which has already been weakened so that it is not advisable to make an incision on it with this medicine, because it will bring about a fatal outcome.
Chapter 31.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
It is known that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not only cause dislocation, but also do not bring about what is brought to other joints by small movement and concussion.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, for it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and rarely to the front parts or to the back parts.
The sign of dislocation of the tooth is evident when you adjust the leg of the healthy side to the diseased side, it is then longer and the knee is more prominent than the healthy one, because the diseased side cannot bend its knee towards the tongue area, and this is the place where the tongue is pressed by the aposteme of cautery, so that the head of the hip has already been penetrated here.
The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs in the parts beforehand is that their accidents are contrary to this accident.
The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs in the front parts is that they extend their own leg according to their will, but nevertheless do not bend that knee which has pain in it, and if it is perforated or strained and cannot support on that knee beforehand; and their urine is retained and their tongue is pressed, and they drag their ambulation on the heel.
The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs in the back parts is that they do not extend the knee, nor can they bend the front part which bends the tongue area, and their leg is shorter than the other, and the tongue area is softened, and the head of the hip is below that place.
The greatest reduction of the species of this dislocation is what you consider, namely, if the dislocation is old and ancient, and has already been treated with a remedy, then administer reduction therapy according to its condition, but it's not entirely in this treatment; therefore, it's not suitable for a hasty procedure to be done in that case.
Moreover, in that case where the dislocation is recent, and it's one of the four species of dislocation, then you should reduce it to what will return the joint to its proper position and extend this to the inner and outer parts, and move it to the right and left, for it strongly returns and does not indicate another treatment.
But if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of the affected part from behind, or with their hands, or with a bandage which is tied over the leg above the knee; and another minister extends the hand of the one who is above in such a way that they put their hands under the patient's shoulders; and apply a strong bandage over the joint of the thigh, and hold another minister to hold the extremity of the bandage.
And let there be extension of it or of the inner part to the angle of the buttocks, or from the back part to the region of the back or buttocks.
And let the extension of all those things be in a single operation where the patient is elevated with their back to the ground and remaining hanging.
And this type of extension is commonly applied to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary to apply all types of remedies that I will speak of regarding its own cure.
In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the innermost parts, it is necessary that the patient be placed on their side; and place a poultice over the joint at the location where between the head of the joint and the spot that has been dislocated, the limb is longest; and extend the poultice upwards from the part of the ankle to the furthest part of the buttocks.
And another strong minister should take the arms of the patient, and firmly grasp the thick part of the joint, and strongly extend it to the innermost parts by vigorous extension, so that it returns to its own place.
And this type is of the lightest cure with which this member is reduced, lighter than the other types.
But if it is excused for you and does not obey the treatment with this type of cure at all, then it is necessary that both feet of the patient be tied together with a strong, light poultice, on both the soles and both the ankles.
And let the length of each of them be by the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then let the patient be suspended over the head of the bed frame, and that it be on a mattress; and let the length of it from the ground be the quantity of two arm lengths.
And then command a strong youth to pull the head of the thigh, and let another youth be suspended with the patient, and the other youth pulling the thigh with force, so that the joint returns to its place with speed.
More in the proper reduction, when there is dislocation to the displaced part, it is necessary that the patient urinate on a bedpan as we have recommended in the case of having hematuria; and let the ligament be strengthened over the affected leg properly and over their chest.
And then let two wooden frames be placed, one at their feet, and the other at their head; and let adjusted frames be placed in the middle of the bed, on which humid cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by the frame being between their thighs, because the extension to the affected parts should not be hindered.
And then each minister extends to his own part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary that the leg be extended gently, and it is according to this methodical narration on podagra; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's langenor, and then with the other hand he presses that one, and with that pressure he extends the displaced part to the front part.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it is not necessary that the patient be extended to the back parts, and he is elevated from the ground; rather it is necessary that he be placed on a hard surface, just as it is necessary for the anchorage if his hip is dislocated to the front parts, according to what we have said about placing him on two anchors; and it is on his face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, there is no defect.
And then a compression bandage should be administered on the table over the area where the joint is located.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and that is that you extend the patient's two legs, and when you see those groins and the patient stretches their own leg and expands those six excursions, then you know that the member as it should be is returned — and then you adjust the two hips and apply a plaster cast and stretch with a bandage in such a way that the width is not constricted in any of the parts; and have the patient rest for three days or four.
And then remove the bandage and the plaster cast, and compare one hip to the other.
Then, if you see those groins in improvement, then you know that the dislocation is already corrected, and therefore let the patient walk.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that, and stretch it according to your first structure, and let it be for three days.
And then remove that, and make it wait in walking on crutches for some days, until it is comforted.
Chapter twelve.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways, for it is dislocated to the front parts, and to the inner parts, and to the higher parts behind, but not to the lower parts in front.
And the sign of dislocation is that it compels the patient to place their leg on their thigh; then you will know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its kinds is to make the patient stand upright, so that they extend their leg if possible; place their two hands on their face, and hold their foot between their two feet; then carefully place their shoulder in your palms, and press those against their shoulder strongly, holding them in place over their shoulder, and another servant extends their foot inward until the shoulder returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction of it is that the leg sticks to the thigh with lightness and without effort.
And then plaster that and make the leg stick to the thigh, and then bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then undo it.
And do not let the patient walk for several days, until they are healed and comforted.
If the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer a strong extension with ligaments in the treatment of the hip that was mentioned previously.
Chapter thirty-three.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes sprained by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the injury, and the dislocation of it is made either at the inner parts or at the outer parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that the ankle swells up, proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of the sprain of it is gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with ease to the hands and be immobilized until it returns.
But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to the injury, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and have a strong and able minister at the rear part of the back of the patient in the middle place of it.
And then put your right hand on the foot at the most superior part of the thigh, and with your left hand at the lower part of the thigh in the place of the knee.
And then pull the foot towards your right hand, and place your left hand for two supports, and extend your left arm; and press the foot of the leg with your right hand above the thigh to make it work.
And make there two supports as we have explained.
And then press the foot of the leg to the thigh for the third support, and you are at the calf.
Thus if it returns to one support or to two according to this method, and if the foot is healed, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, for that which returns.
But if to you is forbidden the reduction of the limb with what we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stretch a piece of cloth firmly on the ground, and which goes between their thighs, and you have wrapped around them a sheet so that it doesn't touch the patient.
And then one minister holds their thighs, and another minister stretches the foot with their hands or with a ligature that lies on the heel of the foot; and each minister stretches against the extension of the other's part, and the cloth is stretched between the patient's thighs, holding it so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the parts below their extension.
And then the doctor will treat the dislocation with the healthy thighs, and another minister will hold the sound hip to the patient's parts, so that the dislocation returns to its ease.
And so when the dislocation returns and the health of the reduction of it is declared to you, then pause to apply a plaster and extract that with a strong bandage, and tie the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And beware that you protect yourself from the nerves which are behind the heel, so that the bandage on that area is not violent and tied tightly.
And then leave it like that for two days or for three; and if the bandage becomes loosened, retighten it.
And then undo it on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days. But if it is forgotten to go within that space, it is not done safely that the dislocation is not on it dissolved and corrupted, and then that which does not receive treatment.
And if there happens to him a hot abscess, then beware that you administer in the release of it that which we previously mentioned, in another place of treatment and of application, until it is reduced.
Chapter Four
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
It is necessary that one who is dislocated should be treated with gentle extension of the affected limb; and this is not difficult, but rather easy.
More often if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient put their foot on the ground or on a table, and let them stand still as if they were not moving.
And then put your foot down, and place the patient's foot on what is lower than the joints, and then press that with your foot upwards so that it returns, and you will see that it is already treated and does not appear in the same prominent place.
And then place on the belly of their foot a table that takes the whole foot, which has two clamps, and then tighten it with a decent structure and firm for three days; and then release it and make them rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and the recovery is assured.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
On the species of dislocation that are caused by a wound or a fracture or several things at once.
When certain causes of these conditions occur, and you penetrate in the treatment of it and in the restoration of it, many witnessed events precede death.
And for this reason, it is not suitable that anyone presumes to treat it, except one who is wise in the art, with long usage, merciful and pitied, slow, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses in the administration of medicines that cut abscesses solely, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, but rather to the one to whom you hope for health from danger, and alleviation of the sickness, and in which appears some hope. And therefore force yourself to remove from it as much as possible the reduction in the treatment of the cause, provided that an abscess is about to be cut.
And therefore if the member returns as we wish, then administer treatment which will cut the abscess and cure the wound with what is convenient for it from the ointments of the dishonest.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and occurs in the bones that are separated by joints, then you penetrate the statement of them, and do in this what we have said about simple illnesses of this type which precede in the places of these.
And keep and beware according to your virtue that which is in the pathways of fear, as my preaching has preceded you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutations to your body, truly those in your time. Thus finishes the words of Albucasim perfectly, from which God may be blessed. Amen.
