Oh, sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last part of the science of medicine, by its completion one achieves perfection in it, and through its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I have provided you with a comprehensive treatise, which is a division of the practical work, namely surgery.
For the practical work is so neglected in our region and in our time, that it has greatly suffered the decline of its science, and its practice is forgotten; and there remain none of it except for a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which were obscure and led to error and confusion, until the understanding of it was obscured and its force was weakened and the art was prolonged.
And it seems to me that I will revive this in the ordering of this treatise, in this way: by explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes to the forms of the preparations of cauterization and of other instruments of the work, as is necessary for the addition of the declaration, and for its preparation.
But the reason why no artisan is found with their own art in our time, is that the art of medicine is long and requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes knowledge of the junctions of the members and the forms of those, and the connection and separation of them; and also the recognition of the bones, nerves, and cartilages, and their names, and their relation; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their origin.
And according to Hippocrates, the name of this condition is a word, more often used in minor works, and especially in the art of the hand.
We have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy, it is not surprising that they fall into error by which men die, as has been seen with many of them, because some are formed in this science and turn away from it and lack experience.
For I have seen a foolish and inexperienced doctor having made an incision into a scrofulous aposteme on the neck of a woman, and having cut some arteries of the neck, through which a large amount of blood flowed, until the woman fell dead among her people.
And I saw another doctor who prescribed that he would swallow a stone of a man which was stuck in his throat, and the stone was large, and came out to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, through which that man on the third day died.
And I have already called it foolish to extract that, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I conjectured that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he applied to a wretched black man, who had a fracture in his thigh; and with his ignorance, the doctor extracted the fracture, on top of the wound, with poultices and splints with strong structure, and did not leave the wound to heal.
And return the disjointed according to the desires of the sick, and return the relaxed, and return the loosened by walking and commanding that we loosen the ligament; and it is necessary that this be between the thigh and the foot, so that the abscess forms, and turns into a loss.
And it is called a relief to him, and the preparation to loosen the ligament is achieved, and obtained is tranquility and thus alleviation from his pains.
But when corruption had already established itself in the member, because it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread in the member until the disease reached a crisis.
And I saw another doctor who made a cancerous abscess, and it was ulcerated in the same days, until the evil of it was magnified with the lord of it, the patient.
This is because the bitter humor is pure melancholy, then it is not suitable that it should penetrate to him entirely, but rather that it should be in a member which suffers so that all of it would be evacuated.
And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation on the ill person be divided into two divisions: one is the operation in which health is associated, and the other is the work in which there is danger in the major dispositions.
And you have already examined this in every place of this book where an operation is described in which there is error and fear; for which it is necessary that you guard against this and avoid that, so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and accuse you.
And then take your arms with solicitude and protection from God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God to bring about health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind the terrible illnesses of difficult cure, and remove from your arms that which makes you afraid, so that trust in your faith and in your name does not fail you: for greater is the remainder of your glory, and afterwards in the world and lastly among your sanctities.
Certainly I have spoken in some sick men's warnings: “Do not treat the bad illness poorly, so that bad doctors are not named”.
And you have already devoted this book to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first from the first part. The first chapter deals with the head and the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the preparations of cauteries, and with what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on dryness and perforation, and on ventoses, and on plasters, and on extraction of arrows and on similar things to those, all chaptered and ordered in the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on treatment of twists and on similar things to those; chapter ordered from head to feet, and on the forms of instruments.
When I describe the quality of the juices of that cautery and its outcomes, and in which condition it is prohibited to apply a cautery.
Therefore I say that the discourse on the quality of the juice of cautery and its outcome is a long and prolix discourse, subtle for science, and hidden secret; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they are discordant among themselves, and for me it suffices to take a little from their discourses, fearing prolixity.
And therefore I say that cautery is suitable for all universal complexion, whatever the material or non-material may be, except for two complexions, which are cold complexions without material.
In the complicated and dry matter, it will be decided; for some said that a cautery is helpful for that, and others said the opposite of that, that a cautery is not convenient in an illness which is due to heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it's convenient that a hot and dry illness with a cautious and dry treatment will be healed.
And they say that which says the opposite of that, that with a cautery is made a remedy for all hot and dry illnesses that occur in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complexity of fire, you find the body of man is cold.
And I say by the sermon of that one, that I have already experimented this myself many times and discovered.
But I more openly say that it is not necessary for what has already been tried and discussed in the chapter on cauteries through previous exercise, and to have understood the diversity of the complexity of men and the disposition of illnesses in their treatments, and the causes of those, and the accidents of them, and the timing of those.
But in other complications, it is not about your fear, and especially in cold and humid illnesses, because already all doctors are in agreement on those, and they do not disagree on the treatment with a cautery in those.
And you should know, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, is that on a medical cautery, the fire is simple, whose action does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized and does not reach another member of the body except for a small injury.
But the action of medical fire penetrates to that in the members where it is joined, and it makes come to the member with difficulty of healing a strong help and assistance.
But fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not make it exceed except that it is superfluous; And we have joined to us through experiment and through length of service of study in the art on the truth of causes; and for this I excuse the length of the sermon; And if it were not that it is not read in my free will in this passage, a secret hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of its expulsion by which you expel diseases, in a philosophical demonstrative sermon, which would be sharp in your thoughts.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to do a cautery and they pause for the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by the accident in time is submerged in the benefit of what the cautery attracts, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and frequent, which do not suffer delay for fear of those that bring malice, which is greater than small harm entering through time.
And also do not step on your feet, or, sons, that they do not esteem except the common people and foolish doctors, it is that for that illness which is healed by cautery there is not need for all time, and they pause to consider the consequences.
And the cause is not known thus by them because of that, for cautery is not but in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries the humidity which are the cause for which come the pains.
More, I prefer cautery above medicine for the will of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that the illness returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness, and the virtue of it, and that which is prepared in the body from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and that which has come to it through its acquisition of food and similitudes of those causes; except that the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidity, just as a cautery for a tooth for pain and similitude to that, it is possible that in it the pain does not return, but rather decreases.
And most vulgar speech is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a speech of ignorance, not because they understand it, but because they believe that it is not a cure that is improved by medicine nor by any other cause except for applying cautery.
And the cause is to the contrary; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when we administer the means of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and then at the end of the treatment, cautery is administered, and improved by that. And it is said here that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which is understood by the common people and ignorant doctors.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not matter, as it is not absolutely true, because it has been proven and found that it does not work except in some bodies other than the others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said; but however when you do cautery with fire or with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is done according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and prepare to receive cold; and if you adjust it on the ignited spot, the gold melts by the fire, and pour some lamellas into the fire so that the artisan can take it for the occupation of that.
And by this a cautery iron is made with a gentle touch and properly applied to the rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that I alleviate the demanding thing that he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization is contrary to humidity and cold on the servant's accidental [condition] of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of sweat and multitude of fluxes, called rheumatism, from the head to the parts of the ears and of the hearing fluent, and multitude of sleeping, and of pain in the teeth and of the throat, and universally of all malady that comes from cold, as well as paralytic, and apoplectic, and similar things in those maladies.
The form of this cauterization is this, that first we command the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to what the virtue of the malady and their age and their custom require.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make him sit between your hands on a wooden bench and place your hands on his chest.
And then stop the flow of your palm near the foot on the flow of the nose between the two heels. More precisely, when the vein of the middle place is perforated, mark that place with a probe, and apply the olive cautery, which is the shape of this:
And then stop that on the place you are probing with a hand that presses down, in such a way that the vein is constricted little by little, and you turn it.
And then lift your hand gently and examine the place, and if you see the bone being uncovered to some extent of the head, like the quantity of a grain of barley, then lift your hand, and if it does not return to its previous position, or if another one appears, if it is inflamed, until what has been said to you is seen by the bone.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the place and apply it for three days.
And then stop it on the cloth wrapped in cotton and place it on until the scar of the wound is destroyed by the fire. And then heal the place with four-part ointment until it is healthy.
And it has been said that as the wound becomes larger, so much better will be the arm, because it is more improved and younger.
They said that part of it should be cauterized where the bone enters, and hold the cautery in such a way that it touches some portion of the bone's marrow.
And then scrape off what is attached to the bone, and then let it heal.
They said that others with the cautery should reach to the back, so that it presses into the bone strong pressure so that the bone breaks, and this is the method of small aphtha. And they think that from that place come out the vapors of the head.
And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and then be treated until it is consolidated.
But to me, these two species of cautery have not been seen, except in some men according to the way of fear; and it seems to me, better is health, when it is; for the head is revealed by solution of continuity of the aforementioned, as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
And the first species of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion; and from that practice and with that work comes health.
Chapter according to.
Of the cautery of the head.
When the head suffers from chronic and prolonged pain, and this is in the patient's prolonged illness, and uses treatments such as poultices and suppositories and head wraps and plasters and bandages and cold compresses and liniments and remedies, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that has not relieved the symptoms of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution in its nature; and it is not fragile and suffers from great cold, then that cautery should be done with another cautery, leaving the previous one. Then cauterize that area on the horn of the sick head with a cautery until the cord is severed. Cut the cord and expose the bone the amount that we have described, and cauterize it with a cautery in the right part of the head, in the place which is called "vas" — and this is the place where airy flesh is found. And lift your hand thus, and do not expose the bone, because the patient suffers from very great pain different from the pain of all the other head cauteries.
And I say that this cautery in its place, because it is known that the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occiput are cauterized is a more subtle cautery than the one with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Head of the bed.
From the cauterization of an old migration.
When pain is located in the part of the head or it is a stabbing pain inside the eye, then evacuate the head with medicine that cleanses the head, and administer the other cure, which was previously mentioned in the treatment of illnesses; and not to prolong, there are two ways to cauterize: either cauterization with sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
The most cauterizing of burning medicine is that you take a handful of salt, and scrub it and bind the extremities of the patient on both sides. Then cut into the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet so that it is in the patient's bad blood which remains there, until it is hidden.
And then apply a bandage over the wound with a tight compression, and leave it there for three hours; and then undo it and treat the salt, and leave the poultice on for two or three days, and apply a plaster submerged in hot water until the place forms a scab.
And then heal it with an ointment until it is healthy.
And if you want, make this with some burning medicines which have been written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
More with the cautery iron according to this method:  warnings for the cautery of which this is the form:
And it is called key or end of the hands, because its head has a form like that of a nail in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it is a small prominence.
And then pause over the place of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery is not irritated, which is underneath — and turn the small iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it that is irritated by the narrowness of the tube is as much as its size, then raise your hand so that the artery which is underneath is not irritated, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
And then soak a cloth in salt water and apply it to the place, and leave it there for three days; and then apply a warm poultice, and treat with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you see it, cauterize at the extremity of the knife wound according to the cautery, and beware of the cutting of an artery in this migration properly not ancient.
Fourth chapter.
Of the cautery of ancient migraines.
When you treat emigranea with the aforementioned treatment for the preceding cure, and what has been said about the divisions of illnesses, and do not hasten the cure, and sometimes due to the illness that is not enough for what has been said about the first cautery in medicine or the cautery with fire, then it is necessary that you apply the cautery iron which is albificated, because it indicates on the location of the pain along the line of longitude where the majority of the aforementioned is, or perhaps something else; and place your hand for a observation and hold it firmly while making an incision in the artery and penetrating through to the bone.
It is necessary for you to be mindful of the continuity of the mandible, which is harmed by chewing, and that the ligament not be injured and the nerve which gives movement to it, and that it does not become dislocated with spasms.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, because in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially for one who ignores what they do and is not careful and does not proceed with caution; then leave the operation to someone who begins with competence.
And I will come to the recollection of the rule for the flow of blood from the accidental injury of the artery, according to its own method, in its own place of freedom.
And if you see that this sickness does not require the cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle place of the head thus as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery that we have spoken of in the chapter on extraction of arthritis with a cautery having two handles, and this is a better cauterization and more beneficial.
Chapter five.
On the cauterization of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain from cold and it is treated with lacative causes and with the other cure that has been spoken of in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is what is called a point, of which this is the form:
And apply the point near the ignition, and let it be carried around the entire ear as if a wheel is turned, or in a circle around each part if the pain is in each part. Bring yourself to the cautery of the root of the ear little by little until you feel the place with your finger.
And if the cautery of ten points on the entire ear, and cauterize it, then treat the places until they are healed.
Chapter six.
On the cauterization of torture.
Torture that is cured with cauterization is not one of the species that come from flow, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoid cauterization of the species that originates from dryness or from spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that species of torture with poultices and capers and gargling, and you do not confirm your cure, then it is known that you should cauterize the illness with three cauterizations: give one to the root of the ear, and a second a little below the temple, and the third give to the junction of the two lips.
And place the cauterization on the opposite side of the affected part, because mollification is only seen in the part that appears to be healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cauter on the right side of the extremity of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the aforementioned finger, and put your hand with the cauter inside until the quantity of the matter of the species of the cod is consumed.
And this is the shape of the cautery, and it is a species of the knife, the shape of which is in front of the table. More subtle is that which takes away a little, as it seems to me; and I believe that cutting from the superfluous fatness a little.
And then heal the place with what is in front, processed within so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 7.
Of the cautery of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said and it does not respond to your medicine and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with a cautery in the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the nape. And the handling of the cautery is done according to what has been previously said.
And it is cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more dangerous; and then it is treated with what is processed.
Chapter 8.
Of the cautery of oblivion caused by weakness.
I believe that given to the patient at the beginning are bitter and great pills serving for purging.
And then gently take the entire head of the patient and place it on the wooden plank described in this treatise's chapter on plasters.
And place those warm cloths, because that is the technique of cautery. And do it according to the order which has already been stated by doctors.
And so if healing occurs with that; and if not, then make three cauteries on the back part of the head, which depend on the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck. And place the thickness of the said cloth between each cautery, and then carefully treat the cautery with what has been previously prepared.
But if you are experienced and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle place; and if your experience is greater, then apply the cautery on the two temples.
Then carefully treat it until it heals; and let the olive oil cautery be according to the form previously given.
Chapter 9.
On the cauterization of paralysis and the softening of the entire body.
As you proceed with the treatment of the head with earth and with what has been said; and then take the head of the patient, and then apply cautery on it in the middle place of the head, and apply cautery above all the temples of the head, and apply cautery on the back part of it, and apply three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body due to excessive moisture and the illness is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and strongly with a cautery until it is burned by the combustion of the codes of the same, and lift your hand. Then return to cure that one until he is healed, and this one should be cauterized with an olive-tree cautery.
Chapter ten.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
It is not the epileptic who should be cauterized, but that the epilepsy is due to a flux.
And therefore we advise that you modify the brain of the patient at the beginning with a mixture and another cure, which we have dictated in the division when the illness is great and it tolerates the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer gargling treatments and masticators to the servant that modifies, giving that for many days, with improvement of the food.
And return to the head of the patient, and then cauterize that one with a cautery in the middle place of the head according to the preceding manner, and with another cautery on the occiput of it, and on each horn of the head let it be cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize them with the same cautery that has been mentioned, having previously softened and loosened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the olive oil be cauterized according to what has been stated previously.
But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery in this manner.
Chapter 11.
On the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and gross weakness, then cauterize them with the same cauteries that we have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an overflowing inclination towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give them a drink that cleanses their brain according to what has been stated previously in the division.
And shave the head of the patient, and make a decently made plaster of egg on the circle, and apply it to the middle place of the head.
And let the patient be sitting upright, and let them be held firmly from all sides.
And apply a liniment; it is also worthy to anoint the eyelids with elderberry. Heat that one on the fire with tempered warmth by measure, which the said sufferer feels most in it. And apply that to the middle place of the head of it in a circle, and release it within so that it is refreshed.
Make that to the patient for a whole week, with another regimen of it inside until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that making small points according to the size of it, provided you hold the hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
And then put that cut in a poultice or in wraps of gualina.
Chapter twelve.
Of cauterization of descending water in the wheel.
When it is declared to you the beginning of water in the wheel by the signs which you have heard said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient that which cleanses the head of it, and keep it from all humidity.
And make it sweat in a bath for ten days.
And then command it to shave its head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle place of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of evacuation of water in two wheels, or on one side if it is the beginning of evacuation of water in one wheel.
Make incisions with a cautery on all the veins and arteries that are visible in the knee; and let the cauteries be in that length in the width of the temples.
And beware of flows of blood when it is being cauterized; and if you see any flow of blood, stop it with some medicine, which is within your power.
And you will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries and in the removal of those and caution of flows of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck where two bones are, with two cauteries placed backwards to produce a result.
Chapter thirteen.
Of the cauterization of old tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and assiduously flow through the veins and arteries which are in the obvious place of the head before and it is verified that this is a superfluous flow of phlegmatic humor, then cauterize it with a cautery, which we have mentioned in the chapter about the beginning of water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle place of the head and with two cauteries on the neck behind two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck behind two bones. If the case requires it, then cauterize that entire area of the heel on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
On the cauterization of foul odor of the nose.
When you treat that with the remedy we have mentioned in the division and do not press your treatment, then prepare it and give to drink to the patient the decoctions for three nights; and rub the head of the patient, and cauterize it with a middle-sized cautery or an olive tree cautery. And then cauterize that area with a small nail-shaped cautery or two cauteries above the two eyebrows, leaving a small amount of hair.
And beware of the acidity that you do not inflame it.
And this is the shape of the nail-shaped cautery.
Chapter 15.
On the cauterization for softening of the eyelids of the heels.
When the eyelid of the heel is softened by illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery or with this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its shape:
And if you do, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries on the entire partition, and let them be elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the swelling.
And do not press your hand too much with the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is irritated.
Chapter sixteen.
Of the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the skin is converted to the inner parts and the eye is punctured.
When the skin of the eye is converted to the inner parts so that it punctures the eye, then cautery is done in two ways, either with iron or with medicinal applications.
If you apply the cautery with fire to the patient, command them beforehand that they should lift their skin like those who are about to be treated, until they are lengthened and widened; and if the needle is piercing too deeply, then tie the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that it is not moved until the skin is grown.
Then when they are grown and widened, place the head of the patient on your thigh, and apply a sign above the eyelid of their eyes with a thread, which is shaped like a fig leaf, and let this signal be close to the skin.
And then stop putting cotton in the wound or in the poultice of pitch on the ulcer.
And then apply the cautery of which this is the shape.
And then cauterize on the figure that has been designed, little by little, in small burned spots, until the surface of the quiver is completely burnt, which appears like a fig tree leaf, clearly apparent.
Signal of sanity of the present work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already being contracted and the skin of it being elevated due to the puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and then put on the wound a bandage until the scar is formed. And then heal that with an ointment until it is healed.
But if it returns through the skin for some reason, then apply another treatment and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery on that one just as you had done previously.
But if the skin grows on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is elevated to its own natural place and is evened out so that the skin does not touch the eye.
Put the cautery in medicine to burn and this is what commands the patient to raise their skin while they are prolonged and narrowed, and then make a paper of cloth in the shape of a miter's funnel.
And then take soap made from congealed and living snake, or what is called aqua, and mix those things together, and make a paste to prevent it from being cold; and then spread that paste on the paper which is made in the shape of a miter's funnel, and apply that to one of the soles of the feet; and apply the heel wrapped in a poultice of warm water, and let the patient's head be in a raised position.
And then put the finger on the medicine and press it a little and not on the veins so that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, because this biting is in him like fire.
And then when he perceives that the medicine has a biting sensation, then raise the medicine and put it on the upper finger; then when the biting stops, then remove the medicine and wash the heel with water; and then consider if the swelling is already lifted like something washed of constriction by fire or incision, because this is good; and if it does not return to that place where the medicine was applied and does not diminish until the operation is completed and the heel is contracted.
And then pause on the patient's back to ensure that the stiffness of the adjustment is eradicated, and treat that area with a soothing ointment or another entrance so that it may be healed.
And it is necessary for you, that you must guard your operation with vigilant diligence so that no part of the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid is softened in some days and some cause of the skin pinches in the eye, then apply your medicine to that area where the eyelid is softened, and properly as it was done at the beginning, and apply a dressing to ensure that it may be healed.
And this is the form of application of the plaster.
And you should know that the eyes of men are diversified according to size and smallness, and thus your contraction is made accordingly.
And let not be hidden the way of rectitude to he who has studied in this art.
Chapter 18.
Of cauterization of the fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with the method that we have discussed in the divisions of illnesses and do not confirm your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to pause with their head held back, and hold the head of the patient by some servant between the hands in such a way that it may not be moved nor agitated with the head.
And then pause to put cotton or a poultice of warm water on the wound of the patient.
And then prepare the cautery in the shape that this is:
which should be concave, such as the shape of a reed or a dove's wing, on one extremity where the cautery is made.
And if it happens, let it penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want, let it come out like a probe.
But I prefer that which is concave to be better for the whole work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and pull out from it blood and dry it. And if it is not open, then apply to it and extract the pus from it.
And then pause on it the cautery which should be well ignited, and give to that one the whole hand except a little below the cautery from the wound to the separation of the nose, so that not the hand or the patient is disturbed, and then pause the cautery in the depth of the wound and cauterize it.
And thus if at the beginning of applying the cautery you see it enter into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and let it be like that for three days, and then pause on that wound with a bandage and wrap it with unguent exsiccative until it is healed.
More pain will be if it has passed eleven days and it's not healed, then pause on the medicine of sharp corrosive until the bone is uncovered and scraped according to what is convenient in the sixth chapter.
And there's another way of cauterizing a fistula, which the first doctors described: put it in the place of the fistula and make a hole and return to the narrow passage with subtlety, of which is the form of it: And put in it the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with it with good retention, and do not move the patient so that the melted lead does not penetrate to the inside of that; and cover what you put on the inside of the patient with cotton soaked in white of egg or in water, because lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterizing and of the cure, it's good; and if not, then it's necessary to administer a tube through the nose and return the fistula to the body of the nose according to how it will come into its proper place.
Chapter 18.
Of the cauterization of the swelling of the feet.
Many times seen are ulcers in the lips, and mainly in the lips of infants.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with the method that we have discussed in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then apply the small cutting cautery according to this form that is taught:
And let the convergence of it be according to the subtlety of the cut.
Then carefully place that instrument in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then treat it with wax until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there appears an apostema, and then it is broken, and then it is antiquated, and a fistula is made, and you treat that one and do not deepen your treatment, then take care that you apply cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then put that applied thing in the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron thing reaches the bottom of it, and afterwards make a dressing, one or two; and then treat it with the method that we have discussed regarding treatment until it is healed.
And thus if the blood is separated and purified, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what is described in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the cauterization of the teeth and the softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines and not with confectons, then place the patient's head in a sling, and take a cautery in the shape of which will be described later, so that you place the swab on the tooth and introduce into it the ignited cautery, gently and slowly, and make a small hole so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth to be penetrated.
And then lift your hand, and apply the cautery repeatedly as needed.
And then let the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the decayed tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupted moisture is dried out.
Chapter 21.
On the cauterization of toothache.
When pain in the tooth is caused by cold or heat, or if the verm or worm does not respond to medical treatment, then a cautery is applied according to two methods: either a cautery with a hot iron or a cautery with a burning coal.
Cautery with a hot iron is that you take a hot iron rod and burn it in a coal fire, and then wrap the iron in cloth and apply it to the affected area, and then dip the iron in boiling water, and place it on the painful tooth, applying it gently until it becomes cold.
And then repeat this process several times until the virtue of the heat penetrates to the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge a thread or cloth in the hot iron mentioned earlier, and place it on the painful tooth, and place the hot iron over it until the iron penetrates to the depth of the tooth's cavity.
But beware of the cautery with fire that you pay attention to the size of the iron or rod, and it should be in the core of some thickness so the sharpness of the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery in the form that you want, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery becomes cold; and do this several times a day, either on that day or on the following days, until the pain is alleviated.
And it is necessary that the patient should put their mouth on the good opening of the cautery and hold it for an hour and then remove it; this is the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize to the extent that you can, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
Of the cauterization of excesscences or tumors.
When excesscences are of phlegm and cold humors and are not obedient to digestion by medicines and you wish to digest those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form of which this is the following, having two extremities covered so that the smoke of the cautery goes through the other extremity, and place that ignited thing on that apostema for a while, and another time if it is necessary for that one, until it penetrates to the bottom of the apostema.
And if the apostema is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and remove it after three days and place on the wound a dressing in good order until what the fire has burnt is restored.
And treat that one with ointments and bandages and dressings until it is healed.
Chapter twenty-three.
Of cauterization of the throat and constriction of the spleen or alternatively,  Of cauterization of the region of the voice and of the constriction.
When humidity comes into the channel of the lung, and especially when it is mixed with coldness of temperament, then it is advisable that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the vein at the root of the throat in the affected place.
And beware that you do not touch the throat with the cautery nor burn the cartilage of it except a little.
And cauterize it with another cautery on the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of it. And his cautery be done in the same manner as previously mentioned.
And then heal it with that which has been previously stated, until it is healthy.
Chapter twenty-four.
Of the cauterization of sickness of the lung and of cough.
When cough and lung sickness are from cold humidities and the patient has no fever nor wasting, and it is an old sickness, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the furcula in the affected places on the arms and shoulders; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cautery be done according to the previous method.
And if you want, then your cauterization should be done with a cautery that is called a point, the shape of which precedes in the treatment of ear pain.
And make points between the sides to those; and then heal that which is treated before it becomes healthy again.
And you should have the cautery having three hooks because cauterization is done in that way: in one session you can make three cauteries according to this method:
Chapter 25.
Of cauterization of the nipple which is the tip of the helper or assistant ( possibly referring to a part of a medical tool or the body part that assists in a procedure, likely the
When the tip of the helper is dislocated due to causes of lubricating humidity and is not held firm at the time of its return, you must return its dislocation before it becomes customary to return, and then with a small movement it is displaced so that it goes in, as we have testified, when we primarily reduce the dislocation, and then the patient is turned over on their back or on their side; and then lift the cod (possibly referring to a tendon or ligament) which is in the inner part of the nipple to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated in the inner parts.
And then apply the cautery having two ends; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the vein so that it penetrates to the other side; and the figure of cauterization will appear, which is customary with four irons or cauteries.
And some adjusted burns are made according to this count and for which there are three cauteries.
And then pause on the cautery with salt water, and make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the member not be moved for some time while it is being comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the lower parts and it is done thus, then cauterize on the muscle with a key-shaped cautery or with many pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and many humidities come into the stomach so that it extracts from its complexity and is thus multiplied to it, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not confirm, then it is seen that the patient is on the seventh day resupinated, and extends their hands and their thighs, and then cauterize with three cauteries: one cautery placed on the chest for the quantity of a finger with a key-shaped cautery, and two cauteries placed on the two sides of the chest, until the figure of a triangular cautery appears; and elongate between those that are not adjusted so that they will make a poultice.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the skin of the cod.
And let the figure of the cautery be added according to this form, And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle place of the stomach according to this form; and let this be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be cauterized by pricking the one who is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you place stitches on the stomach according to the quantity that you want with a needle, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the points; and then cure that with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter 27.
Of the cauterization of the cold fever.
When there is pain in the liver due to cold or humidity or excessive fatness until it is expelled from its normal composition by superfluous excretion, and the patient is cured with what we have said and not conflicted, then it happens that the patient is suspended on their back, and stitches are made with a needle with three cauteries in this form and quantity placed on the liver under the hypochondria, where one can see the decline of the disease.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the said thing, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
And do not press your hand on the moving cautery.
And if the quantity of water that is administered is equal to the quantity of the mixture of the specific treatment of the coda, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already spread their thighs, and lifted their arms.
And to you it is possible to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-shaped cautery, when you are with subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the specific treatment of the whole coda be administered so that it penetrates the entire body and reaches the intestines, for the coda is subtle here; and know this.
Chapter 28.
Of the perforation of the abscess of the liver with a cautery.
When there is an abscess or swelling in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will experience severe gravity and increased pain.
And if it is in the tunic of the liver, then the pain is greatly increased and many times the doctors have exhausted the cure for it.
Therefore, it is necessary that the patient be turned onto their back; and secure the area of the abscess with a bandage; and apply the cautery iron, which is assembled like a razor, the shape of which was described in the previous page. And cauterize with that iron, so that the entire cord is seared, until it reaches the spleen, until it penetrates to the liver, where the blood will stop.
And then treat that one with the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used unless the one for which the study in the art of medicine has been prolonged, and on which many maladies have been experimented; but however some experienced men have argued about this operation, but still I will tell you what seems good to me.
Chapter 29.
Of the cauterization of wounds.
The ancient doctors said that the roots of aristology should be cauterized in a wound according to this manner: it is necessary to take a root from the aristology plant, which is a long and thin root that is found, and it should be the thickness of a finger.
And then submerge it in oil and bring it to the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauteries guiding, slightly inclining towards the part that is below the beard, and with two cauteries in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the crotch, declining slightly towards the back parts; and with another cautery in the middle location of the chest; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back parts; and with a cautery at that location which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on both sides of the chest, leaving the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And do not think that you should press your hand with the cautery, but rather it should be evident in the manifestation of the work.
And the experienced old men said that they were experienced in treating men who used a iron cautery resembling a rod and ignited it, and put it in the location which is between the ribs, until they reached with it to that apostema and extracted the unhealthy matter, just as we have said regarding the apostema of the liver.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, because what happens most often is that it closes the fistula at the location where there is no healing.
Chapter
On the cauterization of the wound.
When you treat the wound of the thigh with what we have said about treatment in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are effective, one of which is to make three or four marks according to the length of the wound, according to the shape of the cauteries on the foot, the shape of which has been previously described.
And let there be between each cauterization the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cauterization should be the same as what we have said regarding the cauterization of the foot, namely.
And do not press your hand on the cauterization; and let the patient be elevated on their back with two pillows.
And there is another way of cauterizing, which is that you should ignite the cautery having two vertices, which cause we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the tendon which is in the interior of the thigh where the vein of the patient's left sinew or nerve is visible.
And let your elevation be such that you elevate the tendon according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two vermilion instruments, ignite the wick, in that entrance through which the cauterizing tool penetrates the skin of the other part.
Then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
And if you want, cauterize with a cautery having three vermilion points.
And then cure the cautery after having waited for many days, for it is more confident that the other causes precede in the cure.
Chapter 21.
Of the cauterization of dropsy.
Cautery is not applied in dropsey but rather on the affected joint specifically.
When you treat the dropsical person with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not confirm their treatment, then it is necessary that one applies cautery with four cauteries around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and one cautery on the liver, and one cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the ribs of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the chest, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
And then place the cautery iron near the opening so that it can be held for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient's waste near the cautery unless it is covered so that two cloths can be applied to them, and they will be helped by a healthy assistant.
The shape of the cautery on which the belly is cauterized should be like a key, and according to the form of that which precedes it, and the back should be olive-shaped according to its preceding form.
Chapter 32.
On the cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are affected by dropsy and are full of acrid water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in the area that is between the ear-like and ankle-like parts, and raise your hand with the cautery and do not touch that; and then raise your hand, and do not return it at all, because the acrid water flows out.
Make the cautery in this form: And then make on both thighs two cauteries, and on each thigh make a cautery at the extremity of the cutting cautery. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one at the knee and the other in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
And leave the opened wound to heal for a long time so that some water comes out of it.
And then treat the hands for those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter thirty-three.
Of cauterization of the belly.
When the belly is due to cold and humidity entering so that it weakens the virtues, which are the digestive and retaining virtues, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, and it is treated with the methods of treatment and not confused, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cauterization of the virtue showing, then cauterize that one with a large cauterization on the upper stomach as has been described in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauterization of the circle and with four cauterizations in the subtle circle of the navel, with a subtle key-shaped cauterization; and with a cauterization on the hip on the large kidneys, or with two cauterizations.
And if sometimes the excess humidities are exhibited and the patient cannot tolerate it, then cauterize that one on the navel and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauterizations on the stomach and near the groin, for this is a perfect cure of youth, from which you will not err.
Chapter 94.
Of the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When there are in the nature behind old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured with what we have said in the division and do not respond to the treatment, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus of the spine of the back, little by little, triangular, and with a cautery above the navel for two fingers.
And if it appears that the patient's stomach is weakened and their food is not digested, and their face is often discolored, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the middle of their back with a key-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery for some time open, and carefully treat the inside so that it may be healed.
Chapter 95.
Of the cauterization of the thigh near the abscession of the tumor.
When you excise the thigh, then ignite the cautery that is assembled like a grid. Then insert the ignited thing into the excised thigh, and hold your hand inside so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And make a cut or incision, for if the humors are excessive, then cauterize each of them according to what has been recounted, and immediately cure those with cauterization that contribute to their healing.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the bladder, it is more damaging in young people.
Chapter thirty-six.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are made in the behind, in the lower parts of the body.
When the anus does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal it with a cautery.
Therefore when someone has a fistula in the anus behind, and it is chronic, corrupted blood and rotten humidity corrupt it, and therefore that which is most worthy to be cured is what proceeds from the subtle thread, and then measure the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned thread.
Then ignite the cautery that resembles an arrow. And then insert the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the thread penetrates.
And apply the cautery on that place until those corrupted bodies are cauterized, one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your need.
Beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if a fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, beware of all those places; and do not do that unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you think it is not penetrating.
And then heal the place within which it will be cured.
And if the place is sealed, and its matters are cut off from it, and it rests thus for a long time, then know that it is entirely cured.
And if the matters are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the press of its rotten bone, or this comes from those causes of which a reminder will be mentioned in its place.
Chapter 37.
Of the cauterization of the kidneys.
When in the kidneys a pain is caused by cold or by great swelling, and thus the cot of the patient is constricted, then it is advisable to cauterize that which is over the kidneys with a cautery on each kidney with a clave or key, from which one expects the remedy.
And strengthen the cauterization on the second with a small device, so that three linear cauterizations come, and then serve as more reliable in joining.
Chapter thirty-eight.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When there is weakness and softening in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that part above the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with a cautery on the right side, and also on the left side.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of nodes on the foot; and cauterize that part with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
And let the cautery be shaped like a nail according to what is needed.
Chapter thirty-nine.
On the cauterization of the uterus.
When cold and humidity come to the uterus, and because of this there is difficulty in conceiving, and the menses are corrupted, and their arrival is delayed, and there is pain in the abdomen, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the bladder; and with a cautery above the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be shaped like a nail.
Chapter 40.
On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When moisture and mucus accumulate at the ankle joint, and are caused by the imbalance of its position, it is a sign that one thigh is longer than the other when compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is found in which way it is bent.
Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle joint with a circular cautery, because you will have felt with your hand around the circumference of the joint, and in such a way that the joint falls into the middle of the circle.
And let the cautery be of the kind previously described for the treatment of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then cauterize with three irons or with an olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the thickness of the entire cord; and then heal the wound so that it becomes healthy.
Chapter 41.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated with what we have said before and it is not effective, then it is necessary to purge the patient of gross humors with foul or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize.
The handling of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either with a medicinal cautery that burns, or with a cautery using fire.
It will be according to two scientific methods, of which one is that it cauterizes the area on the patient's hip with three triangular cauteries in this form; and do so to a good depth. And let the space that is between each cautery be the amount of the thickness of the finger, and if the olive or grain-sized cautery.
More often, the cautery is on the middle place on the head of the ankle for which there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle in which the form is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, that the circle be continent and burn the tenderness of the entire cod.
And this is the method of cautery in cases where pain is adhering to the ankle and not extended into the thigh.
But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh in the place where the pain turns, and with one cautery on the hip a little below the iliac region.
And if the cautery cuts, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the inflammation of the codena.
And if the patient complains that the pain has spread to the area proper to the toes of the feet, then cauterize that spot with a cautery for three points or four or more if it is indicated for that.
And if the patient complains of pain being in the knee near the thigh, then cauterize that spot with a sharp cutting cautery.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not touch with the cautery any nerve or large artery, and that because of this there is no bad occurrence or contraction on the patient.
I have already seen one and another of those whom I have cauterized on the hip and finished with the cauterization, and the leg became inflated within where the tumor reached the foot, and it became perforated and corrupted the whole foot. And then comes a strong purging of the belly, and then comes death.
And if the pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterize each one according to this method.
They say that the wise ones in cauterization of this cautery, of which this is the method: make similar to a circle of iron, of which the circumference is the size of a palm; and let it be thick according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
And indent that circle another thumb; and let the space be the amount of the knot of the foot; and let those circles be divided into two parts; and let the length of those chains be a knot or two knots, and make in that margin of iron decently apparelled irons in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then set fire to the focus within which it will ignite and emit sparks, and then place it on the affected part of the water, the patient reclining on their side. And thus cauterize that wound with three cauteries arranged in a row.
And then leave it for three days; then plaster that wound with poultice and leave the open wound for many days; and then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Says Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this species of cautery we have made little use because of the fear of its management, and because we have found few who manage it properly.
It is better for those who undergo cauteries to suffer them, and to remove them from the place where they are.
It is better to cauterize with medicines that adhere, that you make two circles having an armula perforated in which the iron hook of the door should pass; let the length of the partitions be in the thickness of them two knots or four.
And if the space which is between each of the quantity of the thickness of the said thing; and let them be opened above and below, and let them contain themselves within them according to this form:
And then stop on the part of the ill person's flank, and press your hand on the part of the flank; and take some hot water and put it between two cloths, and let the quality of that be near the small fire little by little, and apply that for the quantity of one hour, and let the patient suffer the biting and adjustment of it — because that bite is like fire — until the biting ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from the entire flank with cold water.
And then let it be for three days and apply on that wound until the blackness of the adjusted healing is removed, and let it be for several days, and cleanse his foot from the pus; this is the last treatment.
And then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a plaster for it that contains water as is done in the aforementioned treatment.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe for alkaline and non-extinguished lime, take a portion of it, and put it in a new vessel, where the portion will be perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the patient.
And put the bottom of one vessel into another vessel, and pour over that alkaline and living lime sweet water which takes those with a finger, and once you have compressed them well with your hand for good compression, and let the vessel that is emptied of the sharp water be in the vessel that has been emptied.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living lime and other renewed alkaline, because that water will be very strong and sharp, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for a fire operation.
And of the medicines some are those with which it is cauterized, like tar and honey and melted wax mixed together.
And Gualia recounts from an ancient man the operation and the cure with which is cured pain of water and of vein sciatica, and magnifies many things about that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and that it is healed by a single glance, just as one recommends, for the strong effect that this has in bathing and he had already said that it was enough.
And it is that a green paste is applied, and if no green paste is found, a fresh fig is applied; and the moss is trampled with a few grapes and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the leg, and is tied.
And it is left there for a duration of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the adjustment.
Then put him in a bath and when his body is sweating, dip him into the mud, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
And be aware that it's not suitable to use cautery with these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Moreover, Escorides says that when the vein of the calf is cut, it should be cauterized; and apply to the wound in this manner: take a wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the metatarsal bones.
And then take a dry calf vein and burn it in the fire until it becomes charcoal; and apply it to the wool and tie it on so that it is held tight. And then repeat this, and do not stop doing it until the inflammation of the bite has passed into the ankle and relieved the pain.
And this manner of cautery is called cow's cautery.
Chapter 42.
On the cauterization of pain of teeth.
Some wounds are painful in the back for trivial causes, such as from a fall or a blow or from excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, due to the infusion of cold and humid material.
And cautery is not applied except in this single case which is made by the infusion of cold material.
Therefore, apply evacuation to the patient with warm pills and similar things, which are made on the back where the pain is, three lines according to the width of it, placing seven or eight cauteries in each line, according to the quantity that you see of the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
And let the cauterization be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or with four using the median clavicle cautery in this manner:
Chapter 43.
On the cauterization at the beginning of gibbosity.
Many times this disease appears to small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they become stiff on them with a curvature in the leg, with elevation and movement.
And you will touch upon the last vertebra of the back and the knots of the patient that have already begun to protrude over the other vertebrae.
And then when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that which is around with a cautery that follows this shape: that the cautery takes on the entire affected part of the vertebrae equally.
And if you want, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines. And let the points made be properly spaced between them.
And then heal the place within which it is sanitized with what we have said.
But beware that cautery is not administered in yellowing that is made by spasm of nerves.
Chapter 44.
Of the cauterization of gout and of joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And then how gout of cold cause is cured with manipulation of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then they are alleviated by cautery.
And it is that you should cauterize with evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with heated cauteries.
And be an olive tree cautery of which this is the shape:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains increase in the teeth or in the other joints, and this swelling endures, then cauterize that one on each tooth with three cauteries or four of the whole part with this olive tree cautery.
And if many cauteries are needed so that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize that one and do not press too much your hand with the cautery beforehand, but only surround the area of the burn.
And if the pains increase in the tooth and the two, then administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the sixth chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands, and it is called sugar disease, then prick in the circuit of the kidneys thus as they turn, prick in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick in the circuit of the kidneys on each knot and on the joint of the hand.
And if pains push close to the joints or the muscles, then cauterize each of them from the entire affected area.
And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is done and the flux is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God helping.
Chapter 44.
Of the cauterization of fractures.
When there is a fracture in the limbs and intestines are coming out through the hernia, and this is a common occurrence, then advise the patient to leave their food for that day and to use soothing remedies so that the wound of their belly may heal.
And then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to hold their arm inside so that it may be supported or held in case the hernia or intestine comes out.
And then return to the areas that have been mentioned and examine for rupture on the bone of the pelvis with sign of fracture on the extremity which seems similar to the circle of the divided parts of the body.
And then apply the cautery, of which this is the form:
Into that which is moved by red and yellow bile. And return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant is beside their legs, and another on their chest, who holds their hands.
And then place the cautery on that sign with your hand, and if it is right, so that in the patient's consciousness the bone enters into the middle of the buttocks; and repeat this other procedure if you have not succeeded in the first procedure.
And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during the time of your cautery, that you do not touch that intestine so that the patient does not come into death or other great evil.
And know that when you have the cautery, if you do not touch the bone, your operation is not effective.
And it is fitting that the cautery of children be subtle according to their size and measure.
And then treat the place of the cautery for three days with a bandage until the wound is healed by the heat.
And then treat that one with other ointments until it is healed.
And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the place and the wound are sealed.
And take care that you administer nourishment to them according to the length of time of their treatment, which will allow their belly to digest, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of straining.
And then when they want to get up after forty days, administer a moderate and decent diet, and keep them like that for another forty days.
And let them be spared from work and from eating rich food and from drinking, and from violent vomiting, for when they use this regimen of complete healing they will be healed.
And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and it is not necessary to repeat, then cauterize the rupture of that one with a heated cautery according to its quantity, and let it be what is exuded from the coda thus as the third part of it; and then treat that one with what we have said, and it is not suitable.
And I have already said to some first that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is touched with a tent.
And a paused line is made through the width in the flesh above the rupture, and another line below; and pause your hand with a cautery key, but the first cautery is put more gently and better.
Chapter 46.
Of the cauterization of the torso.
When pain is entrenched in some members by blow or by percussion and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medicines, then it is advisable to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be of the entire member according to its size and smallness, and its virtue and development, and location on the torso and pain of it.
Therefore if it is healed by the first cautery, it is good; and if not, then repeat on it the cautery; for it is customary with those pains that they be punctured in the member to which it approaches, because it is advisable to continue with the cauteries until the patient is healed.
Chapter 47.
Of the cauterization of leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes treated with a cautery for great benefit, and especially if the type of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
And so if you want to cauterize that person, consider if the leprosy is contagious and if that treatment is with what we have said in the division and not otherwise, and you fear for the patient that the corruption will comprehend the entire body of theirs and their entire complexity, then cauterize that person on the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one on the right side of theirs, and one on the forehead to the end of the hair; and two on the horns; and one at the back, on the nape or neck.
And finally, put your hand on the cautery for a little while to press into the bone a small impression, and let their shoulders be dislocated so that the expulsion of gross vapors is alleviated from them; and cauterize on the middle as it is prescribed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is advisable that you cauterize that person with those cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on the two clavicles, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on the hips, and one on each hip, and two on the knees and one on each knee, and two on the elbows, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the sixth rib; and cauterize that person on all the joints of the limbs and thighs, and on each heel of their feet, and on the soles of their thighs.
Be careful with the nerves that are on the sole of the foot, so you don't hurt them.
And in some cases it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the kneecap and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more adjustments of cauteries you make, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not have pain from the cautery, unlike their usual ailments, because the body of the patient is already numb.
And it is seen that the cauteries are large or small according to the limbs and the joints, as it is determined by the species of the instruments.
And then treat the cautery with flour of burnt earth, mixed with honey and with another remedy until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
On the cauterization of numbness.
When a limb is numb or paralyzed and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let the cautery penetrate the thickness of the skin a little. And then heal the one who has entered into the anointing that will bring health.
And some treated areas are cauterized with a stupor that affects the hands and feet, and the spine and back, which is the seat of the nerves, which govern that member, and the stupor is relieved.
But do not touch that except for one who is wise in the anatomy of the members and the path of the nerves throughout the entire moving body.
Chapter 49.
On the cauterization of ulcers that are gangrenous.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to the poultices of medical ointments, then you cauterize it with a cautery iron, taking a little according to the quantity of the species of the cod Liver, until the whiteness and color of it are restored, and its color is changed.
And then heal the one who has a poultice made from flour of oats and lentils with oil of rose and leaves of wormwood, and blood of pigeon or blood of swallow, each one a portion and all mixed together, and then it is applied as a plaster on the area where it will bring healing.
Chapter 50.
Of cauterization of cancer.
When cancer is suspected and you want to treat it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around the circumference of the affected area as it is turned.
And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; but to me it is not visible, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this happen several times.
And it is better to cauterize around the circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple small cauteries.
Chapter fifty-one.
Of the cauterization of anal fistula.
When some anal fistula is delayed in maturation, and this is due to the excess of material that forms it, or because of the age of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the fistula; then cauterize around it with many small sharp points; and immediately apply a dressing so that it will close in maturation.
But if you want to make a perforation with the cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape, and apply it to the middle place of the fistula until it penetrates the skin.
And if the cautery is applied in that place where it is put, so that the body of the arm is alleviated; then carefully treat that interior part that needs to be healed.
Chapter Two.
On the cauterization of corrosive substances.
Corrosive is a wandering corruption in the limb, which corrodes that part as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corrosive substance in a place where the cautery is suffering from fire, then ignite small irons, and apply them in a gentle and gradual manner, as is convenient in that place where the corrosion is.
And then cauterize that entire inner part from which the corruption radiates, so that all of the corrosion is eradicated and no cause of it remains.
And then let it be for three days, and apply on the cauterized places a dressing made with oil mixed with other things, so that the scars are entirely eradicated and all of the corruption.
And then treat it with an ointment that generates flesh.
But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is born in which there is no corruption, that's good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains rotten in the corrupted places.
Eating away is a medical treatment with some sharp medicines, for that is a substitute in place of cautery. More often cautery is made at the focus of the pus to drain it gently.
And already I have said the cure of it with sharp medicine in division, and therefore take that one when of its urgent need.
Chapter 3.
Of the cauterization of wounds and of the other similar things.
Matters to be considered in the divisions of the foot of a patient who is called clau, and it is a gross cause, an entry, which damages the foot; and cauterization in these is according to two methods, that is cauterization by fire and cauterization by hot water.
The most common method of cauterization by fire is that you should make the cautery resemble a pen for writing, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that the wound contains, and it should have subtle edges.
And then apply the ignited instrument to the wound, and then turn your hand with the cautery in the circuit of the wound until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the wound. And leave it there for three days until pus starts to flow out. And then apply a plaster made from wild mallows crushed with salt, and place the plaster on that area for nine nights, so that it will eradicate the root of the ailment.
And then heal the area with an ointment made from generated flesh, so that it will be healed.
And if it does not convert, and warts appear on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, then take a cautery iron in water, and take a needle of iron or of stone or of pumice stone, and place that on the nail; and then put a small quantity of hot water into the needle, and hold your hand back, and you turn that with compression of your hand, and press the edge of the needle on the root of the nail, and introduce the hot water through the pressure of the root of the nail; and let the patient wait a little for the penetration of the hot water for one hour, and then remove it, so that the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do the same on those areas and then apply another one so that it comes out all over their joints in the body.
And then heal those areas where the roots of the nails have been eradicated with ointments that generate flesh.
Chapter Four.
On the cauterization of trembling.
When you have a patient with trembling caused by cold in the nerves or by fever of any cause, then it is advisable that you cauterize them with four cauterizations or five on the spine of the back, between each vertebra a cauterization; and a cauterization on their chest, and another on their stomach, an olive tree cauterization.
And the trembling of his is relieved and the health of the cold illness is restored.
Chapter Five.
On the cauterization of accidental wounds to the body.
When in the body there are protruding wounds and there are pus-filled sores which are made of gross corrupted matter; then it is advisable at the beginning of the treatment, that it be cauterized on every head of the fistula with a subtle cauterization, or with a burning of myrrh, whose extremity is extended to the focus; or with a razor of long aristology; or with a viscous cauterization.
And some wounds are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion in this manner; and they are not believed to be credible, and the excess is broken up, making them healthy, and curing them.
Maybe the emperor ordered that this be done with proper evacuation of the blood.
Chapter 56.
On the cauterization of abnormal flow of blood by surgical incision of the artery.
Treatments applied to stop the flow of arterial blood that is cut due to a wound which cuts too deeply, or due to an incision of abscesses or cauterization of a limb, and it seems similar, and it is difficult to restore that.
Therefore when it happens to someone, then you should press with your hand on the orifice of the artery, and place over that the ligature or bandage so that it holds and tightens those applied remedies inside which block the flow of blood, and do not let it come out.
And then apply to the focus of the cauterized places warm and large poultices, by name "motions", and blow on those inside so that they are ignited.
And then take from those a small or large piece of vein from the location and the wound in which the artery is broken, and sew it onto that place firmly so that you have restored the ligature, and apply the cauterization inside so that the blood is constricted and restrained.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove the tie and extract the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease to apply it until the blood is constricted.
And beware that you do not touch the nerve that is here, and let another evil come upon the patient.
And be aware that when the artery flows with blood, it is not possible to constrict the blood in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with a cautery as mentioned before, or with extraction when it has not been extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of the member are burned and the blood is constricted, or that it is tied with a thread or with a ligature for strong constriction, or that they are applied with medicines whose virtue is to constrict the blood; and they are strengthened with a pillow or with a bandage.
More importantly, one who administers a decent constriction with a ligature and a bandage or with clothes, or by the position of causes that burn and of similarities, does not do so hastily but gently.
If that pain should be intense and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then apply a warm poultice to the aforementioned orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand that in the great constriction of the intestine the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and on the area above it is not warmed; and above the area apply a cold and very chilly water to congeal and thicken the blood; and consider if there should be applied a cauterization or medicine of necessity.
Of incision and perforation, and of evacuations, and of phlebotomy, and of wounds and their similars.
We have already said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which a hot cauterization is convenient and with medicine to burn, and the occasions and causes of it, and the necessary instruments for the forms of the cauterizations; and we have ordered the chapters concerning the subjection of the head to the feet.
And we will proceed in this chapter for that medical treatment, so that it may be alleviated what the seeker of it is looking for, namely regarding what has been requested.
It seems that you should begin by warning them about this, son, that they learn in this chapter the fear of what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And because of this, beware that there is great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many careful observations are needed to evacuate what is with blood or on the vein or incision on the posthem or apprehension of tissue or purification of the wound or extraction of the arrow or incision of the skin and similar things. And all those things are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their hands there is almost always death.
And I warn you that upon you does not fall what is in the aforementioned, for some observations are dependent on you to have good manners as men and many manners of illnesses. And of them, it is some that flee with their illness and fear the death, and also because of the violence of what they find in their illness, and for the length of their illness, and in the illness there is a fear which means death.
And of those, it is one who gives you to understand and say, you hoping for health, and their illness is pernicious.
Therefore do not believe in that which you see of the one who comes to you with this treatment; and your caution should be greater than credulity and your recklessness; and do not presume any cause concerning this except through certain science which verifies what you must do, and for which successful outcome is awaited.
And use it in the cure of all your illnesses of prognosis and indication to him who is health converted, for in that you are helped with the acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and of glory.
Oh, sons, God inspire in you the divine understanding and grant you direction and protection, for this is in his hands.
And I have written and ordered this chapter distinctly by chapters as it precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure from head to feet, so that it may be facilitated for you what you demand of it and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of infants.
Know that this illness, often seen in infants, must be given the treatment and when the nurse tightens the head of the infant it loses its vivacity.
And some times it happens for an unknown cause which is not understood.
I have not seen this illness except in children; and all those who I have seen with it have been killed by it, and thus I consider it a fatal work in them.
And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of it was so magnified to the point that the child could not support itself because of the greatness of its head, and more that the humidity caused an increase until mortal harm.
And this humidity or is gathered between the cartilage and the bone, or is gathered under the bone on the siphoid bone (or near the xiphoid process).
For the operation in that case where the humidity is between the cartilage and the bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make an incision in the middle of the head with a slit in the width, and let the length of the slit be two nuts so that the humidity can flow out, and this is the shape of the spatulum:
And then if the humidity is even more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two slits in this manner:
And if the humidity is under the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head opened from one end to the other and the water is squeezed out when you press on it with your hand at the separated parts and it does not come back in. Make sure that you make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
And then extract the entire moisture from the incision; and then wrap the wounds with bandages and plasters; and then apply oil and wine externally on the fifth day, and then uncover the wound and cure it with tents and poultices, and bind the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which considers when the size of the abscess appears and the collection of the water, because some times it is bigger on the occipital bone, or on the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and so proceed with the incision where the abscess and the accumulation of the water appear, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
And be careful not to cut the artery and do not allow blood flow, lest the patient die from that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter second.
When the disease has progressed to the arteries of the shoulders or the hips, and it is chronic, and the medical treatments do not agree on this, then the last cure in this case begins with the opening of those two arteries.
And then proceed when you want to cut into the scalp of the patient, and rub the area with rough cloth to reveal the arteries, and hold the patient's neck with another cloth; and consider the pulse of the vein; and the places on each one corresponding to the places where you previously pressed the ears, so that they are hidden in some homes.
And then mark the artery with a tent, and cut each one in the spatium of each affected part, making a precise incision entering into the bone, and let that be the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatium beside the artery and divide it to reach the incisions in the lower parts.
And let the length of the incision be two fingers adjusted, because when any vein is cut, the blood exits with pulsating egression, which stops with frequent pressure.
But if the artery does not appear to feeling, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of the space of three fingers, and mark with a tent, and make an incision into the bone.
And that which is to be taken from the blood is a quantity of twenty units, and take it from their veins or months, and all that is according to the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the replenishment of their liver.
And then consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause of sciatica, then cut it out so that no abscess or tumor forms.
And then strengthen the wound with bandages and with a dressing of linen cloth, and cure it with an ointment so that it becomes healthy.
Chapter 3.
On the extraction of the blood from the temples which are in the temples.
When to some people an old or chronic disease occurs, due to humid and bad qualities in the temples, or an old and violent pain seems to be in those, and it is treated with the art of medical cures and this does not help, then we have spoken about extraction of blood from the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
And the method of operation and extraction is that the patient scrapes off the skin which is on the temples; and it begins with the apparent vein in the temple, because it appears to you through the blue veins, and is hidden except in few men due to violence of cold.
And if the area is concealed, then bind the patient's neck with some cloth; and apply cold compresses to the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until it appears to you that the arthritis is visibly reduced. And then take the spatula, of which this is the shape: And then scrape the channel with that which facilitates entry until you reach the joint; and cut into the tissue and extract that from the upper parts until you extract it from the channel and discover it from the tunics which you had left there, of the whole piece.
But if the artery is delicate, then wrap it with the extremity of the groin, and cut from it a part according to the quantity by which the extremities of the tissue are lengthened and contracted, and you will not find a flow of blood, for if they are not cut, the blood will not rise at all.
And then evacuate three cups of blood from the vein.
And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you ligate it in two places with double thread of hemp or with cords of flax, and do not allow putrefaction before consolidation of the wound and find a flow of blood.
And then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that hour or at another hour.
And if you want, cauterize that wound with a cautery iron within the bone with a cutting iron where the extremities of it are cut, and put in place of that defective member.
It is a better work if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion; for cautery is one of those causes that helps to dry out the harmful moistures, and thus it is better in treatment.
And then take out the extraction of the arteries that filled the place of the old abscess, and let them be covered with decently made poultices, and then let it be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh grow and with clamps within which it will be healed.
And if while you are working another vein is found with a flow of blood from the artery, then restrain that blood, either with a ligature or with a cautery, or fill the place of the cut, and press your hand within so that the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes is at your disposal, then apply a cold dressing on the area so that the blood is congealed, and wrap the area with water of vehement coldness so that the sharp pain subsides, and let it be tightened as needed.
And this is what is called easier extraction of the artery, that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, since you have sensed the two areas with your finger, and applied it to each one, soft fire, until they penetrate the bone and cut the vein in two areas, so that what is between the extremities of it is elongated, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And its sharpness is in the tips of the two handles. It is better if the sharpness is in the handles rather than the tips, because if it is too pointed with two handles it will be more proper to each wound, and it won't cut the flesh quickly.
Therefore, when there is some thickness in those areas, the heat of the fire is applied to them and the flesh is cut easily.
And this procedure is better than any other procedure and more efficient.
And the space which is between the two handles is the thickness of the said (or aforementioned) thing.
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of bodies with sharp and acidic humors of the veins.
When there are acidic humors, and it is the body of those veins which are on the head, and do not confirm any cause for the treatment of medicine, and times the face of the patient is already reddened and felt in the seat of the forehead a certain form of ambulation, as if it were an ambulation of antimony, and the veins of that one are so attenuated, humid so that already the skin of theirs is constricted, and the eyelids are so scratched by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient wise men mixed in the treatment of those of this operation, and I named this treatment with a pause.
And you command the patient to raise the skin where there are wounds on the upper frontal area, and then insert three equal distant slits in the frontal area according to the length of it. And if the length of the slit falls into two sections: one slit is equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle area of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And beware of the beginning of the tears which are in two sides, and extend your hand from the continuity of both the jaws. And if the space between each incision is adjusted to the quantity of three fingers.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dried cloth moistened with which to drain the blood.
And then insert the spatula between the two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision: which is from the partition of the temples to the second incision. Scrape out all the cartilage which is between two incisions around the siphac which is above the bone, and then make that from the middle incision to the second incision. And then insert a spatula into this space and in the first incision use another instrument called a cutellar, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And push the edge of that sharp instrument through the flesh attached to the cartilage, and the edge of it through the bone, and insert it so that it reaches the middle fissure, and cut off all the veins that descend from the head to the heels.
More, let the incision be continued to where the cartilage appears, and then make an incision in the middle fissure into the other fissure.
And after that pour out a quantity of blood, squeeze the places of the lumps of congealed blood.
And then push into each hot fissure a piece of old cloth, and place on those enclosed powders made with wine and oil and sharp vinegar, and beware that the applied cautery does not produce an abscess.
And on the third day loosen the ligature and administer a large enema of hot water or tea, and then treat it with a mixture of basilicon and oil and rosewater and other ointments so that the wounds are healed.
Chapter five.
On the treatment of ulcers caused by catarrh and descending to the heels from the divisions of the head.
When the liver and spleen are inflamed with catarrh and continuous pain, and the veins of the patient are thin and exhausted, and their protection is weak, and their eyelids are ulcerated and their skin is damaged, and in the forehead there is sharp pain and consequent inflammation, then you will know from this accident that the materials and catarrh do not come except from many worn out veins proceeding from the divided parts.
And the best cure for these is this: that you order the patient to shave their forehead, and make an incision in the middle of the forehead, a small one in width (and start from the left temple's fissure to the right temple; and let the incision be up to the bone; and stretch out your hand on the sides of the temples which are swollen due to bad chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or with dry cloth and fill between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or with yarn. And then strew dust of powder mixed in wine and oil so that it does not foster an apostematic abscess.
And when you see that the apostema is diminished, then it is time to scrape the bone until new flesh begins to grow, and treat it with a drying regimen which makes the flesh grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and make a plaster from it, and administer it on these wounds of the reborn flesh.
Chapter six.
On the treatment of that which falls into the ears.
Every cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral matter or similar to mineral, such as iron and copper, or it is from a plant, such as cedar or lavender, or it is fluxible matter, such as water and sharp vinegar and their equivalents, or some animal.
And then when stone falls into the ear or other cause similar to those that do not fit in the ear, and warm the ear with sunlight, and if necessary grind the stone, then distill it with some oil of violet or cypress, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the person sneeze with condition, and stop the nostrils for fear of sneezing. And then put in the ear canal some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear to the separated parts, because moist heat is introduced with these causes.
And if it does not come out, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called fine forceps, whose shape is this:
And if it is extracted with the instrument, well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a thin hook of little doubling.
And then if it is not perforated by that, make a cane of iron and insert the end of the cane into the trachea of the ear and close around the environment of the cane with wax and oil softened so that it does not hurt except the cane. And then extract with your finger strongly, because many times seen with what we have recounted.
More if it is not perforated in this manner, then take of alum or of prepared vinegar on which the ears are pressed a small quantity, and place that on the extremity of the vein, and then wrap around that place decently with a poultice. And then insert that into the trachea of the ear with ease, and then cleanse the ear of humidity.
And then if it is not perforated with all the causes that we have recounted, then you should consider that which appears before as a post or spasm of the apostem or abscess.
And the manner of taking that is that you at the beginning sensibly touch the patient's vein sepulchral and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make that go between your hands and turn the ear to the divided parts, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear and put the fat of it in the place where it is pressed. And if the lunar figure fissure enters into the stone, and the stone is perforated, then you can use an appropriate instrument; and at that hour apply the fissure with velocity, and cure it so that it becomes healthy.
And if the cause in the ear is one of the fatty growths that appear and become inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your initial treatment, then take a subtle spatula according to this form: and administer to him the excision of that growth which has fallen into the ear.
And do not do that when you think that it is already moistened by the vapour of the ear, and put it in several warm applications, and extract it with the nails or with a subtle gesture, or with an incision as has been said before, because the extraction of it is thus alleviated.
But in the water that has entered into the ear, it happens that the patient uses sneezing with conditioned commencement, and fills his other ear with an old cloth, and throws over that ear where the water is, and if by this it is expelled, well; and if not, then take hot stones and wrap them according to the length of the said, and heat them in the fire a little, and let the patient introduce one of these into the opening of his ear and press on the other side of that part with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear. Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been expelled from the body.
Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been expelled from the body. And when the water has been expelled, take some paper or cloth, and put one end of it in the ear and extend the other end to the fire until it is burned by the fire.
And also put and take another cloth and do it as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and squeeze that one with a tube so that what is said about the evacuating pipe is fulfilled.
More in the extraction of beasts entering into that ear, if it is a small beast, take it out similarly and to its likeness, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large beast which causes pain to the sense of hearing, then administer the extraction with gestures and anointings, and the cause of it is considered lighter than all the other causes that happen in the ear.
Moreover in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations and do not confuse your cure, then it is advisable that you expose the ear to the sun.
And therefore if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or with subtle anointings, but if no cause appears, then take a pipe, narrow and wide at the end, whose form is like this: Insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can suffer; and suck it strongly with a forceful suction, and make well-observed movements, until all the worms are expelled.
If it does not obey your treatment, then block and close the circuit of the vein with wax in the same way as we have said; then administer distilled liquids which the ancients have already proven in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be that with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear, using this instrument of which this is the form: Make it of silver or of brass, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and placed below.
And then it will be as if they are filling what is in the cavity of the vein, where it will be necessary here. And if you want, take the rod and envelop it decently in the extremity of the cloth, and put oil or juice of some herb, or whatever you want of these medicines into the vein — which is in the ear —, and then insert the rod with cloth below and press with your hand a tempered compression so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the hearing and the patient feels the oil penetrating.
And that which is infiltrated in the ear should already be scaled with a small focus. And beware that the cause which you distillate in the ear is not too cold, because ear medications do not tolerate this.
Chapter 7.
On the treatment of obstruction of the ears.
Some observed that some infants have non-perforated naval areas, and this also occurs in some men, obstruction in the middle of the ear due to a plague or flesh growing in it; and this obstruction sometimes happens in the passage of the ear's duct, which doesn't allow for hearing, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which occurs in its passage, which doesn't allow for hearing, is among the major conditions of difficult healing.
And in that case where you achieve hearing, take care to place the patient's ear in the sunlight and observe it. And then if you see apparent obstruction, open it with a subtle spatula, of which this is the shape:
If the extremity of it, in which the width is small, one part is pointed and the other not, and the spatula is of two smooth sides so that it does not make a lesion on the ear.
And so if the obstruction is caused by flesh born in the ear or in the middle of it, then apply a subtle and incisive instrument with vehement facility until all the flesh is removed.
And if the obstruction is in the hole of the ear, then take a subtle iron and heat it in a fire for a little while, and place it in the middle of the ear.
And so if you have felt the obstruction with the instrument that the patient feels with ease, due to the gravity of hearing, relieve the oppression of it with ease; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And place a poultice in the ear, made of wax according to the quantity of the size of the wound, which you have enveloped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take cotton and soak it in vinegar and sprinkle powdered treatise on it and use it; and if the ear has become infected, then remove the poultice and replace it with another one which you will have wrapped in wax mixed with rose oil, until the infection is cauterized; and heal it until it is cured.
When there is an excessive flow of blood, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use another treatment that restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 3.
On the treatment of a disease that causes inflammation to the eyelids.
Athezil, which causes inflammation to the eyelids of the eyes, sometimes is humid, sometimes is dry.
Therefore, hold those in your hands or with your fingers, and cut them away from the roots of their causes, and apply pressure on the affected areas following the treatment.
When there is pain with a flow of blood, then you should cauterize those areas with a subtle, lancet-shaped cautery.
And the best cauterization is when the incisions and wet wounds return to health once their causes are removed; and when they are cauterized with a hot iron, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Treatment of cataract that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Wet spots appear on the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause which is similar to cataract in its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called cataract.
It is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid and underneath.
Therefore, the operation on them is what you should consider if the growth proceeds from it in that which appears of the eyelid and is obstructing the entire sight; and the cause of it is laziness.
Then make an incision on that with a lancet, and carefully remove the entire growth with ease until it comes out, and elevate that with a clamp and cut that off.
And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from that which the angle of it, restoring and fleshing out.
And if the growth is leaning towards the inner parts of the eyelid, remove it from the surface, then take up the eyelid and with a clamp remove the growth, or if you need to make an incision, press on the entire area, and if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, this will not harm in any case.
And then apply the treatment, wash the wound with salty water; and cure the area with liquid that promotes healing inside until it is healthy.
Head or Chapter
Of the treatment of the eyelid wound on the underside of the eye.
A stye is a grievous thing which is generated in the linings of the lower eyelid, and mostly occurs in children, it aggravates the eyes of those who have it and makes them blind; and they cannot look at the clarity of the sun because tears are collected in their eyes.
And because of this they rub their eyes with their hands for a long time, and they sleep with their hands on their eyes; and the eyelids of their eyes become humid, which already has been covered by inflammation and swelling, and apparent acne in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the hardness inside their eyes.
And a certain method of operation is in that the patient holds his sick head in his hand, and then holds a cloth of linen and of wool, and makes a circle according to the quantity which contains the entire affected area, and then places that on it and presses with the fingers from all sides so that hardness is accumulated in the middle of the circle, and then puts it in the middle of that humid place with spittle incident on the fissure for the width, and the fissure is not larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
More in the press that you find the entire code within which you arrive at the liver, because in the more dispositional processes of the liver it proceeds by fissure according to the form of white gray matter.
Then extract that which you have enveloped between the layers of the said parts, and turn it over with your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure so that with the spatulum you do not reach the hole and that you do not touch that.
More if it does not appear to your liver at the beginning of the fissure, more that you adjust in the fissure a small one with facility until the liver proceeds; and then extract that which we have said; and then submerge the clothes of this in water and wine and place them on the area and strain those with powders.
And thus apply that you sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that it absorbs the remainder of that humidity.
And then heal it until it is healthy.
More if there appears on the spot a hot aposteme, then heal it with cold plasters until it is healthy.
Chapter 11.
Of manual treatments of the touch of urine.
When in the eyelids of the urine there are born ulcers that obstruct the natural passages and become inflamed, then those tumors of the urine cause symptoms of illness such as constant tears and softening of the eyelid and web-like tissue, which is a cause of destruction of the urine, which is called touching of the urine, and it is cured in four ways: either with cautery by fire; or with sharp medicine as it will be said in the chapter on cautery; or it is touched with incision and suture; or with canes as I will direct.
And then it is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your thigh; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, well; and if not, insert a needle in the one where the faithful thread of the suture is, and make the needle penetrate with the thread from below, and this should be — near the edge of the eyelid where the natural threads are — near the threads, and pull the thread to the divisions above with the eyelid, and turn that one to the correct position.
And then put in the inner part of the eyelid, below the obstructed passages, a spatula or a needle to make an incision from the major lacrimal to the minor lacrimal; and then pull out the thread and place below the eyelid a small piece of cotton or cloth, and then apply it to the eyelid with a bandage, and let it be like the figure of a fly's wing.
More emperor has said that the figure is according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for that which is diversified in men, for those of them it is indicated that a large quantity is incident on the eyelid according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
And then put the spatula over the two lines that you have sewn, and begin from the larger tear duct to the smaller tear duct. And if your crack is near the natural skin so as it is the thickness of a kidney.
And then put the hook in one of the two corners of the wound, and then excise that entire area, and then adjust with the suture the two lips of the flesh with thread or wire, and remove the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of the threads on the eyebrows with some envisioned causes, if you want to do it, and if not, do not cure.
And then remove the suture of the threads within three days or four, and then cure that.
And if you want, remove the patch without suture, and cure it with what is excised and constrained, for the eyelid is elevated by the relaxation of the wound and its aggregation; the best suture is minor, and thus I have said to the ancient ones of taxation.
More emphasis is placed on soliciting the patient, and it is a good operation, and not something to be feared.
And there is another manipulation in examination, which is that you make a sign above the eyelid in the shape of a fig leaf, and then lift the eyelid about three inches separated and gathered according to this form:
But if it's not possible to do that, to have the inches, and this is not equalized, then take a needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert one end of the thread near the larger tear duct, and the other end of the thread near the smaller tear duct, and adjust between the ties so that the threads are equal, and then elevate your hand with elevation equally, elevate all the skin over which the sign was made as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound to suture, and heal that interior area so that it is healthy.
But if there occurs an abscess on your incision or your suture, then apply that abscess with wax and to the surroundings, with bandage.
And some times it happens to the eyelid that the stitches are converted into scars, therefore be careful when you use in that what we have spoken of about incision; but a suture is in each case more artificial.
To treat gout in this manner: and it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the shape which is defined according to what has been recounted; and then by art make two canulas or two subtle astelas from which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them is less than the width of the spatulum. And you have already cut into the extremities of each partition, where you hold the threads.
Then add subtly under what is superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canulas of each partition with a strong ligature, and leave it for several days, so that the thread will die from the constriction and be denied and will fall out by itself.
But if it is prolonged, then cut the ligature with the scissors, and then cure the wound until it is healed.
Therefore when it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not puncture.
And this is the method of making two canulas which you make according to this form: and neither more nor less in quantity of length and width.
Chapter twelve.
Of the elevation of piercing pains in the heel with a needle when the skin is hard.
When they are unnatural pains, hard and rough and piercing the heels, then the operation on them is that you take a subtle needle and place it in that weak and thin vein, and then adjust the extremities of the patient and massage each one in a subtle manner. And let the length of the veins be of a quantity of one palm.
And then you combine another subtle vein with it on the patient's arm, and massage the extremities of that one if you want to.
And then put the patient's sick head in its proper place, and let it be near the window for the sake of your work being declared, for this is a subtle and minor operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the adjusted skin which has need of ingenuity, and make it penetrate the eyelid gently until you extract that from under the natural skin.
And then pull the skin from underneath and insert it into the axis, and let the pains be one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand towards it so that the skin is adjusted to the axis on the eyelid with the natural skin.
If the ailment is irritating the elbow and not healing the skin, irritate the elbow on the affected side of the thigh, where you have applied a plaster, until the irritation of the elbow has passed to the upper part.
And apply that to the vision of the wound, for then you will irritate the elbow and the thigh, and wrap each one and close the wound, and leave it closed for two or three days, until the skin adheres to its proper place and forms over that good flesh.
And if the skin is too short, then adjust a long skin from the natural skins, and elevate it to that one, or let it be until it is lengthened sufficiently to occupy the space, and then elevate it.
Chapter thirteen.
Of the cure of the disease which appears in the lower eyelid.
When there is a disease in the wound, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on its own, either to the right or to the left side, due to poor consolidation of a wound or of a cut or of a cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this contraction is either natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor consolidation of a wound or of cuts or of cauterizations, or by resemblance to other poorly treated diseases.
During the operation on him, you should make this consolidation and separate his lips, and place between them a piece of cloth, and tie them so that they are healed.
And do not think that you should use treatment on him for the causes which dry out and constrain, because if you do this it will return to an even worse state than before.
Use on that cause which softens, such as fenugrec, and mix it with water in which the seeds of flax are cooked and crushed, or with a decoction of plantain, which has been dissolved in oil, and submerge the piece in it, and treat it with this.
And the treasure of your cure is that you should penetrate to such an extent that it is not consolidated according to the shape it had at the beginning.
And this operation which we have spoken of, is nothing but a correction of the ulceration that does not restore the shape of the place as it was before.
Chapter 14.
Of the cure of ulcers which are made on the eyelids.
This ulcer which is made on the eyelids, which is properly called an ulcer; and it is of this some natural, others accidental.
Pain from an injury is caused by a blow or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar things.
And the method of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread penetrates through both extremities of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh to the separated parts with the needle and sew it with the needle, and cut it with a broad spatulum. And thus if the shape of the eyelid returns to its proper form, well; and if not, take the thread and pass it through the split figure, and with that turn back the eyelid, and make two fissures on the side of the eyelid.
And if the extremities of the two fissures are at two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and let them form an angle where when they come together a figure is formed by them.
And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
Then stitch the flesh in the amount that is the edge of the needle, next to it, which is the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and bind them with a thread of flax; and then treat them with the same things that we have said about softening medicines and poultices, so that they may be healed.
And if the eyelid is torn by a tear or suture or cautery, then it is good that you sew with a flat needle on the skin of the eyelid, as has been previously described. And then separate the poultice between the two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the sermon on the cure of the eyelid when it is torn or dropped, that runs in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of the eyelid, and this is in the form of diverse poultices.
And the skilled artisan always prepares an aid in each manner that is possible for it to make the figure return to its natural form, or near to it, and that patient according to what is convenient for them of the operation and of the instruments in the best dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many men in such a way that the eyelid is solidified next to the white of the eye, and is prohibited from ease of movement and its natural functions, then it is good that you insert the extremity of the tool under the eyelid, and lift it up, or stretch it towards the corner.
And then you carefully dissect the adherence with a subtle spatula, which should not be sharpened by the dissections, having obtained a small opening so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remain with the spatula that does not touch the vein with its sharpness.
And let your dissection be such that it excises the adherence with ease, so that the eyelid is returned to its natural form and the entire adherence is healed.
And then put salt water in the vein, which you will wash with it; or dissolve a little of that substance in the water.
And then separate the eyelid from the vein with a thread of linen, and place on the vein a woolen cloth soaked in warm water, and for three days use consolidative treatments until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
On the dissection of the nail and the protrusion of flesh of the tear ducts.
Know that the nail is according to two manners, either it is nervous, and is similar to a hard, subtle callus; or it is not-nervous, similar to white congealed humidity, which when the iron touches it, or the tongs take hold of it, it is cut off and the tongs are not fixed to it.
And both eyes do not comprehend except for the larger tear duct which little by little covers the vision and prohibits light and the movement of the wheel.
More of the method of operating in the incision of it is that the patient holds his head tied up high, and then operates on its heels, and raises the eyelid with his hand, and then collects the nail with a pair of pincers and extracts it from the divided parts. And then take a needle and insert into it a thread of horse or of ox or of cow, or of similar, or of strong wire, or double the extremity of the needle little by little and put it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with wire the nail; and extract it from the divided parts, and strip with the thread the flesh of the nail which is the pupil. And thus you follow it with the thread to the back of it.
And then you cut the remainder in the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula or with small forked instruments, and separate the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that by the incision of it there does not appear continuous flows of tears.
And sometimes the nail is removed from the sole of the foot, stretched out or held in a vice, as we have said, and then extracted with a curved spatula the tissue of which this is the form:
And be careful that on the spatula you do not touch the corneal layer and that it enters into the rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then put in the wound a little of crushed salt or fat made from resin, and let it be until the next day; and then treat that with water that is suitable for healing.
And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed on that toe, then this type of nail is treated with medicines, and is healed in the same way as others, and restored as recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you open the wound of the patient and take a subtle spatula made from sharpened steel in this form: with subtlety. And if it happens that it is hardened and is confused and the mixture enters into the wound, then distill from your work on the wound made of resin or with hot wax or with crushed salt, and cover the wound until the next day.
And then place a thread on that operation so that everything that is of it may be removed, unless the contrary happens and an abscess forms in the wound, for which you will leave that, and treat the beginning of the abscess until it is healed.
And then continue your operation on that reason until it is healed.
The protrusion of the tear-producing flesh, if it is not in the wound for great discomfort, should be suspended with a bandage; and cut that part from that one side, and do not make the incision so that you do not cut the flow of tears.
And then apply a cool cloth to the tear duct and make it sinewy until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
Of the incision of swollen lymph nodes and of that which is born from flesh adjusted in the wound.
Some growths in the wounds of some people are born from reddish flesh, and it is placed over the pupil, or applied near or pressed on the eyelids and forces the eyelids to shut tightly together at the red border and it resembles the rose of a pomegranate.
More, the operation on him is that the patient holds his sick head in a tie; and then uncover the wounds of that one and collect all that flesh with convenient bandages for it, and hold it with a forceps or with tongs; and then cut the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the incision, and beware of the wound that you do not let it escape from your operation.
And let your incision be the one with which you make those cuts on the spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forked instruments with which you collect abscesses according to the shape that will come closest to this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the hole with trisa salt, or distill it into powder and apply it like rouge, along with other corrosive medicines, and place on top a piece of cotton soaked in warm album to ensure the aposteme does not suppurate.
And if you suspect some cause of gangrene and it is confirmed by cautious examination, and you fear suppurating aposteme, then cleanse the hole and treat that aposteme with the thing that caused that aposteme, and apply the thread over the operated area until it is healed, and similarly do on the adjusted flesh which adheres to the hole of this special case.
But first make sure that you avoid all cure of the fresh wound by natural or accidental means, working with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is sufficient for that operation.
Chapter 18.
Collection of sweat from the ankle.
Sweat that comes as red veins which are applied to the ankle and prohibit the movement of the vessel, and they develop the ankle over a length of days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the ankle in which sweat is, is strong and in it there is no other disease than sweat, then you collect that sweat.
And it is that you command the patient to put his sick leg in this position, and then suspend those veins with an onion or with two, according to your prudence; and let that onion be of subtle duplication according to this form:
or two onions gradually in a container according to this form:
And then veins are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and you extract the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins being emptied of the ankle and being relieved.
And beware that you do not touch the ankle with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, be very firm in your operation so as not to cut except those veins.
And when you have completed, then you distill on the ankle clear wine or red wine for that with sharp acidity it cuts what is collected from the sweat.
More often if that is not possible to gather everything at that time, then apply a plaster to whatever reduces the pain of it, and leave it for several days until the pain of it is calmed and ensured against apostema or abscess.
And return to it according to the method that the doctor will guide until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the forearms:
Chapter nineteen.
Of reduction of fractures to the nose.
When you treat a fracture with a cautery or with sharp medicine according to what is previously described and it is not healed, then do not put anything in it except for a dressing on the abscess, and extract all the humidity that is in it and from the pus until the bone is exposed.
And then when the bone is exposed and there is found in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the shape:
And it is called a rough scraper, and let it be made of iron, and let the head be rounded so that it can scratch, which will be made pointed by sharpening with a file or an aliskalfati for subtle sharpening (such as is in the following figure).
Stop that on the affected area of the bone, and return it to its proper place among the tendons, and press your hand gently so that you understand that the corruption is superficial.
And let some dressings be made, and restore the area with drying and astringent treatments.
Then if the area is consolidated and is covered with good flesh and is separated from the body of the wound and remains for forty days, and is not renewed and is not suppurated and does not happen an accident, then you will know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is not in the skill but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: which is that you discover with iron or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take three broths according to this form:
Let the extremity of the iron be triangular, and its point be first sharpened to the extremity thus many times.
And stop that on the bone, and let it be near the tear duct; and move your hand a little to the well, and return your hand with the broths until it penetrates all the bone, and the patient feels for what is pressing, that it seems to come out as much as you put your hand.
Therefore, restore the area with medicines that dry and tighten, thus as you would apply heat.
Therefore, when the flesh and the area are hardened, the matter that flows to the parts of the body from the abscess returns to the nose, therefore it is easier to put on the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the prominence of the ankle.
When the ankle is swollen in its entirety and does not suffer from pain or diminution, then it is good to massage the patient, and apply warmth, and make scarifications on the neck with suction for a good outcome; and apply a liniment on the ankle made of vinegar and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and apply a plaster on the ankle with many powders.
And the method of the powders is that you take pieces of flax, many threads, and each piece should be folded in four layers; make from those threads.
And then apply those one on top of the other according to the quantity that the ankle needs. And then apply on top of those a strong bandage with a tight and firm dressing; and repeat the suction with scarification; and then remove the cupping glasses and keep the ankle straight during the day and the night.
More often the ligament is softened, then it is necessary that it be more stretched.
And then put the ligament near the day and night in the same way as we have said.
And if the joint has already been reduced, well, and if not, then apply a plaster with powders and strictures and blisters until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
Of the incision of the prominence of the tunic of the uvea (or, more likely, "Of the incision of the protrusion of the coat of the
When there is a disruption in the coat of the uvea, and then it is prominent and protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of rice, and the shape of the man is marred by this, and you want to cut into it, then the operation on it is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle at the root of the uvea on the lower part, and then put the other needle in the double fold of the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and let the first needle slide according to its disposition; and then cut the place of the double fold and lift with that the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and pull it strongly.
And then extract the needle and pause over the woolen cloth infused in a white album of liquid, and insert it so that the thread goes into the wound.
And then heal the wound with water that comforts until the wound is healed.
And in some places gather the entirety of the partition with a circle of cloth around the wound adjusted to great prominence, and then be perforated with subtle spatula that comes to the surface of the wound, and clear the whitish moisture, and descend the wound and enter as much.
And then strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the treatment of ulcers.
This disease that is called ulcer, is not but an abscess which is adjusted in the wound resembling descending water and it is not that.
More to the method of operating on it, is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and right seat, and then take the head in your hands from both sides and bind it so that you see the abscess coming to the lower parts, and then be dried and not descend, and be stopped the flow, and the disease sees the causes thus as it seems.
And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
If the descent to the healthy state is not prepared with what we have said, then make the patient sit between your thighs and take a subtle spatula and rub it gently on the conjunctiva and cornea in the corner (in the place of the lacrimal gland), until the foreign substance is removed from the eye.
Then when it is removed, you distill in a tube hot water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
And treat it with the other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the treatment of the descending water of the eye, or On the cure for cataracts/eye problems descending from the eye.
We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which ones it is convenient to pierce, now we will declare that according to health.
Then make the patient sit between your thighs on a chair and lift their eye, with a tight bandage.
And place your left hand near the eyelid of the eye with water, if the water is in the left eye; or your right hand, if it is in the right eye.
And then take your right hand and grasp the left one, if the wound is on the left; or take your left hand and grasp the right one, if the wound is on the right.
And then pause at the extremity of the left side near the crown due to the thickness of the vein in the white of the wound on the inner part of the tear duct, and then press the left finger with force and turn your hand towards that place.
And then penetrate into the white of the wound and feel that the left one has already been pierced due to an empty vein.
And take the measurement of the chamber of the left eye to the size of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the crown of the wound; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the wound through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then pause on the left at the place where the water is, and lift your hand in one motion to another, and thus if the water descends so much, then the patient will see above that which they had looked at before, and also in the following wound.
And then rest for a little while; thus if the water has descended, then you will put aside that other step before the left one is touched.
And then when it is seated and not descended, then extract the bile with ease, and turn that hand little by little, and dissolve in water a small amount of clear salt of gemstone and wash the wound with that; and place on the wound cotton or stopes or wool soaked in oil of rose and album of urine and tie it with that.
Many of us and those who are of our time place on that a truss of album of urine.
And if it does not obey your bile to enter the wound due to its hardness — for it is one of the hardest things that the wound has, and a motive for men — then take the spatula, which is named albucid, of which this is the form:
And then pierce that joint, and do not push your hand through the hole, and it is not so that you should make a way for the bile to the subtle place.
Then introduce the bile as we have said.
And give the complement of your work, let the patient be prepared in a dark and quiet house, where they sleep on their side with two in attendance, and let them be prohibited from all movement.
And place in the nature of it that water by which its nature is cleaned, and do not move their head to the right or left part at all.
And let the ligament according to its disposition enter the third day.
And then dislodge that thing from the dark and foul-smelling mass, and make visible the hidden sight, and make him see some causes, and then return the ligament into the seventh day.
And do not attempt to do this at the hour of treatments or at least until the infusion. Be careful that you administer this so that the water may gently pass through with great and vehement regard.
If a postrema or abscess occurs, then be careful to dislodge the ulcer before the seventh day, and correct that which has caused the abscess.
Then you will absolve the sight of it and place upon the face of its mouth for which the evacuation of it is regulated, it exists in the dark mass for some days.
And then let it be extracted from that mass gradually and investigated into its causes.
And know that in such a case the disciple of vision is not excused from some visits, and then you will be skilled about the operation.
And it has reached us from some of those who are at the Artach, and some have said that fire is made in the Ayraq, a perforated magma through which water flows.
Maybe the emperor has not seen it in our land, which would have perfected this, nor is it legitimate according to some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of remedies by which it will be applied to those who ignore them:
And they are made of iron or of steel properly, and the extremities of theirs are to this subtlety triangular, the extremity sharp thus as that is the form.
Chapter 24.
Of the healing of flesh in the nose.
When in the nose there are born diverse flesh growths adapted from which some cause is assembled with the tail of a fish called polyp, or a polypus; and this sickness is called polypus for its resemblance to that fish represented. And of it is flesh that is cancerous, rough, of dark color; and of it is flesh that is not of dark color.
Therefore in that which is in these flesh growths not deceitful nor cancerous, it is good to make the sickness seep between your hands and put it in the sun, and breathe into its nostrils, and prick the tissue once in those growths. And then extract that from the divided parts of the flesh, and then dissect what you have comprehended of those with sharp subtlety of one part within which you know that all the flesh is already removed; for if it remains of it a cause of which the removal is possible, then you will use one of the subtle instruments with ease within which from its removal a cause. More often if the wound is bloody or acidic with an aposteme (or ulcer), then stop that which flows; or if it's one of the malignant ulcers, then touch and cauterize that within which there will be separated blood and all the cavities will be removed.
And then let it be put into the nose, a mixture of vinegar or wine and water. But if the nose is opened and its process humidity enters the palate, then know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that the flesh is nothing in the purulent ulcers of the nose's bones to which separation has not been achieved.
Therefore it follows that you will put a thread of linen to which some thickness is added, and knot the thread with knots, and place between each knot the quantity of the said or measured, and anoint the patient and put one end of the thread in the nose with a straw or another instrument by which it is possible.
And then it is made so that the aura is generated, which attracts the upper odor to the point where it penetrates the channels of the nostrils, and it is ejected over the upper throat, because repeated vomits seem to be the cause of this action for the schools, and it is a legitimate reason for one who wants to do it.
And then pause with the two extremities of the vein, one extremity that goes over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a closure of flesh to the nodes that are on the vein, and make it so that you know that the flesh is already at the nodes of the vein.
And then extract the vein, and pause on the nose with the abstraction of blood a little, and make it so for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that is rotten of the flesh.
And then at the end of the treatment, put in the nose a tube of lead for several days until it is healed.
More if there are signs of recovery that appear, make use of that.
And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head which causes distilled oils and medicines to be in the nostrils:
Make it of silver or of copper, which is similar to a small covered lamp, thus like a small funnel, and the middle similarly.
And if you want, make a closed cane like a reed, and the handle of the instrument should be at the top, flat and uncovered; on which you should put a hand in the back of it, with which you hold that which you extract from it, or that which you want from its juices and sucked causes.
Chapter 25.
Of the ulcers born on the outer extremities of the nose.
Ulcers born on the outer extremities of the nose are called green ulcers, and are treated and anointed for several days during which time one must guard oneself from it.
And for this reason you should write that at the beginning of the appearance of it, and inherit all that. Then apply a cauterization or medicine that burns to the area where it was, or a treatment in place of it.
If the incision is delayed until it becomes swollen, then consider if it is hardened, of dark color and with little sensation, do not touch that part with iron for fear of causing an aposteme or cancer; because many times this has been seen to happen to one who performs this incision, due to great malice upon the one on whom it was performed.
And if the aposteme is of a yellowish touch and not of dark color, and at times when incision is possible on the entire thing, then evacuate the patient and perform the incision without fear, and treat the area with that which expels and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of the suture of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by a wound or by similarity.
It is known that when there occurs a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, little confidence is placed in that operation except by some men.
Therefore, when you come upon some cause of these, consider if it is a fresh wound with good blood, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and carefully treat that area until it is healed.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is necessary that you extract each part of its own mucous membrane until healthy flesh appears. And then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture and strengthen them, and on top of them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and crushed tristicum, and place on the powder a piece of plaster or another consolidating plaster, and leave that poultice on for two or three days, and then remove it and change the plaster and leave it on until the wound is scarring and the edges are separated, and then heal with ointment until it is healthy.
The method of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity to the edge as you know how to do.
Chapter 27.
Of extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided teeth.
Some swollen nodes appear on the divided teeth of their lips, some abscesses similar to grass of oats, and some of them are minor and some are major.
Therefore, you should convert the lips and wounds each one of those hardnesses of the whole part, and then with the abscess drained, fill the place with tristicum powder so that the blood is restrained, and then wash with warm water and treat the place with what is stipulated, until it is healthy.
Chapter 28.
Of the incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Gather the excess flesh over the adjusted gum, which the ancients called albulus, and see that you suspend or hold that one with a forceps or clamps, and make an incision in that place, and let the blood flow or the wound.
And then apply a dressing on the wounded location, either with astringent powders or excitative ones.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
Of the root of rotten teeth.
When on the surface of the teeth that are divided, separated, and in the gums that are adjusted, scorched, rough, and some growths are blackened and made citrine or green within which the gum is seen to be corrupted and the loose teeth are decayed.
And then see that you make the patient sit between your knees and place their head on your thigh, and examine the teeth in which those roughnesses and causes of bad appearance appear, like sand within which no cause of harm remains, and this comes from blackness and citrinity and other things that are deformed.
Therefore, if the blockage is in the beginning of the digestive process, that's what it is; and if not, then you will pass the digestive product through the other days and to the second and third intestine until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have need of various shapes and forms of mallets according to what is prepared for your operation. And because the mallet with which the tooth is extracted from its partition is different from the mallet with which it is extracted between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of mallets should be prepared by you, whichever ones you will see:
Chapter thirty.
Of the extraction of teeth.
When you treat the tooth of its pain with all skill and delay in the entire extraction of it, because it is not a trivial cause that should suffice to remove it when it is eradicated, because it is a subtle substance involved in the excuse for the extraction of it.
Before you attempt to extract the tooth from the patient, you should be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, because many times the pain deceives the patient and they think it's in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and then the pain doesn't cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Therefore, when you have certified what the aching tooth is, and what you know to be, then seek out in the circuit of the tooth with spatula in which some virtue is, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gum of the entire part, and then rub that one with the fingers or with subtle fork at the beginning small by small until that congeals.
And then put in the strong tongs holding for good eloquence or strong structure, and place the head of the patient between the teeth that you hold so that it does not move, and pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
And therefore if it is not forced out, then take one of those instruments, and put that under the entire part with facility and effort, to ease the removal of it, so that it is done from the beginning.
But if the tooth is damaged or decayed, then seek that you fill with cloth that hole and tighten it at the extremity of a subtle thread so that it is not torn in the hour of your construction over it, holding it.
And seek that you open with excavation in the circuit of the entire part of the gum and guard with your strength that you do not break it and rend and tear a part of it, and return to the patient for the malice that is less than the primary pain of it.
And beware that you do not perform what ignorant and arrogant barbers do in their pretension and boldness regarding the eradication of it, which they do not administer as we have recommended; because many witnessed things bring about great maladies in men, which are more difficult to treat, and the roots of them are all or some of them, or that you extract that with some bones of the jaw, as many witnessed things have testified.
And for the eradication of it, let the mouth be washed with six or seven bitter salts.
And if there is an efflux of blood through the mouth, as many witnessed things have shown, then sprinkle a certain quantity of ashes and dust on the wound, and if that ash does not work, apply cautery.
The shape of the forceps and tongs should be subtle with which the tooth is pulled at the beginning being of long extraction, with a short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you have to work with them.
And let them be like this, of thick handle between so that when you grip them they are not bent, but rather short and slender.
And let them be made of Indian iron, well-made and slender, and in the slenderness of those let there be teeth which one enters into the other and grips with strong construction, and some witnessed things, the slenderness of those is the shape of a bird's beak, which has the name ciconia, that is guanta, and are of strong construction.
Chapter twenty-one.
On the eradication of teeth and extraction of bones from fractured jaws.
When you need to eradicate a tooth that is fractured due to some cause, then it is advisable that you apply a poultice on the area with a bandage for a day or two until the area becomes softened; and then insert the handle of the tongs or forceps, the extremities of which are assembled at the beak of a hook called ciconia or guanta, the shape of the forceps:
The extremities of them should be made like a file or a rasp.
And if it does not obey to your efforts with these forceps or tongs, then it is advisable that you cut into the root and scrape away all the flesh and insert the instrument which has the name "atali", which is a small lever the shape of which is this:
And let it be of brief extremity, thick and not bent so that it is not fractured.
Therefore, if by this the root is cut through, well and good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which the following are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at the extremity in which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a subtle, pointed extremity.
And thus helped with this instrument having two grooves of which this is the shape suitable for the following: and with other instruments which I will describe in the scraping of teeth; because it is made with this instrument which is assembled to a large file, and this is the shape:
of the triangular pointed extremity, whether twisted or short, which should have some thickness, and not be sharpened so that it is not scratched.
And you should know that the instruments for the teeth are moved thus and similarly the other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisan in the art, finds for himself according to what it means for the operation and various ailments; because there are ailments for which the ancients did not make or even think of a proper instrument, due to the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is fractured, or if it is broken, then weigh carefully on that location with what is convenient for the instruments and the forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help yourself with the gesture of which this is the shape:
And let there be on the opening a small, gradually increasing tightness, and let it be constricted or held at the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the whole bone is fortified; and then restore the area with medicines suitable for this condition.
If there is a small perforation in the bone, then take away that part of the decay and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter thirty-two.
On the treatment of teeth that protrude above the others.
When the teeth protrude not according to their natural body, in that case the form is flawed, and especially when it happens to women, and especially to venerable old ladies; therefore I advise you to consider: if a tooth has no contact with another tooth, and there is no possible arrangement or alignment of it, then extract that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut that one with this instrument, the shape of which is like this; and it should be made from Indian steel, extremely sharp.
And let your incision be the one with which you cut it, for several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and let it not be sharpened by another of the teeth.
And if there is an eminent stone that appears in the bile, then clean it with a file made of iron from India, of which this is the form:
And let it be all of iron from India and with an edge; and let it be with many small points, like a file, with which the needles are made, with which the tooth is cleaned little by little over many days with ease, so that there is not another tooth that grows and falls. And then anoint that end with a bandage, and give it to the patients to lick.
And if it is a tooth of which one part is loose and the tongue touches it, then make sure that you smooth out the roughness so that the splinter of that fraction is hidden and swallowed, and is pressed down so that the tongue does not wound it and the speech is not corrupted.
Chapter thirty-three.
Of the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver wire.
When the teeth in front are knocked out by concussion and removal through percussion or extraction, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated it with medications that dry up the area, and your treatment has not been effective, then so that nothing is cast into those that are strengthened with gold wire and not silver, because silver becomes black and immediately turns to powder after a few days, but gold in no time is changed.
And let the thread be of such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the thread and take double its length between two healthy teeth, and then tie knots with two twists of the thread between two molars, or one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then pull the suture back to the part where you started, and hold your hand with ease and skill so that it is not bitten.
And let your tightening be such that you hold the thread between the roots of the teeth so that it does not come loose.
And then cut off the excess threads with forceps or scissors, and add them to each place as needed, and hide them between the healthy tooth and the molar, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then leave that thus tightened like a Roman.
But if it is loose or broken, hold it or them with another thread in such a manner for all the time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two molars, thus with these threads tied:
And when it happens that one or both teeth are returned to their proper place in the jaw, and the tissues are reconnected as we have recommended, and the gums recover.
And do not do this unless you are skilled and knowledgeable.
And some bridgework is made from the bones of a cow, and is shaped like a tooth, and is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and is tightened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter thirty-four.
Of the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which comes with the tongue sometimes is natural to man, or is accidental and happens by a wound which has already consolidated.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, their head being held firm in your tie; and you lift their tongue, and then cut the nervous ligament according to the width by which the tongue is bound.
But if there is any hardness or knot in it, and this has been caused by the consolidation of the wound, then you cut and divide it by the width through which you have cut the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
And beware that there is not made a fissure in the press of the flesh and that you separate the artery here and come blood flux.
Then wash the vestiges of the incision with warm water or wine or cold water; and then put a clean cloth on it, which is the method by which you hold the patient's tongue in each wound so that it is not consolidated into another ulcer.
More often if blood flux happens, put on the place a burnt and crushed verdigris; more often if the blood comes out, then cauterize the place with a broad and flat cautery that is convenient for this purpose. And then heal it with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Certain ulcers happen on the tongue, an aposteme similar to a small wound, hindering the tongue from its natural operation; and so it is magnified until it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient sitting in front of you and examine the aposteme.
And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, in which the patient has no feeling, then do not touch that which is cancer.
And if it declines to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then put the ankle in a poultice, and cut that with a subtle spatula, and cut from the entire affected part; and if blood comes out during the time of your operation, then stop the bleeding immediately, so that the blood is restrained.
And then return to your work, until you have treated it with a complement of wine and vinegar and salt; and cure it with another cure adapted to that until it is healed.
Chapter thirty-six.
Of the extraction of abscesses from both ears and of that which is born in the throat and of other abscesses.
When there is a swelling in the throat, then there are glands that are gathered together, which protrude outward and are called ears, which when you treat with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little feeling, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron because of the flow of blood; let it be until it is matured, and then you will operate on it, or it will break by itself.
And if it is of a white color, redness, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what is thought to be the onset of the disease.
And the operation on it is what you consider, during your operation, if the apostema has already been treated with a complete or partial cautery; and then examine the patient in the sunlight, and let their head be in a raised position, and open their mouth, and the servant should hold between their hands to press the tongue of the patient with an instrument of noble movement, from which this is the form:
And let it be made of silver or copper, and let it be subtle as a knife.
Then when you press on that tongue and it shows you the apostema, and you see above it the raised vein, then take the needle and put it in the amenal, and pull it to the outer parts from there as much as you can. Or also that which you pull out, some cause of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument of which this is the form:
Or also that which you pull out, some cause of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument of which this is the form: and it is assembled with forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, such that the orifice of each one of them is in the hollow of the other, with sharp edges, which should be of iron or forged.
If this instrument is not at your present, then describe that spatula from which this is the shape of: And be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And since you have made an incision, make the other according to this same method of incision, and apply the incision to the patient's wound with cold water.
If there is an efflux of blood, apply water from the decoction of the seed of milgrana or of the leaf of mirtra and similar to that for stopping causes, so that the flow of blood is restrained, and treat that which is sick.
And some abscesses appear in the groin or other swollen parts, and incise those according to what was said and written about the incision of two similar swellings.
And I have already treated a woman for an abscess which had formed in her groin, the abscess was of a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed the groin, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and she had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she would have been near death if the treatment had been delayed by one or two days.
And the abscess had already pushed so much that it had formed two openings between which a pus flowed out through two channels.
Then I cut through the flesh and put my finger in one of the openings, and pulled it out, and a large amount of pus was thrown out from him, and I made an incision in the other opening to meet with the first one, and I forced open his mouth, and compressed his tongue, and then I put my finger in the opening into the abscess.
And then I cut out a large part of it, and there didn't flow much blood from it except for a little bit. Therefore the abscess of that woman was completely removed, and she began to drink water, and then took a diet, therefore I did not see any more discharge from that abscess for a long time, and another abscess formed in its place, which discharged between the space where it was prolonged.
Then I applied an iron and cauterized the abscess of it, then a fire came from the application; and then I walked around and did not know what God would do with that woman.
Chapter 37.
On the discharge of the umbilical cord when it becomes abscessed.
When the fever is high in the uvula, and it's swollen and long, it's called perpendicular; and if it's in the area of the throat and it's thick and round, then it's called bubo.
More often when it's cured with what we've said in the division, and not conflicting with your cure, and especially if several times the aposteme is cauterized and it's subtle, then beware that you incise what is accumulated around; and if it's to that length, and it's bloody, of dark color or black, and not in its center, then beware that you touch the incision of it, for there is fear regarding the patient.
And when you see that according to the method that has been said about its whiteness and length, you should seize the patient and press their tongue with an instrument which processes its shape and return the nail to the new moon, and pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two molars.
And beware that you do not incise it except what is adjusted according to the natural term of its addition, for if you incise more of it, you will damage its speech.
And then apply the incision, using the same one that we have recommended in the incision of two sides, and cure that which is inside until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision, it is good to use art in the cauterization so that fear is removed, and the handling of the cautery on them is not but with sharp water, and it is that you put the head of the patient in a high place, and then press the tongue of theirs with the instrument that we have mentioned, and then take from the water which we have spoken of in the chapter on cauterization, and soak this cloth vividly, and apply this not rough nor subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Let the extraction of the cavity in which the medicine is put be like the cavity of a scorpion's tail, and put the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer, and the patient will spit on the other side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of theirs can come out through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not cause any bad effect on their throat and so that it loosens that one.
And then put your hand with the medicine, and express it on the uvula for half an hour until it becomes diminished and soothed by the absorption of the medicine.
If you desire, take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the arm, and submerge the cloth in medicine, and insert the arm with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to the tube, and make this action as many times as necessary until you obtain what you want from the cauterization of the humors, and then apply a plaster to it so that it dries and falls off after three or four days.
And if you indicate that the medicine should be repeated, repeat it, and apply the cauterization externally in the circuit of the humors with cloth wrapped in bandage, and cleanse what is in the circuit of the body from the medicine, and wash with cold water, and cure with an embrocation, and treat with gargling until it is healed.
And this type of cure is more safe than incision and less fearful.
Some weaknesses are cured in the humors with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with subfumigation in this manner: take calament, ysop, origanum, rue, arabic scammony, camomile, and other herbs similar to these, and adjust all or some of these causes into a woolen cloth, and submerge them in hot water, and boil; and the cloth should be washed decently, and in the middle of the cloth there should be a hole, on which an instrument made of silver or metal according to this manner is placed.
And let the extremity be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the uvula over the tonsil, until the uvula is sufficiently moistened.
And then spread it on those moistened spots until it's dry, and beware that you don't perform this treatment at the onset of an abscess, because too much adjustment would be harmful to the abscess, and it's not suitable for you to do this, but rather you should refer to the declaration of the abscess by its cauter.
Unless the instrument is not present to you, then take a cane and place in the extremity of the patient a knot of yarn, so that the mouth of the patient is blocked, because the knot of yarn prevents the vapor from entering the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter 38.
Of the extraction of thorns and of that which adheres to the throat and other causes.
Moistened spots adhere to the throat or a thorn in the foot or some other cause.
Therefore it is necessary that you extract that which is apparent from those things, on which the sight falls, because you press the tongue with an instrument under the tongue alone, so that it may be declared to you what is in the throat.
And if that which does not appear is hidden in the throat, it is because you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, since the cause attached to the throat will be expelled by vomiting; or the patient should take a piece of soap or of root of laytuga or a dried fig; or take a piece of dry marine sponge and tie it strongly with a thread, and give it to the patient to swallow, so that when it reaches the place where it is spit out and extracted, then it will be expelled. And take a worm and tie it with a thread, and let it be put in and extracted immediately; or take a rat and immediately extract its liver and immediately draw out the intestines.
But if it is not expelled with those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in this form:
And let it be thick enough to enter a small opening, and in the extremity of it be enclosed what you will insert into the throat with ease.
And raise the patient's head upwards, and beware of touching the bone of the throat, so that it does not injure the body or puncture the bone or the spine, or that the doctor puts his hand on it.
More often it happens that the patient inserts their finger into the affected area, by the knowledge of the place of the adjacent cause and feels it from below, and pulls their hand with the instrument on top, all of this according to the quantity which is prepared for them until it is expelled.
Chapter 39.
Of the extraction of blood associated with the throat.
When the throat is treated with blood in the way that we have spoken of in the division of the cure with medicines and not with confectures, then consider the throat of the patient to the sun, since you have comprehended the tongue of them with an instrument which you have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the blood, extract it with a small pinch or with subtle and decent gestures.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and place in the cavity of the cannula an ignited iron, and do this as many times (until the blood is stopped and removed from the throat) and abstain the patient from water for the whole day.
And then take a full pitcher of cold water, and put the patient's mouth in it, and wash their mouth with it; and do not swallow any of this water for any reason, but rather spit out the water an hour after, because as soon as the blood senses the cold water.
More often if the patient is not previously prepared with what we have recommended, then subject the patient to steam or to a poultice made with the instrument that we have recommended in the steaming of the palate.
Make that, which is in four courses.
And there is another manner of operation in the steaming of that, which you take a bowl in which are ignited coals and the bowl is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole, and let the extremity of the instrument be composed in that hole; and apply it from below to the steam; and put the patient's mouth on the extremity of the pipe, and close their mouth so that the steam is not wasted until you know that the steam has reached the blood, because the blood as much flows.
And if it doesn't work, then repeat the steaming many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and make them eat salty and bitter foods, and don't drink water, and it is necessary that with this regimen the patient be prepared.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood of the throat is treated when it is seen; and it resembles a forceps as many times, except that it is in some curvature: The one that is placed on the pillow, and the extremity of it resembles a beak of a cicada, which is a gouty tumor, in which there is an accumulation of lime, for this reason, when we press upon some cause, that one does not let go.
Chapter 40.
In which there is the sum of the serum in perception of abscesses and in section of their discharge.
The abscesses show special symptoms, of various kinds, according to what we recall about them, each one in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and discharge of them through two methods, of which one is for the species of abscesses in themselves being treated; and for that which we comprehend of the humidities.
And the second method is proper for the places in which accidents of the body occur, because the abscess that happens in the head is different from the abscess that happens in the buttocks; and the abscess in a fleshy place is different from the abscess in a joint; and each one of them is judged by operation.
And among abscesses there are some which it is advisable that they not be perforated but rather waiting for the maturation of the blood in them or the completion of it.
Other abscesses that are formed when they are pierced, and not matured according to their nature, like abscesses that are applied to the joints, because an abscess is applied to a joint, its substance is prolonged until it has consumed what is in its circuit, and it has corrupted the ligaments or nerves of that joint, for which it is made cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess proper to a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is matured, it will harm the principal member; or it is proper to the anus, therefore perforate what is not matured; and it is not necessary to perforate the crude, of undigested digestion, but that which is proper to the anus, so that it does not press on its bottom and is elongated to the inner parts of the anus, and a fistula is made, or that which is made in the term of it which is not sanitized. It is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess, and also when it is matured.
And you will know that it is matured when there is a reduction of the pain and a cessation of the fever, and also a decrease in swelling and pulsation, and a sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And where it is necessary that you know the perforation cauterizes in the place of the abscess and of the pus coming from the treatment of the prominent area.
And the cauterization is done through the depth of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the place of the arteries, of the nerve cords, of the tendons; and, finally, in all hidden places where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use cauterization according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you delay the cauterization until digestion is confirmed according to the compliment, as we have said; for if you cauterize it at that time, it prolongs the body of the pus and increases its foulness, and forces out the lips of the wound which become hardened and increases the depth of it.
But some abscesses are cauterized according to the thickness of the flesh or body depending on necessity, or according to that which the affected member indicates.
And it is necessary that you administer small cauterization, and in large abscesses a large and wide cauterization or several incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And other symptoms of the abscesses in which it is believed that the gland is affected and inflamed, when it is made thus with bread and made in term that it already starts to suppurate, just like that which occurs in cases of swelling and boils.
And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those it is in which is incised thus as the figure of a leaf of mint, thus as the abscesses of the glands.
And of them in which is administered a round section and a crescent-shaped section, similar to those.
More, that one which does not fit thus as are abscesses, being superficial, it is believed that you should puncture it with a superficial puncture, or just flatten it.
And it is believed that when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, that you should puncture it and not be concerned that you extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted a portion from it, and then apply a poultice to the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger portion, and then do this several times according to the gradual process until it is completely evacuated.
And especially if the patient is of fragile virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit is resolved with the evacuation of the pus, and for this reason it dies, and you operate on them.
Keep this chapter with great caution, and approach your perforation in which you make these apostems, considering that you clean the wounds and see if the wound of the apostem is small, or is a flat section, then you administer poultices of lime or of hot cinders; and if the apostem is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then consider that you apply a plaster on each hole so that they heal together.
And if in the apostem a part of the skin is cut off or has been hollowed out in the circuit, then consider that you fill it with hot cloth or with yarn made from linen thread, as when you treat ulcers or wounds, its humidity; and bind it for three days; and approach the process and cure it with what is necessary to anoint until it is healed.
Moreover if a flow of blood occurs at the time of your operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in the places where you apply a linen cloth, and place it over the area of the abundant and visible bleeding.
Moreover if the flow of blood persists, then consider that you administer treatment and cure with powders which have been recommended in many places of this our book and division.
More often if it is in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of nervous motion, then you should apply poultices of warm oil and cauterized wool, and put them on the affected areas.
And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should apply poultices soaked in water and oil or in warm wine and oil, and all this should be applied with friction for three days, as we have said, and then you should open the abscess and clean it and administer the treatment that is suitable for the patient.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction I have already spoken of all abscesses in which manner the way of cure is by chapters singularly.
Chapter twelve.
Of the section on abscesses that occur in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck small abscesses form, and they are species of knots that contain tunics that are made for them; and the species of them are moved.
And from them come pimples, and from those comes what contains humidity resembling slime. And from those which contain humidity resembling pus, and resemble them; and from those which are lapidous, hard.
And in the section of everything, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, since the extraction of those does not cause irritation of the arteries.
And the operation in section of those is that you press those with an instrument the shape of which goes near to them, which is called entromes, while you know what they contain.
For if that which it contains is humidity, then cut that one with a section according to the length by superficial section according to this form:
And begin the section from line B to line G. Then when the humidity is evacuated, then you excavate that which contains the humidity, and do not leave any of that cause of all, for if many times seen, it returns, if it remains from that cause.
And then submerge the cut in Egyptian gum, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with that the wound and leave it until another day, for the corrosion of all that is rough from that membrane.
And then apply again on that cut the Egyptian gum secondly and thirdly if it is needed, until you confirm that there is no roughness from any cause of that membrane; then cure the wound with the gum until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise that section in this manner: I make an incision in the shape of a cross, and put forceps between the two lips of the incision and cut out the entire affected part, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains it.
More often if your skill makes a counteraction, then do what you have recounted as the primary remedy.
And similarly do in the abscess that is to be incised and cured according to what you have said; and an incision over a healed abscess is considered lighter, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
And some times there are some of these abscesses which are in the head in some men, in whom there is absolutely no humidity; this causes that you should not incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and probe the abscess as a dull, rough, white stone, which cannot be pierced, and if you were to touch it with a pustule, it would become a plague.
But in the other accidental abscesses on the head this is not the subject of this chapter, such as the abscesses that come to the heads of infants and from the roots of the ears, but the incision of all these should be a superficial one.
Pause the perforation of those from the lowest part of their back so that the body of the blood is alleviated to the lower parts.
And properly cure those with what is convenient for that treatment.
Chapter 42.
Of the section of scrofula which occur in the neck.
Many swollen gatherings appear as these abscesses in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin areas; and some gatherings occur in the other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and there are many that are generated among them, and all of these scrofula have their own proper tunic, and thus like the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
And the species of these scrofula are many, for some of them are gouty, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey treatment.
Then in that one which you find in good condition in the Touching, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the codena, and it is mauled to all part, and it is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not deep, so that you make an incision in the superficial scythe of the upper part to the lower part of the body of the line of G. between the line of B., and cut that from all part, and stretch two lips of the codena to one ounce, or to many ounces if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
It is of utmost caution that the vein or nerve is not injured.
And let the spatulum not be pointed, so that it does not touch your hand with incision, or disturb the patient, and incise only what is necessary to incise; for if you were to incise a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then apply to the wound vitriol or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and tighten the wound, and lay on it a dressing that will reduce the acuteness of the apostema and soften the wound and begin to be purged. When the blood is separated.
Then return to your operation that you have begun.
And then examine the diseased tissue to see if there is any cause of the other small tumors or scrofula, and cut out those and cleanse those.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, beware that you do not cut that scrofula from its root. Take care that you tie that wound with a strong and double-folded bandage, and leave it so that it does not fall off by itself for fear of harm.
And then fill the wound with old oil, which you have already mixed with Egyptian ointment, and heal it.
And if you cut out the entire hardened scar tissue, then make sure you adjust the edges of the wound and cauterize as much pus as possible so that no excess remains.
But if you see that excess remains due to the size of the scrofula, make sure you understand how to cut out the root of it, and extract it and administer a suture and what is called a dressing.
And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation there where you see the place of maturation, and make a perforation of what will be the lowest part of the pus, as we have said.
Then administer a perforation, and apply a plaster or ointment similar to those, so that it cuts away what is rotten from the corruption. And then when you see the wound is already cleaned, then treat it with a plaster of generated flesh so that it is healed.
Chapter 43.
On the section of the pilum of the accidental apostema in the throat.
The ancients said this section was in the pilum, and none of our countrymen have seen that it was done.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
More often in men there is a tendency to avoid the extraction of the splinter, as if it is not done gently then all the veins and main ones of the patient will be damaged.
More often in those who have abscesses or cuts on the mouth or throat or two ears, when the disease is not in the cane, it is good to use the section of splinter to flee the loss which is made by perforation.
Therefore it is good when we want to do this, that we make the splinter with three turns of the circles of the splinter, or four with a small section for the width in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section should be in the ciphac, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the veins of blood of it are few.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, then it is good that he stretches the cord of the throat with an onion, and then cuts the cord until it reaches the canal, but avoids the veins of blood if possible to prevent any harm.
Then cut the ciphac according to what we have recommended; and it is indicated regarding the section of the canal by the weakness which is from that exit with what is from its disruption and by the abscession of the mouth.
The wound has been open for some time.
Then when the hour is reached in which the perforation is feared, apply two lips of the scab on the wound, and sew that alone with the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow so that it may be healed.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended is not an exposition but rather to show that some of these apostems have already closed the throat of the patient, and the patient has come near death, and their breath is between cuts, and some will fall into the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the place of the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
And therefore I command to leave the open wound until the evil of the illness is consumed; and its evil lasts for three days; and then I command to dress the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And this that I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and put it in the throat of a man and fell into a part of the cane of the lung, and I was called to its cure, and I touched the pulse as is customary for the dying, and I uncovered the wound and I touched the blood which was coming out of the small wound.
Therefore, it was confessed that no vein or ligament had been injured, and the wound was from an ulcer, which should be cured before the focus is healed.
And do not hasten to serve if it does not arrive at the vault, and then for some days return to the consideration of its own dispositions.
And now I say that in the removal of the splinter there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
Of the incision regarding the abscess which occurs in the throat from before, and it is called throat hernia.
This abscess called throat hernia is a large abscess according to the body's color, and it dies in women.
And it is according to two manners, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, it is not necessary to cure.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fat knots, and the other manner is similar to an abscess which is made by obstruction of an artery, and in that one there is fear. And do not attempt to make pressure on it with iron except in the case where it is small. And you probe it and investigate it with the aforementioned, and if you find it similar to a fat knot, and it is not suspended on any of the veins, then you incise it in the same way as knots, and extract it from the thing that contains the pus and wash; and if not, then it is written that the whole essence, and then treat the area with what is necessary for cure until it is healed.
Chapter twelve.
Of the section of the species of knots.
Of the knots, some species and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
And I will show you the difference between a knot and an abscess with a clear explanation.
Therefore I say that with an abscess there is heat and fever and vehement pains until the ebullition of the surplus is sedated; and it is a completed putrefaction which then stops the fever, pain, and heat.
But with a knot there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that hip or hernia which is in its own sack.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cyst and is made thus as a vacuity, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, which are either fat or contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I have said in the division.
Therefore I say, when you approach the cure of a knot, that you explore and inquire into its beginning with the instrument which is called an introducer, according to how its shape will be found in the chapter which is appropriate for this.
It is the technique of inquiring about abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the place where you find humidity in the abscess, and you will turn the thumbs of the patient little by little so that you know that the instrument has already penetrated the abscess.
And then put your hand according to the size of the abscess, and extract the inserted part and consider what comes out from the remains of it.
And if the running humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you will cut it with a superficial incision according to what has been said about other abscesses.
And if from the remains of the insertion there is no humidity, then you will know that it is a fatty tissue.
And cut above it with an incision having the shape of a cross according to this shape: thus as you have been taught, and suspend that with a hook, and scratch the abscess from all parts with ease, and if possible, place a dressing or bandage over it, and extract that liquid from the knot.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that liquid, and you will see bits of tissue coming out, and then you will extract it with tweezers until none of it remains.
If of the fluid a small or excessive amount, the knot returns according to the size.
And if you see that a small part of the fluid is retained, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and tighten the wound, and place a cauterized plaster on it, and cure that which needs another internal treatment until it is healed.
And if the knot is large, then sew the two lips of it and cure it with that which will make it heal together.
Mostly if the pulse is at the opposite, or not pulsing, then touch and fill the place of the third vein that is varnished and apply a tight bandage for two days or three until the wound closes and the swelling of the blood subsides; and then return to separate that which is the matter of the knot.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of the instrument necessary for incision and perforation.
Of those are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species, that some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of small introductions is this:
Made of iron, with a plentiful flow, of decently purified extremities, so that the instrument is introduced into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are called forceps, and one of them is called a clamp.
And it is of three species, four of which are large, medium and small.
The form of the large clamp, its shape:
The form of the medium clamp, its shape:
The form of the small clamp, its shape:
It is suitable that they be used for those abscesses and ulcers and fistulas and buboes, so that among those there are of the bones and other causes.
And they are made rough, thick, long, as big as large needles on which the threads are sewn, and they are made of brass wire, or of iron, or of silver, And the best ones are those made of brass wire.
And the clamps are made of black lead, which it is fitting that for those the ulcers be covered in the concavity of which they are reflected, that they be reflected with their lightness on those reflections.
It is taken from three species, where some of them are long, and of the others are medium, and of the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of the stricture of it.
Form of a large experience with lead:
Shape of the experienced plumber's weight or mass.
Shape of the small experienced lead or plumber's form, possibly referring to a mold or shape made from lead for
The shapes of the ankle joints are of many special kinds, for some of which are simple ulcers, to which there is only a curvature, and they are of three species: large, small, and medium.
And of their ankles or joints, and they are of three kinds.
And of those that have two curvatures in the ankles, and they are of three species.
And of their ankles that have three curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
And all these things are necessary in their place.
Shape of a small simple ankle joint, its shape:
Shape of a large ankle joint having two curvatures. Shape of a medium ankle joint having two curvatures. Shape of a small ankle joint having two curvatures.
Shape of a large abscess having three openings:
Shape of a medium-sized abscess having three curves or bendings:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and the abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three species, namely large, medium, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of a medium scalpel:
Shape of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those with which a cut is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and not placed in such a manner, but rather so that it can be done gently in the scraping of the nodes, the fear of cutting a vein or a nerve, and for this reason the patient is healed and retrieves tranquility, a little at a time, for the adjustment which it finds from the scraping of the abscess.
And these are the forms of the emollients, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
Signs made of real matter and similar to royal authority by which it is made, Alcofol.
And it is in the extremity of the affected point hidden with occulted spit and in that body towards the divided and deformed parts, when you wish, thus as you see.
The forms of spitings, which are found among the words of the perforation of abscesses and do not perceive the ailments, and they are of three species: great, medium and few. And these are the forms of those things:
The forms of flatulence by which the flow of blood is separated, and they are of three species: great, medium and small; the forms of it:
Signs made of citrus, round with some length, and they are subtle.
And it is seen that these species of flatulences are your large, medium and small ones, because through them the flow of blood is separated with velocity in necessity, and then when at first it is not medicine.
However, I do not use them to separate blood in every part of the body, and I do not use them except in fleshy places, thus as in the flesh of the legs and thighs, and in the flesh of the arms, and of the breasts, and of the belly and of the groin, and similar to these, the fleshy humid places.
And certain veins are made by those small surgical instruments that resemble scissors, according to this form; through which the blood is separated when it is done by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
And certain veins are made round according to this form:
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of men's breasts which are similar to those of women.
Certain veins become swollen, the breasts of certain men receive the complement of sleep when they start to be hairy, and then the breasts become swollen, and the breasts are similar to those of women, and we call them romantic and weak.
And to the one who has that, it is necessary to make an incision on the affected area with a lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then remove all the grossness, and then fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and then join the two lips of the wound with suture, and cure the one inside until it is healthy.
But if the breast declines to the sides and is softened by its magnitude so much that it approaches that of women, then it should be divided into two parts, one above the other, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, each of which is contained within the other up to the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from line B to line G. And then remove the skin that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders, whatever is necessary for the cure until it is healthy.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which must be cut due to the anxiety of the patient, and due to the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive ointment and apply it to that area which the corrosion eats away, which is the root of the gout, and properly cure that area which must be healed.
Chapter 48.
Of the perforation of abscesses that come from the nipple.
These abscesses that come from the nipple are of the species of scrofula, and boils, which contain a pea-sized sac.
And of those some that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity it is necessary to cut with a lunar incision according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess has been evacuated, then fill the wound with warm oil and apply it to the other day.
And then let the wound be treated and cured with a suitable ointment for that, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the species of knots and scrofula, then cut above that as we have said in the section about scrofula treatment.
If the wound has extended to the point where it becomes putrid, then administer the cautery according to what we have previously mentioned.
Chapter 49.
Of the section on abscesses that occur through either artery or vein.
When an artery is broken, and the cord that is above it is consolidated, then putrid abscesses occur, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscesses are caused by the artery or vein: for when an abscess is in an artery, it is long and accumulated in the limb of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor in the vein.
And that which is in a vein is near the surface of the body.
And the section on this abscess is an error, especially in those who have them near the shoulders, and in the arms, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; it is very dangerous, therefore it is necessary that its treatment with iron be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
More about the one that comes from flow due to inflammation of the artery's orifice, cut into the cord section in the limb; and then open the section with knives and then the artery, and make an incision through the tunics so that it may be discovered.
And then put the needle on that thread and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the ligature with double fidelity in two places, — which causes you to extract excess humors from the temples.
And then prick the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula so that the blood comes out of it, and let the abscess be dissolved.
And then administer care in the place where pus is generated so that the ligaments fall, and cure it with an ointment convenient for that, so that it will be healed.
And if it is an abscess due to a cut vein, then take care that you hold with your hand the place of the abscess near the cord, and put the needle through the area where you have held your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread so that you extract from the other side, and tie the abscess with a good ligature as has been said to you in the ligature of the uva, of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then put the thread in that needle, passing through all the abscess except the point of entry of the needle, and tighten the ties in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle place of the entry where it is located, and when you exit, remove the excess of the dressing, and leave what is tied to it.
And then apply a poultice on it that has been submerged in wine and oil, and administer the cure that is made with warm plasters and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter one of the abscess which occurs due to a twisting of the nerves.
Thus how an abscess occurs in the artery and in the vein, and similarly an abscess occurs in the nerves when it occurs from their percussion or from excessive labor, and from similarities.
And it is made worse by it in the places of the joints or of the heel, or in any place where the articulations are flexed.
And it is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it is in the worst of its conditions six of them and when it is constricted with inflammation, one feels in it the patient's similar stupidity.
And it is not an abscess that collects in the front of the body, and for this reason the dressing is applied, and it is flexed to one side and does not go to the parts either before or behind.
Therefore, it is not advisable for that which is in the joints to be enclosed with iron, because a strong contraction of the tendons would ensue.
Pain in the head or forehead makes one spit with the spatula. If it is a mild abscess, then apply that to the sores and cut away that which is rotten.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and excavate that, and apply a plaster to that; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 51.
On the section of abscesses which occur in the belly and which occur in the intestine.
We find some homes with moist wounds in the bellies of those and in other parts of the body of those people who are called funguals due to similarity with fungi, whose root is subtle and the head of which is thick; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are very magnified.
And I have seen one, and in its belly there were two fungi-like things, which were more similar to fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with a small root.
And already the lips of those were turned inward and they split, and humidity flowed from that all the time.
Then I put splints on them and wrapped one foot with eighteen inches, and the other with six inches.
And the operation on the incision of theirs is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the pus is white, humid, with subtle reason; then you put the splints with a broad spatula, and be in your presence cauteries at the focus, for four repeated motions the section of it is expelled with much blood; and if the blood comes out, cauterize that.
And if the patient is pale and fearful, guard yourself from incision with iron; but then take a fresh made lead plaster, and strengthen it on that wound, the handling of which is what we have said; and apply that for two days.
And then adjust in the narrowness of the thread of lead; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the large amount of lead on the wound, until it is separated and falls by itself through its own effort.
But if the wound is of thick reason, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in that which is in the belly.
It is possible that you should incise the bladder of the patient, and then cauterize it so that it does not protrude.
And then treat the inside so that the wound may be healed.
Beware lest you presume to incise the tissue which is of dark color, of little sensitivity, of weak regard, for that is absolute cancer.
And you will come to the memory of the cancer with subsequent pain.
Chapter twelve.
Of the treatment of the protrusion of the navel.
Protrusion of the navel is made by many causes; or by fissures of the ciphac which is above the belly, and from it the tissue or intestine comes out according to the other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or an artery as it is commonly said, or by constricted ventosity in it.
But if it is by fissure of the ciphac and by coming out of the tissue, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is less painful, and then appears in diverse situations. And if it is by protrusion of the intestine, then the situation of that with it which we have recounted, of much more vehement diversity, and when you press that with the fingers it is hidden, and then returns; and it is strongly with it thus, and it is magnified by many dejections of sweat and vehement trembling.
More pain occurs with humidity, then it is visible and not hidden when you press on the hand, neither is it constricted, nor is it believed.
And if it is due to blood, then with this symptom, the abscess appears on the declined black part.
More if it is from bad flesh, then it is a severe, thick and hard abscess, and the liver is affected according to a quantity.
More if it is due to gas, then the touch of it is visible.
And the operation on it is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of the liver, or of a vein, or due to gas; then beware that you are prohibited from the cure of it, for in that there is fear and dread as has been taught to you in the chapter in which I have spoken about abscesses due to liver and vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then beware that you command the patient to hold his leg up, and let it be extended; and then apply a bandage around the entire navel, and command him to lie on his back with his legs up towards his chest, and encircle the space around the navel with a spatula to the place where you have applied the bandage; and then extend the size of the abscess to the parts below with a large needle; and then tie it in the circle with a strong thread or with a ligature and the mallet of the surgeon.
And then return the bowel to the middle of the abscess that extends over the ligament and introduce the said finger into that intestine and examine the bowel; and if you have not found or guarded it through the ligament, then extract the bowel and impel it with the parted fingers of the belly.
And if you have found the web, then take that one with an ointment; and cut away the excesses of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that wound, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong strings and introduce two needles in the circuit that you have made around the abscess in a manner of cross, which make penetrate; and then tie the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the area where the extended flesh can close by itself; or cut away what is thin and let it heal, and then cure that wound with the ointment that comes from the ulcers so that it may be healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is made of no flesh or by humidity, then take that you conquer the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and then cure that wound with the ointment that suits and consolidate the area.
Chapter three.
Of the treatment of cancer.
We have said, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner it is the way to the treatment with medicine, and that it is necessary for the treatment with iron so that it does not ulcerate; and we have said cancer generated in the marrow and caution of the treatment of it.
And they said that the ancients that some visible cancers are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, thus as from cancer which is in the breasts or in the thigh and its semblance of the members allocated to extract all that, and mainly when it is starting small.
More when it is old and serious, it does not matter that you apply yourself to it, because I have not been able to cure any of those, nor have I seen others, nor has anyone arrived at this.
And the operation on it is when it is allocated as we have said, that you should precede and prepare the patient and purge them of black bile certain visible things, and then bloodlet that, if it is a stopped and full manifestation.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which it is located for operation, and then prophylax the wound with ointments that are suitable for it; and then concave the entire area around the wound so that it is well prepared to prevent any cause of the roots of it. Let the blood flow, and do not remove that ligament, and press the areas, and evacuate the thick blood all with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible to use among the instruments.
If there is a contrary condition of thick blood from an incision of a vein or an artery, then cauterize that place until the flow of blood stops, and return to cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Chapter five.
On the treatment of dropsy.
We have already recounted, in the division, the species of dropsy from the water, and the signs of each species, about the cure for it with medical treatments.
And that which is cured with iron is not except the species of altthritis alone, and it is not applied near to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hyposarca, because that is deadly.
And when you have medicated this species of dropsy, tympanites, with medicines and do not confirm your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already obtained debility, or it is another illness, another dropsy, thus as if it is in the toes or belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is about that.
If you have seen the patient with an abundance of vertigo, and it is not another disease but only dropsy, and neither infant nor old, then the manner of the operation is that you elevate the disease between your hands, and administer to them a hot application on the stomach with your hand, introducing water at the affected part of the intestine, and apply a spiny plaster according to this form:
It should be of two sharp parts long, with sharp extremities thus as plaster; but however it should be in the little briefness small bit by bit, so that in the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and that you lead it out.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the part of the intestines, for it is known that you should make a section of the navel with three fingers' width to the affected parts below, on the right side of the intestine.
If the generation of dropsy is from disease of the liver, then your section should be on the left of the navel for three fingers.
And if the generation of it is from the bladder, then your section should be on the right side.
And it is not suitable that your section be on the rib, on which the disease wants to be, so that the excesses do not run to that place freely.
And then perforate the entire code with the instrument, and introduce it into that section, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the code and the siphac, and you will extract that; and if the quantity of an nail or environment.
And then perforate the siphac so that the spatula reaches the empty place, and it is the place of the water. And then extract that and introduce an instrument of which this is the shape: and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or gold alloy, in which at the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on the sides of it there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the extremity of it is engraved according to the manner of a feather pen, thus as follows:
And at the uppermost extremity of it there is a little arm, because when the instrument penetrates the water, then that water rises above the instrument, thus evacuating from the water in the middle a certain quantity, because if you evacuate from it more than it can hold in the hour, the patient will likely die from the resolution of their animal spirit, or approaches death with the quintessence which is approaching.
Empty evacuation of that seat according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what the disposition of the patient indicates of the virtue of the pulse of it and of the goodness of it.
And then extract the instrument, and hold back the water which causes it to be retained by the bowel, which holds the pipe that is above the navel, of which it is recommended to you that you perforate in that manner that way.
And then insert the instrument to the other side if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do so for several days on account of fear, and guard yourself from error while not breaking more of the water except a little.
When you fear for the patient, and a large quantity of water is drained, then treat that member with burial in hot sand, and immersion in bath, and expose to the sun for a long time; and treat that member with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize the stomach, and the middle and the liver after the extraction of water, as it has been recounted to you in what precedes.
Chapter twelve or Chapter 12
On the treatment of children whose places of urine are not perforated.
Some newborns are born with a hole in the stomach of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or it is strictly closed or it is not in its place).
Therefore, we must make an opening in it as soon as it is born with a subtle spatula according to this method:
And then stop up the hole with a small lead nail and tie it, and keep it for three days or for four.
And when it wants to urinate let it be uncovered and urinate; and then cover it again.
And if you do not stop up the lead, it is possible that the urine which passes over the place will not close this.
It is better for that which has a strict hole to be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for many days until it is enlarged.
Better are those in which the hole is not in its place, it is said, the cause of which is that some are born with the hole of the penis at the end of the head of the virility so that they cannot urinate in the divided parts inside, until they lift the virility to their mother in the divided parts above; and it is not a generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad illness.
And the manner of the operation on them is that the patient should be placed on their back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with vigorous extraction, and insert the point of the instrument at the place of the perineum with a sharp pointed tool, like one would insert a feather, or so that you do not touch any other part, so that the middle of the vein appears similar to the head of the penis and that which is drawn falls in the middle place according to need.
And beware that in your operation of blood flow, many things can go wrong; and be careful with them that you are cutting the blood vessels, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 6.
About the removal of what is done on the prepuce at the head of the penis and of corrosion and blackness and adherence of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Many times this removal is done on the penis and it is an excess of flesh.
And one of them is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, it is fitting that you suspend with a subtle hook and cut that one until it is completely removed; and then apply a poultice of submirgit, an Egyptian ointment; and then, treat the wound with a diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
If the ulcer is malignant, with a bad color, then it is advisable that you apply cautery near the edge of it and the root of it.
Moreover if the ulcer is on the prepuce of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is within the prepuce and the other part is outside, then it is advisable that you show the ulcer which is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you cure the outer one, for when you cure both at the same time, it is not certain that it will not be injured.
And also accidents happen in the genitals and in the prepuce with blackness and corruption, therefore it is advisable that you remove all that which is already degenerated and that which wants to corrupt or is already corrupted; and apply a liniment on that area with honey, which is mixed with flour of wheat and of dried and crushed roots.
And treat the one with the other cure until it is healthy.
But if there is an efflux of blood, then administer lunar cautery in this manner:
For juvenile cautery is of two dispositions at the same time, one is for an efflux of blood and the other is for the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed entirely at that time, then it is necessary that you insert into the middle of the foreskin a lead tube so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence only occurs in one whose foreskin is its own, and for whom circumcision has not been performed; and when adherence occurs due to a wound or an abscess) it is necessary that you scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all adhesion.
And if it is difficult to distinguish those things precisely, then it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula some part of the head of the penis and of the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is perforated by its subtlety gently.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a gentle touch, which has previously been soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then let it be treated with a stringent ointment until it is consolidated.
Chapter 48.
Of the cleansing of infants and the treatment of that which occurs to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity issues: but rather it's up to our operation and will, and the results of that are especially in children, it is necessary that we assign the best operation and way so that they lose less health.
Thus I say that the ancients did not call circumcision in any of their free writings, because they didn't use it in their laws, and it's not so because we have acquired through experimentation, which is the reason why most artisans and barbers have been found using circumcision and purification with a new knife and tongs; and they use ligatures with thread and incisions with the nail.
And I have already forbidden all these methods and do not find better purification with forceps, or ligatures with thread, than the purification with the nail, because many times it happens that the skin tears from below, since the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and one layer is left above, and this is where the tear is, which leads to another incision and secure pain. And in the purification that is done by the apothecary, and is digital, which the surgeons use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secure, because the thread enters into its channel.
More damage in the operation with the nail, for the iron tool corrupts and mars the entire operation. And the child's bowel is short by nature, and many times seen in such a manner that there is no need for modification, and I have seen it before.
More of the modification that is done with forces and ligaments of the thigh, goodness, experiment has shown to me, where the forces are of proportional incision, because the acuity that is above is just like the acuity that is below; and thus when you press your hand proportionally on both acuities, and make an incision according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the thigh with a figure containing the bowel of the entire partition, with which no error is made.
And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child stay still if it is one of those who understand a little, that you not do anything but place the thigh on its own partition, only so much, and that you lift it up into the other day.
Then do this to cheer up in all that manner which is at your possibility, according to what receives its intelligence. And then be with your hands prepared in a steady position, and do not make any movement; and hide the forces in your hand or below the thigh, so that the child does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into the patient's vagina and blow into the womb, and pull out that which is inside until the head of the fetus is visible, and then cleanse that which has accumulated in it due to the retention of filth.
The shape of the ulcers for cleansing, this is the shape:
Let some of them be uncut and the others cut, so that the branch of the nail is not visible, and let the length of the two edges be equal to the length of two joined finger joints.
The greatest mistake in cleansing is when the inner womb expels all of its contents, or part of it, due to inadequate incision.
Therefore it is necessary that you extend your finger during your hour on the edge of the abscess, and that you cut it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook and cut it.
But if three days have passed, and the matter that is inflamed under the infected wound has not been discharged, then let it be that the discharge of the apostemation is facilitated, and cut away the feculent part with ease, and incise according to what you have prepared.
And beware of the head of the wound, lest it becomes putrid.
Therefore treat it with the remedy that the wound consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise of powders.
And if it is incised on the flank beyond measure, and the divided parts are opened, this will not be noticed by him.
And thus treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 53.
Of the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stone or congealed blood, or by a mass or tumor, and similar to those things that we have said regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved with the water that we have mentioned, the cause is violently made on the patient, then it is necessary that you administer extraction of it with an instrument that is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and the needle should be subtle, like a small cane or reed, as thin as a feather's quill, in similarity to a palm and a half, to which there is a subtle hole at the top.
And the handling of the emission of urine with this is that you take the thread doubled and tie it at the extremity of the wool or cotton for good ligature; and introduce the extremities of the thread into the part of the syringe, and cut with scissors if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, but introduce it into the cane with violence. And then insert the syringe with force and with album of urine.
Make the patient lie on their side, and wrap the bladder of theirs and the rod with olive oil and vinegar.
And then insert the needle with ease until it reaches the root of the rod; and then bend the rod downwards towards the navel; and then press the needle inwards there; and then press it inwards until it reaches the bladder, and this sign that the patient is being affected by the cause they are suffering from, and it is not done according to this order, but rather as the illness demands, where it goes awry.
And then stretch the vein on the wool little by little, so that the urine wets the wool.
Then extract that and do for the cure of urine, and use a needle, do not stop doing this and use a needle until the bladder is evacuated and the patient finds relief.
Chapter 49.
Of the quality of injection into the bladder with a clamp and similar instruments which are suited for that purpose.
When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or it is obstructed by sediment, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then do so with an instrument which is called a clamp, and this is its form:
But in the extremity of it, it is numb, so it is closed. And in that one there are three holes: two from one side, and thus many times.
In the beginning it is a concave place, in which there is what is swallowed, and it is according to the quantity that oppresses it, until when some cause is drawn from the humidity, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, with it being drawn, and when it expels long, according as it makes clamp or clamp-like, as that which is made in the naval battles of the sea.
Therefore when you want to project humidity into the bladder, insert the extremity of the clamp into the humidity, and draw with it the water that is absorbed by the lower parts, because the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clamp.
And then insert the extremity of the clamp into the rod according to what we have recommended in the circle; and then absorb the humidity with the water that you absorb, because that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Shape of the subtle bladder in which the bladder is shaped, and this is the shape:
And let it be made of silver or of gold, of which the head is similar to a small feather, and place the tube gently inside.
And then take the bladder by hand, and pause to remove the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and tie it between two strong ligatures with a double thread, and evaporate that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the extremity of the catheter into the penis.
And then tighten your hand over the bladder with the humidity and strictured descent, so that the patient feels that the humidity has already penetrated to the bladder.
If the bladder is not present to you, then take a piece of sponge and make a circle from it; and perforate that with all its roughness; and then insert a strong thread into those channels, so that they are well wrapped; and then attach the circle as it has been attached to the navel, because you pause in that water that you want to drain, along with humors and liquids.
And then tie that to the instrument and do it in the same way as you have done on the bladder, and express with your hand that the humidity penetrates to the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of stone.
We have already spoken in the division of the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and its symptoms.
And we have said that the stone on which every operation is performed with the hand, is cut.
The stone formed in the bladder itself is the one that is fixed in the bladder.
And I will now explain it with clear exposition and briefness.
Therefore I say that the stone formed in the bladder mostly goes to the children; and of its signs it is that the urine which is expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears as sand; and the patient rubs their groin, and many times it seems painful, and then it is treated; and with this the hole is made in many of those.
And the cure for the children of that age who have reached 14 years is easy; and it is a difficult treatment in the old. But in the young it is moderate because it is between the two.
And concerning that one for whom the stone is larger and the treatment is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore when we come to the treatment of this, it is necessary at the beginning of this that we cleanse the patient with a purgative which removes all the wound which is in their intestine; because this wound many times prohibits the evacuation of the stone by obstructing it.
And then press the patient's feet with your hands and hold them firm above so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or it will jump out of place at some other visible spots.
And then make that circle prepared between your hands, and the patient's hands will be placed on their hips, so that the entire bladder is made to decline towards the parts below.
And then ask for a vessel and prepare everything for a bowel movement.
Then if you feel the stone in the space, then you will be satisfied as soon as it is dried on the patient.
And if the patient does not touch everything with their right hand, then it is necessary that you anoint their right hand with oil on the left side of the bed, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if they are a young adult, and insert that in their buttocks. And ask for the stone until it comes out from the patient's right hand. And turn that small stone little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on it with your right hand, and push that stone downwards towards the bottom of the bladder to the place where you felt it.
And command the servant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another servant to extend the knees downwards with their right hand, and with their left hand to hold back the buttocks which are below the knees, in the area where the operation is being performed.
And then insert a spatula to explore the incident of which this is the shape: And divide in that which is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, above the left thigh; and let the incision be on that part and the right hand be inside the anus, and let a transverse incision be made, so that the external incision be wide and deep according to the quantity that comes out of the part as much as is possible, and not larger, because the hand compresses the right hand which is in the anus the stone against the incision, and it is facilitated without difficulty.
And know that there is a part of the stone to which there are angles and margins, because of which the extraction of it is made difficult by this.
And of that stone there comes out something resembling a nut, and it is round, and its extraction is made easy.
Then if it is the one which has angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not thus easily removed, then you must push on that, or grasp around that with your hand decently, the extremity of which should be like a file on which you grasp around the stone, and do not let go of it; or you insert another subtle instrument of curved extremity.
If you cannot walk on that, then increase the hole a little, and if you see a flow of blood, apply to the strong area a cauterized vitriol.
If the stone is more than one, then to begin with, you will push the hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert a knife in it; and then push a little tube into that; and similarly do if there are many stones.
And if it is a very large stone, then ignorance would be to insert that with a large section, because it brings to the patient one of two causes: either death or that it prevents the continuous distillation of urine, because the area is not completely consolidated.
Administer a purge to make it come out from the inside, or put a bandage on the fracture with the forces that extract it in presses.
Then when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with a mixture of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And put on that a dressing soaked in oil and wine, or in rosated oil and cold water, so that the post-wound scab may be softened.
And then have the patient lie on their back, and do not undo the dressing for three days.
And when the aura is unbound, moisten the area with water and warm oil, and then treat it with a gentle ointment of diafinicon and a soothing balm of diabazilicon until it is healed.
If the plague is complicated by an apostema caut, adjust and corrosive, and it seems as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the egression of blood in the urine), then insert a tube into the wound and extract the blood, because remaining there it provokes corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with sharp vinegar, water and salt, and apply to it all species, with that which is convenient for its cure until it is healed.
And take care during the entire treatment that you apply the medicines which have been paused on the area, with your hands between the thighs and adjust them.
And if the stone is small and in the middle of the bladder, and it is stuck, and the flow of urine is prohibited, then treat it with that which has been recommended beforehand to prevent a section, because many times this treatment is accused of being too dry; and already having tried and experimented, take a iron perforator, the shape of which is:
of triangular extracted fat, needle, made in a pipe or flute.
And then take a thread, and tie it to that verge of the thigh, near the hip, so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the verge, piercing with facility through until the piercer comes to that hip. And rotate the piercer with your hand on that small hip, little by little, and you will make the piercing of it until you cause the other part to penetrate; for the urine is thus absorbed.
And then press your hand on that which is broken of the hip of the affected part of the thigh, because it is weakened, and it is perforated with urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not suited to you for some reason that prohibits it, then tie a thread behind the hip, and another thread above the hip. And then bind above the hip on that thigh between two ligatures. And then extract it. And then loosen the ligature and cleanse the wounded area with a poultice, which is made on the wound.
It is not necessary to tie the thigh with a bandage, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder, and another bandage above, because when the bandage is loosened near the rectum, the colon returns to its place and the wound heals.
And for this reason it is necessary to tie the thigh above, so that you elevate the colon to the separated parts above, or so that it returns and fulfills its duty, and the wound heals as we have said.
Chapter 61.
On the extraction of the rectum from women.
The rectum in women is rarely affected.
But if the rectum is affected in any of them, then the cure is difficult and it is forbidden due to too many manual interventions.
One of them is that the woman has a strong or strained back.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who is wise enough to describe to the doctor what she feels, or one of the women having been married.
The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation on the hand.
And the fourth is that the place of the incision near the rectum in women is far from the place of the rectum, because deep indications of incision are feared, and there is danger in it.
More often if necessity provokes you to this, then it is fitting that you take a woman doctor of science, and few are more skilled.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek a doctor who is subtle and skilled, or present a midwife who is trained in the art of women, or a woman who has shared knowledge of this art.
Therefore make that one present, and command to them that they do all that you will order, from the beginning of the inquiry to the commencement; which thing is because it regards whether the woman is a virgin, then it is fitting that one put their finger in the bottom of theirs and check the area.
Therefore if you find that, cut that with your finger, and then command to them that they inject above that.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and inquire about the area, after placing her left hand on the bladder, and hold it with good compression.
Therefore if you find that, then it is fitting that you gently move that from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts towards the summit of its virtue where it comes from, to the root of the thigh.
And then insert the needle into the fatty tissue of the thigh near the knee joint, where the flesh of any part is thickest, and place a small stone in that area, and let the patient's word not be heeded when the stone is pressed.
And let the incision be small at the beginning; and then insert the blade on that incision, and if the stone is felt, then adjust the incision according to the quantity that you know the stone will be extracted from there.
And know that the types of stones are many: for some of them are small and large, and rough and sharp, and long and round, and having ridges.
Therefore you know how many types there are of it, for that which you signify about that which you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, apply on the spot a triturated mixture and hold it for an hour until the blood is stopped, and then return to your operation until the stone is extracted.
And make sure you have prepared for yourself the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is cut, then apply powder on the spot and staunch it with dust and strict bandage, and do not repeat this; for leave the stone and do not extract it, because very likely the patient will die. And then treat the wound.
Therefore when the sharpness of the blood is calmed by certain days, and the place is purified, then you return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Chapter 62.
On the section about hernia with a cough.
Hernia is not anything but an accumulation of humidity in the white bile duct which is below the diaphragm of the testicles containing the urine, and it is called bile duct.
And some times it is in the proper peritoneum which nature prepares for the urine, until it is said that there is another urine; and it is the diaphragm of the testicle between the white bile duct which we have mentioned, and it is not this but a tumor.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the testicles, because in them is accumulated this matter, and sometimes it happens by a blow made on the testicles.
And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it is either declinating to citrine or bloody, or red, or it is black and feculent, or it is white and blanch, and it is that which is most.
And the signs by which it is known are this aggregation of water: for if it is in the white bile that we have spoken of, then the apostema is slightly declining in length thus as a figure of a hoop, and appears the genital area, because humidity contains that from every part.
And if the humidity is in its own pancreatic area, then the apostema is declining with separation of the hoop and thus one estimates that it is another hoop.
And if the humidity is between the coding of the genitals and the white bile, then remove the sediment.
And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then probe the color of the humidity in the apostema with a mixture of heated material whose form is preceded; and according to what comes out in the remains of the mixture, judge what is lacking in it.
Therefore when we come to the treatment of it with iron, then it is good that we command the patient to be bled if it is possible for them, and let them eat the liver of a beast.
And then apply a resin over the seat, two or three on some cause a little higher, and let them drink the juice of raisins.
And then place yourself on the left side of them, and command the assistant to follow on their right side, who should extend their arm to both sides of the hip joint and to the division of the navel of the belly.
And then take a spatula and divide the hip joint in the middle, lengthwise, close to the perineum.
And let the section be made according to a straight rule, at a distance from the line that separates the skin of the hips, until it reaches the white spine, including the pubic area.
And scratch that, and observe, and be careful that you do not cut into it; and your scratching should be with the tool which is suspended from the upper arm and subtly examine the scratching according to the quantity that is possible for you.
And then puncture the full bladder with a wide perforation, and extract all of the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the wound with forceps, and stretch the bladder to the upper parts; and do not touch the hip joint, and cut the bladder in that manner which is possible for you. And cut it in its entirety or in pieces, and especially the subtle lower layer, because if you do not examine the incision of it meticulously, it is not done safely so that the water does not return.
When the hollow of that defect of his crotch in the time of your operation, after you have completed the section of the perineum, return inside that, and then adjust the two lips of the crotch of the genitals with a suture, and then cure it in the same way as the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the hollow corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to elevate the vessels which support the suspended matter, and extract the hollow, and then cure it with the same treatment that we have said.
When the water is collected in two separate parts, then you know that there are two hernias; thus, cut that part according to what you have done on the other side; and if it seems to you that it is a work, then you do it.
And then you cleanse the wound, and insert a linen cloth submerged in oil or in rose oil; and place another clean linen cloth which you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over the two genitals and the navel of the belly; and cover with double cloths and powders, and tie them with a bandage which is according to this form:
And then press two cloths and fill them with hot woolen material according to this resemblance; and make the extremities tight with cloth or wet wool, and add them to the structure in the waist of the breeches, and one of the extremities take from the buttocks between the two, and the second take at the partition of the perineum, and two extremities over two hips and two other extremities on two thighs, and all the structure be adjusted in the waist of the breeches.
And some times this hernia is medicated artificially with a cautery in place of a cut with iron; and it is that you take a sharp cautery knife and that you make incisions in the skin of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until it is discovered the white ciphac containing water, and then you take the cautery according to this form: and it is assembled in Greek letter.
And then puncture that ciphac, and it is ignited until all the humidity is driven out.
And then stretch the ciphac with tongs, and scrape it with tongs, and scrape it with a sharp ignited cautery; and make incisions according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the hole that the fire does not touch.
And it is known that this operation is more beneficial and longer in stopping the flow of blood, and better than an operation with a section.
But if you find an abscess or a painful swelling at the time of section or at the time of cauterization, or flow of blood, then it is advisable that you cure the condition that causes pain to him, with the treatment that is suitable for him according to what has been said.
But if the patient is faint-hearted and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then administer a perforation as I have recommended; and it is when you are certain of this, based on what we have said about the symptoms, that this hernia is painful.
Then it is advisable that you place the patient on some elevated chair, and puncture the abscess in the lowest part of him with a spatula, and make the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the opening be wide enough that all the water flows out.
And then press on the place with a bandage and bind it, so that the rest of the water flows out. And then treat it until the wound is healed.
But if a condition prevents the flow of water at that time, you perforate it: and this is not done except for when the white pancreatic tissue in the orifice of the wound causes a condition and prohibits the outflow of water, then it is advisable that you insert into the wound a needle or instrument with which the water of the drops is extracted, the form of which is described; or adjust on the opening of the wound a small tube.
And you know that the water returns, and it is given for six months or a year to those; and when it is administered, then it should be pierced according to the manual technique, so that the patient will pass their urine.
Chapter 63.
Of the section on fleshly hernia and its cure.
You know that in the section on this hernia, there is a feared loss of function in the major dispositions; because to me it seems that the dismissal of it and being saved by that which is better.
And I am reminding about the operation on that and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that the abscess is born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is made by many causes: either by sharp acute superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess follows the color of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And also there is a putrid abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not adhere to it.
And some swellings are made by inflammation of the arteries, and by inflation of those which have already been perceived as remembered, or by inflation of veins.
Mainly that which is due to inflammation of the arteries is diagnosed by the dispersion of the abscess when you press on it with your fingers; and do not touch that which is putrid.
Mainly that which is made by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed from it for any reason except compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that on this species a section is made and on the other parts; and it is that you cut the tendon of the genitals, and then stretch the skin to the divided parts, and extract that from the white cartilage, and release the suspensor of the vessels, and tie them, and cut the suspensor so that you release that entire part of the parts of the skin.
Then if the skin is already consolidated in those fleshy parts, then it is advisable that you extract the skin and cut it.
And if there is adhesion between any part of the cartilage, or between that which is between the vessels, then it is advisable that you release the entire adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
Mainly if there is a growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then it is advisable that you cut all that is of it, and extract the skin as we have said.
Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and vinegar; and then take care to treat that with another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of hernia that is of the groin.
A hernia is an abscess enclosed by some wrapping resembling a tumor with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement and walking for the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness is to be feared because of that which is preceded by inflammation.
However, I will say what operation to perform on it, as the first ones did.
And I say that you should make the patient sit on an elevated chair; and then press the suspender of the testicles to the divided thighs; and then tie the string of the genitals with threads or laces to the buttocks which are next to the penis; and hold those other ministers that you have, and stretch those with a vehement extension.
And then make an incision in the spatula with a sharp knife by cross-section on the right of the buttocks until the buttocks are uncovered.
And then scratch from the entire area thus as you have said in extraction of varices which are in the temples.
And then put in those a needle in which there is double thread, and tie that on the first of the places where the veins occur, and tie another one at the back of them. And then cut those in the middle place for section of bad and fetid humidity, and extract that which is aggregated from the foul and corrupted moistures.
And then heal the wound with care of the other wounds in which you want to be regenerated so that the veins fall, which not being one of the two genitals, is not bad for that.
But if the veins occur to all the lower parts, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles for this reason be tied to the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the cutting of the veins, and that they be cauterized, or that they be tied so that they are not joined with those.
Chapter 65.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is by section that creates an end to the cyphac extending over the belly from the part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, so that saying the intestines of that rupture go to some of the intestines.
And this rupture is of the spleen or of excess of it, and these two species are caused by many reasons: either by percussion, or by salt, or by shouting, or by elevation of some serious cause, or by resemblance.
In the case of this, when it is due to extension of the spleen, it happens little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess that forms between the diaphragm and the stomach so that the spleen compresses the intestine.
And the symptom of it is when it is due to inflammation of the spleen, because at the beginning it makes a vehement pain happen suddenly; and it is a diverse abscess appearing under the ribcage, appearing externally, and this is due to obstruction of the intestine, and the body of it is divided into parts above the spleen.
And sometimes it happens that the net of the intestine is pushed out through a hole in the abdomen, and this is called an intestinal hernia, or sliding.
And sometimes it is made in the stomach area, and sometimes it runs into the intestine and gets stuck, and this is a great danger to the patient, and sometimes it causes bad and severe pain especially when it is pressed.
And in the cure of the species of this disease, iron is feared, because it is believed that the evacuation should be avoided.
And the manner of the operation of that is to command the patient to return the intestine with their hand to the internal parts of its cavity, if they obey its return, and place themselves bent over their own neck between their thighs, and lift their legs.
And then stitch the cord which is the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and cut the cord of the testicles all along the length; and put in two lips of the section oil according to what was indicated to heal the section with those.
And if the section, according to the quantity that is possible for you, from which the hole was made outside.
And then excavate that which surrounds the cords of the testicles, until the white hard knot of each part is uncovered.
Then insert your finger into that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white knot, which is where the cord of the hole is, and between the knot, and resolve the adherence that is in the part behind the hole.
And then take the left hand to the scrotum of the testicles to the sides of the behind, and with the right hand extend the white cloth under the left hand, and lift the humidity to the cloth at the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the humidity in this way and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with a complicated solution.
And be certain with the fingers that there is no cause for the intestine being enveloped in the white cloth during the procedure. But if you find any cause in them, then press that to the belly of the patient.
Then cut in the area where the cord of the testicles is, for a section through which blood and urine flow, as we have recommended in what we have said previously.
And administer the flaxseed oil as an enema, and apply it to the wound; and administer the tie that we have recommended (and some veins of the white hip are cauterized, which we have said regarding the incision of the vein with a flow of blood, because many veins are cut) and remove the tie so that the blood flows.
But if the falling of the blood is delayed, then let hot water be applied as a poultice, and put it on that place where the blood flows, as we have said.
And cure the wound with the other cures of wounds so that it is healed.
Chapter 66.
Of bloated hernia.
In this hernia, nothing is seen that has been cauterized under the treatment of iron.
And the first ones said that it is made thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is with the vein; which is that you lift the vessels and place the section above the ease of the patient; and you dry in the middle location around the apostema with that which helps, until the vessels fall.
And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
Of the distortion that is made in the ankles.
Some swellings show a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and cause pain in the area.
And they do not say to the knees any cause of the intestines to the knees; and if they do, it is little; and it returns in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with this, there is adjusted a fissure in the hip until the intestine descends into the hip; and it happens that through the extension of the hip, which is in the ankles as we have said, causing the hip to be stretched, and placed is made soft and the area becomes inflamed and hurts.
The cure of it is with a cautery thus that it is preceded by the narration of it.
And some times it is cured with iron following this method: and it is that the patient lies on their back between their two hands, and then dry the area of the rupture of the abscesses with a scalpel for the width according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white hip that is under the kidney until it becomes uncovered.
And then take the bladder and place it on the prominent area of the hip, and press it against the pressure of the belly.
And then sew the two prominent areas on the extremity of the bladder of the hip, and adjust with a suture one to the other.
And then extract the extremity of the bladder, and do not insert it into the hip at all, nor does it extend to the groin, nor any other cause thus that you will know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that one with the treatment of wounds, and as you insert the threads, clean that one and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the hip is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And a cautery is better in this place, because it is more beneficial for health.
Chapter 68.
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
When the skin of the testicles is touched in some men it becomes soft due to excess moisture, because the flesh that is between it becomes softened, and its preservation is damaged.
It is necessary for the one who is preparing the cure of it to make the patient lie on their back, and to lift the entire skin which has been softened above the natural skin; and then to adjust the two lips to the suture.
And if you wish, cut in the beginning the excess of the softened skin with three stitches or four and with a firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then cure by curing the other wounds until it is healed and the fevers subside.
Chapter 69.
On castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but for a reason it is legitimate for me to remind you of it in this book; and the reminder of it is not necessary except for two manners, of which one is that in the science of medicine when one is skilled in it, knows the cure of it to whom it happens; and the other manner is that we often have need of castration of other animals for our young, such as of many kids, and of oxen, and of pigs, and of similar animals.
And thus I say that cauterization is done in two ways: either by friction or by incision to section.
More in that which is done by friction, the way of the operation is that we make the beast soak in hot water until the genitals of it become softened and loosened and hang. And then take those with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear, removing the touch.
More in cauterization done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the suspender, and make an incision above each testicle with one cut so that two testicles are separated.
And then cut those parts that you want to remove from each. And do not leave on those of the scrotum any cause, but the thin scrotum which is above the veins.
And this way of cauterization is better than that which is done by friction, because friction strongly leaves some cause of the testicles for which the beast desires to copulate.
And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter twenty.
On the cure of hermaphrodism.
Hermaphroditism in men is seen in two manners: one is when it appears that there is a space in the scrotum of testicles, in which case there is a female figure between two testicles, for whom there are hairs.
And some times urine comes out of that hole which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
But in women it's a species: and it is that the womb of the woman on the perineum is similar to two testicles of a man, a little all joined together at the division of the vagina, like the penis of a man with two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two in men and of one species in women. And it is that you should remove those adjusted flesh growths so that the swelling of that thing subsides, and then you will cure them with the treatment of other plagues.
And in the second species of men, from which urine comes out, which is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Chapter twenty-one.
On protruding lips and flesh due to causes in women.
The ligature is strongly adjusted over natural causes within which it is tightened and made to hold the bandage; and some women are magnified in some ways so much that they spread like men and appear in the streets.
Then remove the excess of ligature from your hand or with a knife and scissors.
And do not cut too much, especially on the edge of the reason, so that no flow of blood is hindered.
Then heal that wound with the cure of the wounds within which it will be healed.
Bad flesh is flesh that is born in the horror of the mother within which it fills, and strongly it is ejected to the partitions of blood according to the likeness of a hernia (and for this reason some first call it "fallen illness"); therefore remove that we cut thus as we cut ligatures, and heal it within which it will be healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of gout.
Gout is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or the hole is small. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to illness which has preceded it, and that is made by flesh not adjusted or by a subtle or thick spleen.
It is made in the prison of the womb, or in the costs of it, or in the upper part of the pus, or in the lower part of the pus, and forbidden from coition and from pregnancy and from childbirth, and strengthen the forbidden menses.
And the recognition of that is made by examination of the matrix, if the obstruction is apparent, it is proclaimed; but if it is not apparent, then search for that with the fingers or at the area.
But if the obstruction is due to a subtle sphincter, and it is proclaimed to the dual lips, then touch and disrupt that.
And it is that you apply to the dual lip folds, and immediately after that, touch the fingers indicating both hands under the affected areas.
And the woman should be on her back, the thighs extended, and immediately after that, extend the dual lips outward so that the subtle sphincter is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take a flannel and anoint it with oil and apply that to the area, and hold it there all day so that the area does not become consolidated.
But if the sphincter is thick and dense, then it is necessary that you cut that with a broad spatula or with a mortar's spoon.
More often if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that limb with a bandage, and cut into that.
And you put on them the medicines that make stop the flow of blood with emollients, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and juniper, mixed with the white of an egg.
Then administer a lead pipe widely so that the wound is not consolidated lightly.
And hold that for several days and administer massage with dry licorice.
Then it should be cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And some times they occur in the native birthplace of other flesh, and then it is necessary to cut following this method. But if it is due to cancerous aposteme, for the cancerous aposteme which is in the matrix let there not be done counter-irritation with iron in any manner.
Chapter 123.
On the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that occurs in the cleft of women.
Hemorrhoids are the appreciation of the orifices of many veins inside which there runs much continuous blood; and as they are antiquated hemorrhoids, thus they are made.
And I have said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and to say which ones receive treatment and which ones do not receive treatment.
Therefore, I say that the intestines and liver when are in the grip of the matrix and do not appear to feeling, then in those cases treatment should not be made with iron.
More of those which are in the orifice of the matrix, above which feeling is detected, are those that are cured.
And it is good that you put the woman in a cold wrap and then extend the thigh to the orifices, or with a rough cloth, and incise those at the roots.
And then powder over those wounds with the flow of blood from one of the incised powders that cause mordication, thus as cassia and similar to those.
And then immerse the feet in a water for an hour, and then soak that in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make that plaster with decoction of sumach and with powders of millet and of walnuts and of similar things.
And then take flour of orris root and mix it with honey and wine, and make a plaster to apply on the back of the patient.
If the blood is separated, it is good; and if not, make an adherence with two bandages, and to the breasts scars will be made.
And then take wool and soak it in the juice of colicander or the juice of arnagloza or the juice of guarravier with five pennies, and make an adherence to the area; and then heal the area with a plaster until it is healthy.
And heal it until it is healthy.
Chapter 74.
Of the accidental perforation of the intestine in the matrix.
Various species of apostems that occur in the matrix, such as cancer and apostemic plague, and ulcers, and indurated and eroded tumors, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and ragadias, and thyl, and other apostems. And I have already spoken of these illnesses and the species of those, and the signs of those, and the cures for them in the division.
And it is known that I have said in this treatise of apostems that the cautery which is made on the matrix when there are apostems that collect pus, and if you want to know in what manner the operation with iron is done.
When considering if the pain of the abscess in the beginning is sharp with percussion and fever, and sometimes that swelling and if it falls on the sentiment, then do not think about perforation, and cure it with what helps with the maturation until the intensity of the accidents decreases.
And then make the woman lie on a chair that has two chairs; and recline on her back with her feet adjusted to the separation of the belly, and her thighs spread, and place her arms under her shoulders, and tie each one with a ligature to what is conveniently available.
Then the midwife takes the right hand and administers the instrument with which the opening of the womb of the mother is made, the shape of which will be described in those cases that will be done afterwards.
And then when you want to administer this instrument, make it touch the womb of the mother of the woman, and what of the instrument enters into the womb should not be more than the womb of the mother and lead to the illness. But if the instrument is larger than the womb of the mother, then make sure to place pads on the texture of the womb of the mother so that the entrance of any instrument into the womb of the mother is prohibited.
And it is necessary that you stop the flow that runs in the instrument of the side, from above, and that the assistant holds the instrument and rotates the flow until the opening of the matrix is opened.
When the tumor appears, and it is touched by the hand and it is soft and tender, then it is necessary that you cut that which is above the head of the abscess with a spatula.
And when the blood is evacuated, then it is necessary that you apply to the wound a gauze soaked in rose oil or green oil in which there is some astringency; and press the calculus into the section in the navel of the matrix.
And put on the matrix and on the perineum a clean cloth soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
Then it will be cured in two days, provided that one is applied to what is convenient until it is healed.
And some times the matrix and the wound are washed with water and honey, and then with water in which root of iris or aristolochia is boiled, and then the plaster is reapplied.
And if the wound is deeply entrenched in the matrix, then it is necessary that you desist from the treatment of it with iron, instead treat it with what we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To instruct midwives in what manner the unnatural embryos are to be treated medically when they are seen according to a non-natural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes in the beginning the figure of the natural birth by signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman express at the times of labor and desire to smell the air, and about this she is relieved by that which is on her from the part, and examines the essence of the embryo, then know that this part is according to the natural figure, and its essence is above or suspended from the navel.
Then when you see these signs, then it is necessary that the belly of the woman be compressed so that the embryo moves down slightly, because when they are above on the navel, they move to the vulva, and it is cleaned of those superfluous things for a good cleansing.
More often it is that this part is unnatural and not praise-worthy, because when the embryo is situated on its feet and the body of the woman is situated in front of her head and her feet, or one hand of hers, or at her foot, or it is situated with her head and her hand, or at her belly, and for a long time it is turned on its navel, and appears as one of the unnatural figures.
The doctor needs a necessary cause to be wise and subtle in all those cases, and to guard against error and deception.
And thus showing the entire figure of those things, and what engine or device is in those things so that it is signified by them and is established upon them.
When the fetus is situated above the womb by natural increase, and it is vehement on the woman and is made in the difficult part, and times the virtue of the already debilitated womb, then make that which women have, and evaporate the congealed humor with a warm decoction and with humid oils.
And then the midwife inserts her hand between the woman's thighs, a small spatula, and makes an incision in that second [membrane], or dries it with her fingernail, removing from it what is in it of humidity. And press the woman's belly so that the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be anointed with a plaster of pitch and a decoction of figs with cypress.
And then command her, and anoint her, to be compressed and make her vomit with a concoction; and tie her mouth and her nose for one hour, so that the fetus will be forced out as soon as possible.
And if the two hands of the feet are swollen at the beginning, then it is advisable that you reduce them with facility little by little. More if it does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and hold the chair firmly to the ground; and let the woman be held so she does not fall during the concussion.
And if the hands are not skillfully turned and the foot dies, then incise those and extract the morbid matter from the foot or bind the body to the hand of the one with a cloth and extract that one equally, because that will be swollen.
When the foot is swollen on the two feet, then it is advisable that you impel them in their own, and return the foot small, and that you bend it, and that you take one of them and stretch it little by little.
But when they are swollen between the thighs, then you command it to be extracted, and make that one extrude with condition, because it will be swollen if God wills it.
And if it is not swollen with what we have recommended, then you return the foot little by little until it takes its natural shape, because then it will be swollen with less swelling.
And if it is forbidden to use all that we have recommended, then take a mixture of high alum and dissolved gum, and strike it thoroughly in the mortar with good percussion, and apply this paste to the wound of the woman, at the bottom of her belly. And make that mixture into a cold water infusion, until it achieves the hypochondria.
And when the separated parts of them are thus softened, then make for them a subfumigation of myrtle and apply it to them. And when you have applied the subfumigation for an hour, then make a poultice on a seat, and apply it to induce vomiting and clear the mouth of them, and lift their legs, and press the separated part at the lower abdomen with gentle compression, so that the fetid humor may be expelled.
A poultice is placed on the foot lengthwise during the time one of their hands is being held. Let it be thought in reduction of the hand of the patient, but if you cannot reduce that, then elevate the woman and make her go.
And if going is not possible, then make the patient lie on their back, and strike the thighs of the patient with violent concussion, and then administer ointments which are made from mucus.
And if swelling has come, then make the patient sit on a chair, and then attend to the reduction of the hand, and rock the foot according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to press inside until it is forgotten.
A poultice on the foot with expanded hands and the surface of the patient is at the two of their mother. Let the midwife hold the hand of the child and gently turn that small one little by little, and thus facilitate that.
And when it is swollen, then place on the joint of the aforementioned area that we have recommended of oil and of poultices.
And command her to massage gently little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sit on a chair and command her to lean on the right side, and command her to be compressed; and make her vomit with a condition. The prepared fetus exits over the side.
When you are about to horrifically cut through the mother following this method, consider, and then you insert your nail between the second one so that it is evacuated of humidity.
And if the child is suspended by the face and neck, then you insert that of the navel, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then insert the child in the divided parts inside so that it rests according to what is necessary, and send the woman to compress certain times, and it will be forgotten with a gentle movement, if God or will.
The exit of twins or of many fetuses. It seems that twin births are rarely seen in nature, and some say three or four, but this is strange and uncommon; more so because the cause comes from nature, and it's not a living thing.
And consider those, already being multiple, a second one, and they are separated by the navel, distinguishing those within the ligament in the navel of each of those. Some births are unnatural as if it is a fact from natural movement, and some are also considered unnatural as we have counted previously.
And if some of their births are difficult to deliver, and they come to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you will cure them in the same way that we have recounted.
And the midwife should be subtle and do what facilitates and is done with subtlety, and not delay, and be ingenious according to the entire figure as it has been prepared by art leading to health.
Recollection of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Some women are formed with one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more, and it has been verified by me that a woman aborted nine, and another ten, all of which were fully formed, the cause of which was made by measurement of the glorious sages.
And it is known in the science of midwifery that a strong woman aids in that labor with a similar device, and thus one operates on it as if it were a womb.
Chapter 76.
Of the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with the method we have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not forced out, and you are not skilled in using the operation with your hands, then consider if the woman is of good virtue and not at risk of accidents for which loss on her part is feared.
Then it is that the woman should be placed on her back on a seat or bed, and her head should be inclined downwards and her thighs elevated.
And the assistant should hold the two parts of her, or tie her to the seat, so that her body does not move away from the extraction of the fetus.
And then anoint the mother's mouth with olive oil and mucus of altaea and of fenugreek and of sesame seed.
And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucus, and then inserts her hand with ease into the mother, and then seeks with her hand the place where the fetus is stuck.
And find a convenient place for this: then consider if the foot is prepared to be placed on the head, and then put the ankles in the heels of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or leave the beard, or in the furrow of it, or in the proper places of the ribs, or leave the hypochondriums.
More if the placement is on the feet of it, then in the penis, or in the middle of the ribs.
And take the ankle with the right hand, and hold the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand with ease and put the ankle in some of those places we have mentioned, until you reach the underlying cause.
Then take and place on the opposite side of it another ankle, or the thigh if necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its natural straightness alone.
And massage the entire affected area, so that its discomfort is alleviated just as it is done in order to eradicate it.
And take in that which is between them that the extension should be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then take that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and inserts them gently and stirs with those fingers the retained area.
Therefore, if the part of the foot is dislocated, then the ankles are loosened and placed in the area where it should be; and do so until the entire foot is dislocated.
But if the hand is displaced outward from the other, and it's not possible to reduce it by constraining it, then take a cloth that has been wrapped around it; and carefully extract it until it's entirely dislocated, and reset it either in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
And do the same on the other hand and on both feet.
But if the head of the foot is large, or is constricted in the swelling, or is in the head of the water being adjusted, then take a spatula and insert it between the tendons and split the head and extract the water, or that it be scraped with an instrument which is called “alundat”, the shape of which will be described along with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter which is relevant to this.
And similarly do if the foot has a large head by nature: then take and reset it with a chisel, or that it be scraped with an alundat as we have said; and carefully extract the bones with the forceps.
And if the head is elevated and constricted by the pillow, then it should be cut out so that the humidity which is in the chest is evacuated.
More or less, if it's not complicated, nor an obstruction to elevation, then you will incline the head as much as is possible to you.
And if the abdomen is swollen with an abscess or it is dropsical, then it is necessary that you perforate that area so that the humidity which is in it can flow out.
More or less, if the fetor is above the two feet, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the matrix is lighter.
More or less, if it is constricted by the abdomen and chest, then it is necessary that you extract that which you have wrapped with a cloth over your hand, and that you cut the abdomen and chest so that what is in them can flow out.
More or less, if the other members are stopped and the head is turned, then the left hand enters; more or less, if the mouth of the matrix is opened, then the hand enters the womb, and near that, the head is turned, and it attracts that with the fingers into the mouth of the matrix, and places one or two fingers inside, and pulls it towards those.
And if the mouth of the womb is constricted by an apostemal cautery which adheres to it, then beware that it does not cause turmoil within it; however, beware then to administer an infusion of humid and fatty substances. Then administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the pain is on the side of the liver, then if possible, it should be pricked: and there should be administered what we have said for the painful liver.
And if that is not possible, then let it be cut into pieces, and extracted.
And beware that you do not leave any cause of pain within the second intestine.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of apostems, those that adhere to the womb.
And if there is an adherence of bloody flux, then dip in astringent waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in whose womb the fetus was dead, and then upon that place another conceived fetus, and then the dead fetus is another matter. It adheres to the navel for a long time an apostem; and it is inflated between the womb and the intestines, and begins to throw out arms.
And you were called to treat him, and you treated him for a long time, but the wound is not consolidated.
Then you applied to him from some causes a plaster of strong attraction, and extracted from him a bone, and then passed the urine, and extracted another bone; and you were very marvelled, since there is no bone in the belly.
And then you thought that they were bones of a dead fetus.
Then you probed the wound, and extracted from it many bones, the woman existing in her seventh month of pregnancy, and already had been in such a manner for a long time, and delivered from it a small arm.
And you do not find it strange, but rather that in this there is knowledge and help for that which the doctor's skillful hand administers for the cure.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of a vertex with which the mother is opened:
This is the form of a holder in which the limbs are held, to whose holding belong two vertices at the two extremities of two fetuses. It is recommended that this vertex be made more subtle by the craftsman, and that it be made of ivory or of boxwood.
And the width of each thigh is two fingers and the margin of each thigh is one finger, and the length of each thigh is one and a half palms; and in the middle location of two thighs there are two adjustments of that same thigh, which are already firm, of which the length is a little more than half a palm, and the width of each thigh is two fingers or a little less.
And these two additions should be introduced into the mouth of the matrix so that it opens with those when you apply the two prescribed virtues.
Make another similar to that one, but more subtle and lighter:
Let it be made from the fibers of elder or boxwood, according to the resemblance of strengths. More often on the extremity of it put two additions thus times, and the length of these additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the matrix, then make the woman sit on a chair with her feet hanging, opening what is between her thighs. And then take your hand with the instrument thus as you make a hole according to the quantity that you want of the width of the mouth of the matrix, until the thread makes what you want.
The form of dizziness that the ancients described:
Form of swelling on which the foot is swollen:
Form of friendship on which the big head is constricted
And it is assembled with forceps to which the teeth are in the extremity, like times, and some visits are made long like forceps according to this form, like times, to which the teeth are like teeth of reassurance on which it has fallen and is constricted. Form of little or weak friendship:
Form of a wound having a spine or splinter:
Form of a wound having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two extremities on which the head is separated or cut off:
Form of two broad or wide spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and the more the species of that one are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, the easier it is to its operation and the more useful it is for men because of their quantity.
And do not neglect those instruments, for they should be prepared by you, because the need for them is inexcusable.
Of the extraction of the second [or possibly "the afterbirth" or "placenta"], however considering
When the afterbirth is retained from the birth, then it is necessary that you command the ill woman to retain her seat, and make her vomit with a concoction, and hold your hand over her mouth and over her nostrils, and if by this way she is not discharged, it is good.
And if not, then take a woolen cloth and perforate in the blanket a hole and put in that opened mouth of the mother, thus with warmth and rough and nettle and chamomile and dried Arabic and Cassia wood and holy tree. Soak all these herbs or some of them in water in the cloth, and put that on the womb.
Then put a tube of cane in the mouth of the mother, and hold it until the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And make her vomit in the way we have said, and the afterbirth will be expelled with speed.
But if this cure is not effective, then you command the midwife to insert her left hand into oil of juniper or in a mixture of nutmeg, and then introduce it into the womb and search for the afterbirth, and when she has found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the womb of the mother, then introduce the hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the afterbirth, extract it slowly so that the mother does not feel vehement pain. Let both sides of the costal areas be permeated with gentle ease on the right and left.
And if the mouth of the matrix is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with purging and medication of the bile with herbs.
But if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not make an iteration of abstraction on that, but rather it is necessary that what comes out of it from the mouth of the matrix to the thigh of the woman, and then apply a plaster and tetra-pharmakon; because that will make her purify for several days and it will be dissolved and forgotten.
But when it is purified, the evil humor is elevated from her to the head and to the stomach, and that oppresses the patient; and then it is necessary that sub-phumigations and conveniences be administered to her.
But some of the Ancients already used a sub-phumigation of dried nasal snuff and of dried figs.
Shape of an instrument with which the woman is fumigated to retain the menses and the secondine ( likely referring to a device used to treat female disorders, such as retention of menstrual flow or afterbirth).
It must be done with sight or by feeling.
And let the thin extremity be placed in the bowl and the wider extremity over the focus, and the sub-fumigation be placed on the arms of the focus.
And hold that one until the sub-fumigation is consumed and another one is put in its place.
Of the treatment of the navel of the unperforated child.
Many children are born and their navels are not perforated, which have a thin and closed cicatrix. Then tell the midwife to pierce that cicatrix with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatulum, and be careful not to touch the liver.
And immediately apply on that place a flannel soaked in wine and oil; and treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is closed, then put a cannula in the navel for many days, and remove it when the child is able to defecate.
And if there is closure of the navel due to consolidation of a wound or an abscess; then tell that this consolidation should be incised, and immediately treated with what we have said about the treatment and the poultice.
Of the treatment of fistulas that appear in the eyes.
The fistulas that appear in the low part of the eyes are a sign of thickening and nodules, which appear near the anus or in the space of one side.
And it is a fistula or many boils.
And when that nodulation is ancient and corrupted by damp whitish or subtle purulence, and some veins are seen coming from these fistulas, some penetrate.
And those penetrating are known by the fact that a discharge is issued from them through excretion and flatulence; and some times it happens that the patient has diarrhea, and often the worm is expelled from them.
And some of these fistulas are seen in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the marrow of the penis; and some of these penetrating go into the joint of the thigh and into the knot of the hip.
And that in which a penetrating fistula is recognized as entering into the anus and not entering, is that you put your finger inside the anus, and you insert a thin probe of iron or wire into the fistula when there is no obstruction.
But if there is an obstruction in it, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into which you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel anything in the entire abdomen nor any protrusion of the bowel or any cause of evacuation or worms or gas, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then touch the area to be treated.
When the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the sign of it is excessive urine from that and prohibition to him from going to the place where medicine will be applied to consolidate it.
More so if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and increases pain in the circle, then the signal of it is that the tenderness is felt inside here, if there is not brittleness inside the bone, and increase of pain in the circuit of the affected part; and that of it produces pus and discharge; and that it does not respond to medication, nor is consolidated with ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all, and the treatment of those is labor and vanity of the foolish doctors, on which they are firm.
But in the one that is not penetrating and not chronic, healing with iron is hoped for, according to what you have recounted, and that which has already been tried and proved.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on the back of the bed and lifts their legs inside, the thighs are inclined towards their belly, and then insert a probe of lead, or of iron if it's an anal fistula, until you feel the place where the probe penetrates.
And if that sensation causes the patient to turn around the neck, then it is necessary that you insert your finger inside the neck.
And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already penetrated and uncovered the passage, or if you feel between the finger and the sphincter or flesh, then you are certain that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, because it is not in that place where healing will occur, as we have said.
More importantly, I have said to some that certain illnesses are healthy in certain men badly.
And of the medication for which it is hoped that youth is regained in him, it is that you apply subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that ignited thing into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then repeat this two or three times until you feel that all those adjusted tissues, which resemble a nest of feathers, are adjusted.
And then treat that with warm poultices enveloped in cloth so that all those adhering tissues are softened, and treat that with medicine that engenders and consolidates the flesh, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it is not healthy within a certain time for another treatment.
And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate through the tissue where it is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is only a few inches of flesh or intestine, and it touches the fistula on what is the surface of the bowel, then cut the bowel from the start of the fistula, and you will cut with the probe, and let it be in the fistula so that the cutting reaches the place where the end of the probe appears, and through the probe it is liberated and emptied.
And then clean those fistulated tissues which are gathered like a tube of straw and not broken by any of these causes.
More often if there is a flow of blood that comes between you and your operation when you dissect those tissues, then the instrument that should be cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for cautery with fire adjusts good habits: it is the adjustment of those tissues, and the removal of bad blood, the excision of humidity.
And then treat the wound with warm compresses or trusses applied to the affected area, and also treat the plague with a plaster made from hard fat that generates and consolidates.
And these are the medicines in which there is purging and evacuation; when the treatment is restored, it is already healed and you do not fear relapse.
More often if the fistula has passed into the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert the pointed instrument into the anus and investigate with it.
And therefore if you feel the tension and between you and it is a vein of blood or flesh, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation on it but rather a way of trust and hope.
This cause is to be administered in one of three ways: either that you cauterize the area as we have said; or that you evacuate it by entering and achieving its cavity, so that you can introduce the instruments and the cure provided; and do not proceed with too much evacuation so that you do not irritate the lacert containing the intestine, and that you act on the patient's will and consent; and then treat it with what we have said before, which will strongly heal it; or that you extend the vein and remove the pus that you evacuate from the area near the anus, as we have said, either with a tent or another sharp instrument, and then cleanse the fistulized flesh which is in the evacuated area where you can make an incision; and then strive to make the restoration of the entire wound with evacuation, and if the purulent pus does not consolidate, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, it will be easier for the patient. And some fistulas are finished in this manner: it is when you insert the thread into the fistula, and it is in the flesh of the buttocks around the surface of the body with the codena and in the margin of the buttocks, then take the thread of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the orifices according to this form:
and insert it into that vein wrapped with 5 veins or around those; and then insert the thread into the vein in the fistula until you achieve the cavity of it.
More if it is penetrating in the margin of the buttocks deeply, then you extract the vein from that hole like you insert your finger in the buttocks; and extract the extremity of the vein and adjust the two extremities together, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or for two, and when you see the vein coming out of the flesh, tighten until those flesh are coming out which are between the two extremities of the vein and that fall.
And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
More if the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate, in whatever way you have prepared, but that it be more in the groin, because it is not for you to do this so that the urine does not come out; and then do it in such a way that it is healed.
The shape of the spine is where the fistula is split: the curvature of which is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not cut unnecessarily, thus as needed.
Of the stitching of swollen veins in which blood runs in the incision of those.
Swollen veins are judged by two methods, whether they are between the hemorrhoids and the buttocks or if they are with a fat of excessive flesh. And of those that are small and large, and where the blood flows from them in abundance, and it is one, and very abundant, and outside the buttocks, and in the extremities of it.
Worse are the ones that are outside the buttocks according to the amount of little humidity, from which flows yellowish water or a small amount of blood with continuous flow, and according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is next to the anus is that we command the patient to sit and to strain themselves so that the anus opens and the swollen veins appear to you. Then you touch and lift with your fingers or that you hold them with your nail, and then cut those according to their roots.
If the ulcers are not held in those places due to their humidity and softening, then take those with a coarse cloth or with a cotton swab or with a flannel of wool, and extract those with the fingers, and immediately sprinkle those and powder over them certain powders suitable for the wound, for application instead of cauterization; or cauterize those as previously described in the chapter on cauterization. And then heal those with another cure until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey the evacuation, then anoint the patient with an ointment in which there is a mild biting, and let it be washed with that water which is in the basin and which will facilitate evacuation gently when the patient presses.
If the hemorrhoids are protruding from the anus, then their cause is alleviated, and it is that you take those with your nail, or that you take those with a needle, and prick them, and immediately heal them with the water that we have mentioned until they are healed.
And for the one who has undergone incision, it is necessary to administer suture in this manner: take thread and insert it into the needle, and then extract the hemorrhoids from the divided parts, and make that penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap the two extracted ends of the thread around the divided part below the needle, and lengthwise; and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong stitching, and immediately knot the thread and extract the needle.
Make a cut in that area, and take out one of them, and do not cauterize, so that the excess blood from that wound does not flow.
Then put a poultice on the buttocks made with rose oil or wax; and apply that to the anus, and instruct the patient to rest. And then remove that which falls into a box; and when it is cut, treat those wounds with an ointment or another cure so that they are healed.
And if they are old and not valid in that medicine, then it is advisable to apply those to the point of spit or with your nail so that they are made humid and the pus is drawn out from them, which prohibits their consolidation; and then treat those so that they are consolidated.
Then apply those with a violent purging so that the first thing is blood and they are scraped; and then treat those so that they are healed.
It is known that hemorrhoids, it is clear, and not if there isn't a notable swelling according to the color of the body resembling a head of lavender, and it is made in all the body and mainly in the lower parts near the feet and the thighs, and it comes from those painful veins.
And then it is necessary that what has grown in the area of the groin be held with tongs or with an onion, and be eradicated from its root; and then treat that area.
And if you want, cauterize the second one that is described in the following chapter.
Warts are a small, rough, round, ulcerated protrusion on the surface of the body, and similar growths appear on the hands of children.
And the treatment for it is to stretch and cut that, or to tighten it with a string or a hair that fits into the wound. And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with a hot iron or with sharp medicine.
Warts are a small, fatty, ulcerated or fistulous growth on the surface of the body, especially on the thumb, and when you touch it, it seems to be centered in the likeness of a boil, and it is found around the body.
And the treatment for it is to take a needle of cotton thread or of wool thread, and make it strong, and place it over the wart until it is held by the circle of the thread of the parts of it; and then rotate your hand with the needle so that you cut what is in the area of the wart, and press it into the thumb of the flesh, and eradicate the wart from its root.
And if you want, make that with a cane of iron or of wood according to this form:
Let the division of the cane be with subtlety, deaf (that is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that above the aforementioned thing the absorption of it should be alleviated and the revolution of that.
And if you want, cauterize the woman according to what is stated above in the cauterization of the thigh in the chapter on cauterization.
On the form of the instruments that are administered to give a purging.
Some enemas are made of silver or of gold or of iron forged or hammered; and some enemas are made from those small and large instruments according to those for which they are administered, because that which is administered in the treatment of little children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are fragile or painful, their enemas should be small.
The form of a large and few enemas:
The end of the cane from which it hangs, in which the bag is tied, should be wide in this manner; and let the distinction be where the bag is tied, like so many times.
And the extremity of the part that is inserted into the buttocks, which enters, should be deaf (that is not opened), almost to the end, with subtlety; and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and let the width of the hole be according to the thickness of the thighs and a little thicker.
And let the pouch be where the medicines of the bladder of the beast or of sheep's skin are placed, and its reason being one palm.
And let it be perforated by many holes thus as it is rolled up; and if the space which is between the holes is of the thickness of the said.
And then insert into those holes a strong and crude filament which should be of ten filaments, or surround those; and adjust to it the pouch; and when the pouch is placed on him, let it be tightened around the head of the roll between two distinguishing strong bands, and then tighten the roll to each hole: The quality of tightening the roll to each hole is that you fill the pouch with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it not be too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be supported on his back, and lift his legs up to him and place under them a cushion on which are already the men or a lanolin; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with white of egg or with mucus of fenugrec or of similar things; and then insert that into the anus with ease, and then the minister takes the pouch and expresses it with two fingers and presses with vehemence until all that is in the roll is evacuated into the intestine; and then extract the roll and the patient lifts his legs to the wall.
And if medicine forces that symptom, hold it as much as possible; and if sleep comes to that person for an entire night, it is more beneficial in treatment.
More so if you diagnose that person with ailments of abdominal discharge and the symptom of theirs the thigh, then you will apply the cautery until they are healed.
And if in the anus there are painful hemorrhoids or abscesses, then let the diagnosis be subtle and precise, of the diagnoses with which the children are diagnosed.
Of the treatment of wounds.
I have already spoken in the division of the treatment of wounds what is suitable for the free man, and I will speak thus the treatment of those with illness and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the place where the wounds occur.
And the causes by which many wounds are made are like gathering of gravel, or cutting with a sword, or with a knife, or beating with a lance, or with a fist, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many other causes.
More wounds that are in the places of the body are like a wound which falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar to those of the limbs.
And thus we recommend the cure of certain wounds for which we pause this reasoning and rule over other wounds.
And we will begin with the simple head wounds, for the discussion of the composite ones will come after the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and it's not a fracture, then consider: if it's due to a blow from a stone or something similar, and the skin has been torn only slightly and it's a large wound and you fear the onset of an abscessing caut, then seize the moment and perform a cephalic bloodletting as soon as possible, and don't delay; and extract from that vein according to the quantity of the virtue of it, if there's no prohibitive cause for bloodletting, especially if the blood that comes out of the wound is scarce.
And let the bloodletting be on the opposite side of the wounded part; and protect the patient from replenishment and wine and coarse foods.
But if the condition prohibits any kind of nourishment, then let it be diminished from food and not approached with meat nor wine.
And apply to the wound, if an abscessing caut occurs to it, cotton soaked in rose oil or in wine where it has been steeped.
More is it certain of the postrema cauter, then pause over the wound, if it is recent with blood and the air has not changed that powder which you will recommend to apply little by little.
And if the air has already changed it, then pause on the healing ointments until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or is by incision of flesh and of similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted for stitches, then adjust them with a suture as you will recommend from the suture of others.
But if the wound has already exposed the bone and flesh, and it is not retained by them but only a small suspensor, then incise that and apply cure to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of putridness, and command the patient to abstain from foods in which there is grossness: cabbage and beans and similar things to them, until it is composed.
And if you find in the wound putrid rottenness and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that rotten part and throw it away, and apply cure to it.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which a flow of blood can come, and it is not stopped by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find it uncut, then cut it with a spatula, or tie it; and if necessity provokes what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is humidity; thus you should powder those areas with a powder, which consolidates and dries the area before the air can infect them.
And the method of the powder is this: take one part oil of anise, two parts resin of dragon, and three parts of unextinguished lime; let all be ground and crushed, and with it fill the wound, and constrain it with a good bandage until it adheres to the wound, and let it coagulate with the resin.
And then bind that dressing with bandages and leave it on, and do not remove it while it is like this so that it does not become infected, because the medicine is not eradicated from it until it is healed.
And sometimes make only a sole application, when you do not have anise and dragon resin at hand.
And perform this method of operation on large wounds when it is convenient that a dressing be placed over them and they be bound, and are recent wounds with their own resin, which the air has not yet altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially in summer, then it is not suitable for the application of this powder, but rather cure them with what we have said, so that you apply on them certain digestive ointments, or you apply on them powders made from wheat flour mixed with water and honey until they form a paste; and then cure them with another remedy until they are healed.
Most likely the pain occurs at the fracture site in the bone, and it is small, then extract that with gestures.
And I will tell you about the treatment of head fractures in what is to be applied.
Of the sores of the neck.
Most likely if the sore occurs in the neck, then it is not different in medication, and between the sore of the head when it is simple.
Most likely if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in the remedy but rather the treatment should be avoided with what causes vehement constriction, thus like cinchona and sage which are similar to veterinary and embalming treatments that harm the nerves and counteract that. And do not apply anything on the sore that causes excessive cold, because the substance of the nerves is fragile and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest part of all the members.
And if it is treated with light medicines, such as a warm bath, some ointment rubbed in oil, either rose or not, and turpentine when washed with warm water and the other poultices prepared according to this manner, and anointed humidly.
If the wound is large, then administer a suture, or stitch the lips of it, and carefully cure that with powders until it is healed.
If the wound has depth or reaches to the lowest part of the body, then pierce that in the most depressed place.
If an artery has already been cut in the wound and a flow of blood is obtained, then separate or stop that, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
If the vertebrae of the throat or all have already been cut, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the wound with a suture on the cane of the throat and do not touch that; afterwards equalize that and return it to its natural figure, and place it with decent structure, and lift it for several days; and carefully cure it with plasters in which there is stripping and excitation until it is healed.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then drill into that, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can; and what is not useful to you, leave it until the wound becomes purulent, and let it be separated and the pressure of it be alleviated.
And if the wound is recent, then powder on that powder which has been recommended to you. More so if in the wound there is made a fistula, then treat it with that of which the memory will come back to the following chapter.
If it is a perforation of a lance or of a knife, and observe its depth, then consider more so if from the wound there comes out blood and matter when the patient urinates; then know that the wound is mortal.
And if in it there is no depth and the wound is recent with his own blood, then you put on it from the first hour powder, and do not bind that which is not retained by the blood in the depth of it and which returns to the heart and which comforts the patient, but rather put on it a warm poultice, and apply those two remedies seen during the day.
And if the poultice is not at your disposal, then put on the orifice of the wound a cut vein so that it sucks what comes out of the humidities; and make that the patient sleep on the wound so that what is in it congeals.
If the plague has already passed three days or more and does not cause spasms or tremors of the heart, nor constriction of the spleen, and the other good dispositions of the patient are present, then know that the plague is saved; and therefore treat it with warmth and apply another treatment until it is healed.
If the healing of it is slowed, and enough time has passed, then know that a fistula has been made; therefore treat it according to the sixth chapter.
And if the wound is by a cut of a sword or a knife, and is simple on the surface of the foot or the back, then treat it with water that is preceded by stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If a judgment has already been made on the bone, and its edges are rough, then take a tourniquet and cut to extract those edges, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then loosen them until the wound suppurates, so that the extraction of them is alleviated.
And for other accidental wounds in the other limbs, the treatment in youth is the same as what we have said.
Of the ailments of the stomach.
The indisposition that occurs in the stomach is either great, or small, or moderate.
And slight disruption is made difficult by another handling, and thus it is that the reduction of them is more difficult, if not brought back to their place immediately, because it swells and becomes enlarged, for which the inner part of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is moderate, because in that one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two special cases mentioned before.
And you should know that the suture of the stomach is according to four methods, but two sutures are common which are suitable for sutures of the other ailments of the body.
And two other sutures proper to it communicate with the other ailments, but however they are more proper in the suture of the stomach.
And I recommend to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the ailment is slight and it emerges some cause of the intestine for that, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then it is in one of two methods: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has come inflammation from the coldness of the air.
And then when it is thus, at that time you should make a scalpel in such a way that you submerge a sponge or humid cloth in warm water alone, or that you take in hot water, cypress, and spikenard, and apply them to the intestine so that the inflammation may be resolved.
And some times I have seen that in which there has been stipulated, and it is better than alone water in resolution of the inflammation.
And then when you see the inflammation being resolved, at that time you moisten the intestine with water in which is mixed altaea and marsh marigold, because by it the entrails of the patient are alleviated with little cause.
But if the entrails of the patient are excused from this cure, then you should cut the disruption with a small instrument with which the incised and inflamed places are cut.
And the first cure is better, when it is proper that there is no section, and not an occupation to cut, according to necessity and defect.
Of the instrument, know the shape of it:
One part of it is sharp and pointed, and the other part not pointed, and the extremity is subtle, and not as subtle as a spatula, but rather a little obtuse.
And so when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is outside, it is necessary that its reduction be according to the natural form of it in its proper place, if possible above it, which is better.
When the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs up so that their head is elevated; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place their head and chest higher than the lower parts.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then place your attention and consideration on this: that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other.
And so it is necessary that you administer this in large wounds and in mediocre wounds.
And in small wounds, place what you have prepared, and see to it that the minister is between your hands pressed, which holds the entire disruption with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and see that you uncover from this to that one who knows the suture for another cause.
And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or thread of needle according to the quantity of the size of the wound; and then release from the extremity of the disruption of the said finger, and hold the needle once, so that you do not put thread in the two extremities of the coding, with two extremities of the suture that is below the coding of the interior parts, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already joined two extremities of the coding and two extremities of the suture, and thus made four knots.
And then strengthen the thread with a double stitch around the edge of the wound, and also weave in some stitches from both parts at the same time, and then press together the two lips of the wound for a decent closure; and then push the thickness of the needle through and insert another needle in it, and then tie that one with thread just like you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary to use multiple needles until you have completed the entire closure of the wound.
And let the needles be midway between thickness and fineness, for the fine needles easily penetrate the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to insert in the skin, and therefore it is desirable that they be moderate in both fineness and thickness.
And it is not desirable that the needle be fixed in both extremities of the skin too much, so that the flesh is not easily pierced and that the wound closes before its consolidation.
And let the sutures not be prolonged, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And then insert the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient while he is sleeping; and place powders spread from all parts on the suture, which will hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound has consolidated.
And these special threads of suture with needles in a certain manner are then more convenient for small wounds, where only one or two needles are needed around those areas.
But the second suture is communal: and it is that you administer the suture to the four extremities, of the spine and two extremities of the ribcage, in one way, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped finely and thickly.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that middle part where it began, so that the thread is pulled back from the lower most part of the wound, so that the suture is like a suture of fabric in which the fabrics are stitched together.
And leave between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the said mending thread.
And this suture is known to men.
And with this suture I have sewn the wound of a man who had been stabbed in his side by a knife, which was an injury one palm in length, and two palms from the intestine in the middle, and it was torn apart in the middle of the member; and then I returned that which the intestine had been outside the wound for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and that one is cured; then return the viscera for many years, and it is converted into its natural dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that it would not be cured; and by miracle it was made, for a certain ointment did not cure it, because it was in a place where no ointment nor medicine was effective, but rather placing a cloth soaked in two tablespoons of honey water with assiduous washing daily until it was cured.
But also they say there are two species of proper stitching according to the account of Paraula.
And it is that you begin with the stitching of the intestine, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And thus with the needle penetrating the intestine and in that mesh weaving according to width and length of the entire body, and it leaves the extremity of the suture on which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inner part to the outer part in the other extremity of the thread.
And when you have made that one penetrate, then you make another penetration in the same extremity of the thread from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the extremity of the suture which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate from the inner part to the outer part.
And make penetrate with that your penetration, with which you make it penetrate into the spleen in the extremity of the liver, which is in the part of the intestine where everything penetrates.
And then begin with this doctor's method and sew the extremity that is of the spleen on the other side, and pull out the needle from the codena which penetrated, and then put it back in that codena and sew the extremity of the spleen which is on the other side with this outer part of the liver; and pull out that one from the codena which is a part of it.
And make one suture and another, and then make one suture next to another suture, so that you sew everything that is deformed according to that example.
And the sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture of pellicies, with which you sew the skin, in such a way that you sew the spleen on one side of the extremity of the codena, and that you leave another suture until you have completed it.
More the second special type of proper suturing which Gualia particularly recommends, and this is to be considered by you and recommended for you, is that you sew with a similar subtlety as that with which skilled doctors sew, in such a way that they add the whole part to its corresponding part, conveniently according to nature; and apply one extremity of another part to the other extremity, and this is done according to your recommendation.
When you place the needle at the extremity of the mirror to your own height from the partition of the gold, and make it penetrate the partition of the inside in that sole, and release two extremities of the ciphac; then return the needle and make it penetrate again from the outside to the inside in two extremities of the ciphac.
Then return those tubes, and make each one penetrate from the inner partition to the golden partition in two extremities of the mirror's other sides that are on the opposite flank.
And this method of sewing is better than the common sewing technique, and it is a sewing of which the preceding memory reminds.
This is the sermon of Gualia
And more the teacher says, the sewing of the belly is corrected with two needles, it is that you insert in these each one a thread, and start with the insertion of the needle from what you have, and make it penetrate to the other side according to the sewing of those who sew the guts together.
And know that when there is a disruption in the middle place of the belly, then the sewing of it is more difficult than in the other places of the belly.
More of the judgment of medical treatment of a wound is the judgment of other wounds.
The cause is that when you treat a recent wound with fresh blood being poured out, and the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine and cauterize it and dress it properly, then apply on it a stimulating powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply on it an ulcer ointment with which you have at hand so that they make a hard crust and cauterize the veins, and consolidate the liver and spleen; and properly cure it in the same way as the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then apply on it just as much as needed, since it begins to heal quickly, and change the dressing twice a day, as you and your teacher taught, until it is healed, because you did not need other medication in most cases when wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound will communicate with the lesions of the principal members, then take a woolen cloth and submerge it in oil of tempered quality, or in rose oil, and apply it on the circuit of the places that are between the ankles and knees.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, where many purulent matters are accumulated, then consider it a sign of black bile, and more so if the intestine is perforated and an ulcer is formed penetrating into the cavity of the body.
Know that the one which affects the large intestine is more likely to have a gentle cure than the one which is in the delicate intestines.
And it is of difficult cure, for the intestine which is called "jejunum" does not receive healing from a wound that falls on it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and the magnitude of them that are in those, and by subtlety of the body of that, and by proximity of that to nature of nerves.
More so if that which proceeds from the wound is the flesh, and you treat it newly, reduce it according to your rule by which you reduce the intestines in their place.
But if it has passed to the space and already becomes green or black, then you should apply a faithful dressing on the spot that is stained by it, so that there come fluxes of blood, because in the flesh there are veins and arteries.
And then cut that which is another ligament, and place two extremities of the dressing hanging from the part of the wound, so that on you be alleviated the attraction of it, by the falling of the flesh and emission of the arm of the wound.
Remembrance of the sores when they occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some men, for I have seen cases where a person who had been suffering from a wound in their stomach with a thrust of a lance and it was a wound on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, and this came from bad digestion and bloating.
Therefore I began the cure of what had already been treated so that it was not confused in the healing of it, but rather I proceeded to subtly treat the inside where the wound is healed and the area is consolidated.
And I then applied a poultice on the patient because I had seen that the area was already consolidated; and I asked about the accident of the sickness in their stomach; and I didn't find any remedy for that evil accident, but rather I found that they were accustomed to eating and drinking excessively, and I advised them to take baths and exercise their intestines.
And they also suggested that some experienced practitioners said that when there is a wound in the intestine and it is small, it should be treated in this manner: that you take threads of big stitches; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those threads across the two lips of the wound, with its end exposed; so when you pull on them and tighten their end, it constricts the head of the wound, which adheres and is not dissolved.
And then stop another poultice near the first one, and do not cease to make poultices one next to another according to the quantity of the entire wound.
And then reduce that and dress the wound; and let those attached capsules remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause harm to the patient with discomfort.
And it is possible that the intestine is tied with a thin thread which is made from the intestine of a beast attached to it, because it is thinner than a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these threads of intestine, and it be very lean, and then tie the extremity of it with a thread, wrapped, and then insert this thread into needles and sew it to the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this manner of sewing with poultices is not based on anything except trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then it is not an ingenuity but a subtlety, and it is not a complete healing of it.
On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Know that every wound and abscess that becomes inflamed and chronic, and becomes an ulcer, and is not consolidated and suppurates for a long time and is not resolved, however, in any member it may be, it is universally called fistula, and we call it azukem.
Fistula is truly a nodular, hard, white swelling for which there is no pain and to which there is a sensation similar to that of a pinched intestine; and thus the name for this type of swelling is called a "pinched" or "compressed" stone, that is to say, a kidney stone.
And it is in some men a moist tumor, which discharges urine; and for which the moisture is cut off in a few hours. And in some cases this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
It shows all those causes, and the signs of those and their cure with medicines in the division.
And it is necessary for you to know the cure of fistula, which is made by way of operation with the hand.
And know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for some of those are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the liver, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the joints composed by composition like that of the hand and the foot; and of those which are close to the principal member and of similar things.
And therefore one of these fistulas that follows this manner is of the illnesses of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
And if one of the fistulas has a depth that does not reach to these places that have been said, and you hope and trust in its cure, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or of bronze, and if the fistula follows a straight path, and you require it with it.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate with a probe of subtle lead, for lead that has the lightness of the body's humor is alleviated and cured by diverting the twist.
And if the fistula has moved with horrible motions, it is not possible for you to signify upon it with the probe.
Therefore purify the orifice with its orifices, for the humidity by which you cleanse that one goes away from the other orifices and corrects their flow.
And inquire carefully, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the fistula's cavity is long and deep, or if it's a fistula with many orifices and this is all at the sum of your strength, in your penetration, in which you penetrate the patient, and the invention of pain through your compression on the area, and judgment of signs and accidental causes related to the abscess.
And when you have established yourself upon all those causes with steady truth, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it's an apparent fistula near the surface or in a salty place, of joint length, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which I have told you.
Then you dry the fistula according to what is said about the narration of it, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the heal and of similar things, and cure that within so that it may be healed.
If the fistula is of long and profound depth, and it is according to the rectitude, then you must insert in the wound as much as you can, and remove all the corrupted flesh; and administer hot poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
And do so until some visible results are seen, so that the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
And then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh, so that it may be healed.
But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is a bone and you must certify that, then you inquire into it and treat it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of a vein or of a nerve or of a main member, as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackness in it, then remove all the corrupted material; and treat that which remains with a remedy so that the flesh may be healed.
And if it does not heal and the arm remains as it was, then know that you have not achieved total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you uncover the area again with second intention and carefully make the reason for it and the purification of it with the last strong force, and then restore it.
And so if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then know that the corruption is in the deep inner part of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore you must not apply any ointment but rather lay a plaster on it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible to reach it, then you should reach it with subtle and suitable instruments.
And if there are many bones, then carefully make the extraction of all those, and do not leave any of them in place due to lack of strength on your part.
If you find any cause of humidity, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and scrape the bones.
Moreover, if you have not prepared the hour for setting the bones of that part, then pause on the wound that you think will heal the wound, and leave it until it is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so it does not become consolidated, and the section that you have made in your operation is constrained.
Having, if you suspect, pause on the cot (or affected area) submerged in a poultice of olive oil, or the cot submerged in Egyptian gum, or in a plaster of green wraps, because when those ligaments will heal, and the bones are separated from the abscess, and from that attraction is alleviated.
Moreover, if it is a large bone like the bone of the leg or thigh or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface, then scrub that with resin only until such time as the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
Moreover, if that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and to make an incision in the place where the corruption has pervaded, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you have a helper at your side, who will place and apply an example and assistant on your operation.
There is a young man of about thirty years of age, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and from the affected parts it seems that the matter of the body has entered where the matter is made to reach the thigh, and it is a matter of a large abscess, and not due to an external cause.
And then the time is prolonged for this due to the error of doctors until the abscess has opened, and a gathering of pus and matter occurs, and its cure is delayed until the thigh becomes fistulated, and there are formed in the wound orifices which constantly discharged pus and humidity from the body.
And then a multitude of doctors treated him for about two years, and not with wisdom but in skill, until I was called.
And I saw the thigh of his and the matter that flowed from it through those orifices with great force; and already the body of that man was completely corrupted and the color of it was citrine.
And then I inserted my probe into one of those orifices and passed the probe to the bone.
And then carefully examine and probe all the openings and investigate those that penetrate to the entire limb.
And then I will cut and dissect above one of the openings that lead to where I discovered a part of the bone, and I found the corrupted one, which was rotten and corrupted and discolored; and a part of the limb was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I will wash what was discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I will extract that which is not in the bone but the corruption, which I will cut away and wash, and I had already destroyed.
And then I will apply the restoration of the wound with medicine that consolidates for a long time, but it is not consolidated.
And then I will treat and uncover the bone again, based on the first discovery, and I found continuous corruption with the bone.
And I will wash away that which appears to be from the corruption, and then I will make holes for the cure of it and its restoration, but it is not restored.
And then I will uncover it again and not cease to cut the small bone little by little, particularly, and make holes for its restoration, but it is not restored until I cut around an area of it, and that which I extracted from its marrow, and then I will restore it with medicines, and it is consolidated lightly and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on them except for the disposition of their frailty and due to the lack of tolerance of theirs and fear of theirs of death, because acidity occurs in them every hour due to an excess of evacuation without copious malady.
And therefore it is healthy for total healing, and there is nothing in place of hard flesh; and the disposition of theirs is done well in their body and their strength returns; and it is established in their dispositions and does not cause contrariness in walking nor harm in any cause.
More often if there is a prominent bone in the body already wounded, then it is necessary that you cut that bone in this manner: and it is that you take a ligature and strengthen it at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to stretch it in its; and take a ligature of coarse wool from the first ligature; and apply that ligature over the flesh that is next to the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts next to it, and you uncover the flesh around the area where you want to make an incision so that the incision does not damage the flesh.
And put a splint or board next to the bone properly, because when you do this it is not forbidden that the saw does not cut the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the closure be made on the corrupted spot little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to feeling, force the closure with the other visible aid.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, one part continues with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you discover all the flesh of all parts; and place your hand under them, and make a closure on that first part where the corruption is, until the closure of the other part is continued.
And let the closure be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut out that corrupted joint, and close the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but ingenuity.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, it is necessary that you inquire into the corruption in whatever manner it appears to you, and that you open it, and mend it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with great ingenuity be rectified by you, when it does not cause discomfort or injury.
And you should know that the incisors and the saws to cut these bones are chosen according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that it is necessary that you prepare all species of operation instruments convenient for that operation.
And you should know that this operation refers to your knowledge of the species of instrument which you have indicated; when you have great study and lengthy and conscious understanding of the manners of this art, and testimony of the manners of illnesses, because then you have for yourself the means to apply what is convenient for each illness with instruments.
And thus you will form at the end of this chapter the names of the instruments which you will pause with simples, and with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment on the others. Form of a saw:
Form of yet another saw:
Form of a large saw:
Form of a rasp: Let the head of this rasp be according to the form of the head of a starred nail, and its points be according to the form of the points of the anvil.
It does not suit unless the ends of the joints are rubbed when they are corrupted, or is the mouth wide open.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad or wide razor:
Form of a properly made saw: it is made with an arch-shaped iron edge and the sharpness of the iron, and the handle of the tool is decently made. Shape of it or its shape/form:
Shape of a razor in which there is a hollow:
Shape of another subtle or fine razor:
Shape of another razor with a curved extremity:
Shape of a small scraper resembling a file:
Shape of another smaller cutter:
Shape of another cutter; this resembling a saw, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is used in many places for cutting the bones:
Shape of a saw that suits for sawing what is perforated by the bones:
And its extremity is triangular and with a pointed extremity.
It is made from iron of India, and similarly it cures all the causes that we have spoken of regarding abrasions and incisions and wounds.
Of incisions of extremities and of the sawing of bones.
The extremities are weakened either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, and when you have treated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure is not effective, sometimes the corruption worsens to the point where it must be cut off, then it is necessary to cut off that member in which the corruption has taken hold, so that the patient may escape from death or malignancy which is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that which has befallen, is that the member becomes black until it seems to be burned by fire, or it becomes weak and the blackness spreads until the decay enters into that member and seizes the whole body; and then it is time to proceed with the cutting of that.
And similarly if it is a cause of the corruption, a sting from some venomous things such as the scorpion's tail or of the viper or of the rue or of similar things.
And if the corruption or the sting is in the extremity of the said, then you cut off the said and do not give space to the corruption so that it may not spread to the hand.
And similarly, if you approach the hand, then you inspect that for rot of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the forearm.
And if it swells, then inspect the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond and the swelling reaches the elbow, then in that case it is death for the patient; and to administer another cause or treatment at this point is a matter of quantity of virtue.
And similarly, make for the foot when corruption swells the said part of the foot, then you inspect it up to one of the nails.
And if it takes hold in the sole of the foot, then you inspect the entire foot. More, if it reaches inside the tooth, then you inspect the leg up to the joint of the tooth.
And if the corruption has already spread over the tooth, then in him it is not a remedy but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the method of inspecting the member or of cutting it is that you stretch the ligament in the affected area where you want to inspect, and stretch another ligament over the location; and extend the minister a ligament to the affected areas, and extend the ministeress another ligament on hers; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments with a spatula so that all the flesh may be discovered; and then it is inspected or cut.
And it is necessary that a cloth be placed over the entire affected area so that nothing touches it, and that a warm poultice or plaster be applied to the wounded area.
But if there is an excessive flow of blood when you operate, then cauterize the area carefully, or apply to it some powders that restrain the blood; and return to your treatment once the bleeding has stopped.
And then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and take care of it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that which I have found to be beneficial for someone with pain in their foot, this accident which I and you have recommended, which is because the blood accumulates in the foot due to a condition that was caused by an inflammation of heat.
And this corruption occurs mainly in the right foot, until it reaches the entire foot.
And then that man prepares himself such that his doctor visits him to apply the treatment to the limb with the violence of what he suffers from pain and inflammation, and it happens that the foot reaches the joint, and thus heals.
A long time passes before this corrupted disease appears in the right hand of the affected person.
And thus I come to myself, and I have thoroughly considered the removal of that excess which is placed on the hand of medical treatments, according to the purification of the body of the patient; and if the excess does not recede, then begin to anoint the other said interior with which begins in the hand.
And the patient's hand made me understand, and I did not want to do that which is expected regarding the removal of that excess, and more than I feared the incision of the patient's hand, because the virtue of the sickness was in a precarious state.
And since he has departed from me, he returned to his own land and it came back to me that that man prepared and incised his whole hand, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration except to be an aid regarding that which is caused by this sickness, and that it be a signification for what is signified and according to which it is worked.
Of the cure of sins and the quality of purging with medicines.
When abscesses occur in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of blood, and then it is broken and perforated, and the blood comes out, and the place is left empty as if it were a vessel, and the cloth that is put on it is like a delicate drap, and it does not allow dirt to accumulate, and it does not press on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Worse will be if the space is prolonged until the corruption affects some member, then it is called fistula and not gout.
And the cure for it is that you cut out the entire cord thus as it is turned, and mainly when it is subtly made with a cloth, and constrictions that do not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
Worse if you hope that the cord adheres and that the corruption has not been achieved by consecutive treatment, and in the cord there has been a passage of stool, then your cure is to give an enema.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you make is of foul-smelling dung, then clisterize with this medication from Egypt, which is made of oil and bitter vinegar and juniper, received in small portions, and adjusted in a vessel, and put on the fire until the medication becomes liquid and penetrates to the species of honey.
And then take the liquid that is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and clisterize it into the sinus, and strengthen the opening of it, and let the medicine stay in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then extract that with precision; and do so for as many days as needed until the sinus is cleaned and the pus is removed.
And sometimes it is cleansed with water of cinder, when this medication is not present to you; and it is that you take the cinder of wine, and mix it with water; and then glue that and cleanse him with it until you confirm that the sinus, then, is closed.
And if the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medication or the water of cinder, then cleanse him with water and honey which has been mixed with ground ginger, and cleanse him with wine and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it cleans and washes, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
And when you do this sometimes and confirm that the sinus is already cleaned, then cleanse him with water that makes the flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take the plaster of dyaphonicum and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or that you cleanse him with some medications and other plasters which have properties that I have already written in the treatise on plasters.
And if the orifice of the sinus is too narrow for the reception of the cannula of the clyster, then you will enlarge it little by little with a small iron tool, and place it in a warm wrap soaked in Egyptian or basilicum ointment until it becomes enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is large, then you will sew the lips of it with a suture and adjust the quantity in which the clyster enters.
And if the orifice of that from which the arm protrudes is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the lowest place where it is in you through which the arm runs, for when the arm is constricted in the profundity of the sinus the flesh will be engendered there.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus through the lowest bone according to your will, then prepare the member with preparation so that the arm can run freely as it should be, and that nothing should be retained that could cause retention of the arm.
More of that which is above the orifice of the sinus, which you massage at all times so that it comes to be adjusted in the arm. And to know if that which runs from the arm is movement or little, or is digestion, or is not-digestion.
And also you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is an abscess.
And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the material that is applied to the orifice of the sinus already adhering, or its own adherence, then you might apply it on the third day, and when you apply the plaster, then change the dressing for another and renew the ointment.
But if from the sinus its own space emits subtle mucus, then do not despair of its adherence, for the healing of it is proper, for thus it closes wounds in which slow generation of flesh in the aforementioned plagues occurs, and of those in which the opposite of it is made.
And if from the sinus for many days there is discharge of undigested arm, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and its cause prolonged, then you adjust in drying of the medications, and if the medications are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus as an ointment of diafinicon, when there is adjusted superflluity of addition of discharge.
And the more immediate remedy by which it is cured, is that one takes ointment of diafinicon and dissolves it in heated oil, and applies it to the affected area with an old cloth in its substance, and wraps it around the patient, and uses that.
And it seems similar in that action, when there is no arm, ointment of diafinicon, as much as it is cooked until it becomes thick, and uses it; or one takes myrrh and wool and ashes, and grinds everything and powders it over the honey which is on the fire, and wraps that in a cloth and tightens it around the sinus; and wraps that with the honey which you have cooked until it becomes thick, and powders it on a cloth and tightens it.
And some remedies are administered to the patient with aristology, long roots and celestial lily (which is celestial lily) and flour of dragons and centaury, and uses those simples or adjusts, grinds those and sifts and powders them over the honey which has been recommended; and gives it to him.
And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the patient's chest, and it makes an inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments; then you treat it with a fistular cure, as it is said previously.
Of the treatment of afflicted nails and injured fingers and the cutting of added toes and the division of.
A panarici is an abscess which forms on the nail of the thumb or big toe of the hand or foot, and also appears on other toes, and as it progresses its treatment is highly prized, or it is cauterized with a hot iron, or it becomes corrupted, and it causes the root of the nail to rot, and soon corrupts the entire nail, and soon exposes its corruption to the bone which has a foul odor, and the extremity of the affected part becomes black, and its color turns dark.
And then when you have that on the hand as we have said in the division and you don't confuse your treatment, then it is good that you cut away all the excess that remains of the nail and then cauterize the wound immediately, for a hot cauterization is beneficial in this case.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already begun to grip the flesh at the roots, and start to pierce it and cause pain, then it is good that you apply a subtle remedy beneath the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and press it gently upwards and cut away the flesh with ease, and apply on top of that what remains of the flesh the corrosive medicines that will consume all the bad parts; and then treat that area with ointments until it is healed.
If the corruption has already penetrated the bone, then it is necessary that you incise the bone and extract it, for no time is healthy when the corrupted bone is in the body.
And if the decay and corruption have reached the finger, then incise it on one of the nodes according to where the memory of the pain is pressed, and carefully treat it until it is healed.
If the nail has received a blow or an injury, and there is violent pain in it, then it is necessary that you begin by bloodletting the patient, and immediately cut the nail with a sharp spatula, cutting transversely from below to above, and be careful that the cut does not penetrate the flesh that is beneath the nail, because you would cause the patient violent pain, and it would be a cause for the generation of excess flesh in the area; and treat that place with what relieves the pain.
But a well-adjusted finger, which is born in the hands of some men, is strong in all its flesh, and strong in its bones, or strong in its nails.
And some of them are born from the root of the joint, or it is the generation of them in certain nodes of the fingers. Worse is he who is born with pain in his joints, and this one who is born with strong joints is not injured.
And of those who are born fleshy, the section is lighter, and it is that you should insert the root with a spatula blade.
Worse for he who is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of the abscession of it.
Worse in he who is born with fingers of the toes, it is that you should insert at the beginning the flesh of it with rounded incision into the bone, and then cut with one of those convenient scissors to this, and then cure what will be healthy inside.
Worse consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their worn-out joints or by birth of the man who is born thus, or by consolidation of a wound or by combustion of fire, or by resemblance, therefore it is that you should cut that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
And then pause between the clothes of the swollen feet with oil rubbed so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between them, or put between them a thin layer of lead so that it is consolidated as it is fitting.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of the palm's digits, then you should dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapted to the shape of the limb.
Of incision of veins, these are varices.
Veins are varices, and they are enlarged veins filled with melancholic superfluities which appear in the form of swelling on the limbs of the body, and the main occurrence of them is in the thighs, especially in the thighs of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Therefore, we advise that you administer a purge of the body for black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The cure of them with iron is according to two methods: one is that the vein should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be elevated and all of it extracted.
The sectioning of it is according to this method: at the beginning, immerse the thigh in hot water until the gross blood is dissolved, which purges the thigh, and then tightly bind the patient's thigh to the upper part of the hip with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood with the hand that holds the lower part of the thigh inside it, and from inside to outside, until there comes out the quantity of blood that you want and that is sufficient, and which the virtue of the patient can tolerate.
And then treat that area, and order them to abstain from foods that cause black bile to form.
And the cure is achieved by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this brings no relief to the patient.
More elevation is achieved in this manner: you raise the patient's leg, if it is mobile, and then put it in a bath and immerse the leg in hot water until it becomes red and the veins are full; or it can be exercised by strong movement, if a bath is not available, until the member is warmed.
And then sear the vein in the right area by section in the length or in the back of the arm near the elbow, or in the lowest part of the arm near the heel.
And then uncover the vein with a knife and scrape the vein from every part until it becomes apparent to feeling, and it is near the appearance of what seems to be a blackish cord declining to darkness.
And then as you evacuate and from the vein you see that white thing which seems to be a cord.
And then you put the patient's arm in a sling until it is elevated and removed from the vein, and suspend it with a bandage or a linen cloth.
And then cut the other section and then cut that section for three days, and then scratch the skin of the affected part above the vein until it appears.
And then lift that and insert it into the last section of the heel, and then pull it out and lift it until it is extracted through the second section, and then pull it from the section that is above it.
And do this until you extract it from the section that is most superficial or highest of all the sections, until everything is extracted; then insert it.
And if it does not obey your attempt to extract and lift, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie it and pull it out, or insert the instrument beside the vein and turn your hand in every direction until it is discharged. And beware that it is not inserted; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift the dead flesh and it will come upon the patient for that nuisance.
And when the entire thing is discharged, then apply on the place of the wound a woolen pad soaked in wine and oil, both rose oil and non-rose oil, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the vita is contracted having twisted the part which is enveloped by the partitions, and it's not according to rectitude as we have said, then it is necessary that you make a ligature on that entire affected part of the twisting of it and on the areas of its enveloping, and place your suspensor above it with an unguent that elevates it.
And beware that you do not cut the vein and that you do not harm it, because it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and preserve your discretion in this.
Figure of the incision by which the vita is severed:
It is not to the hernia that is accustomed thus as with the intestines nor is it of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of thick flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; but it has in it a superfluous thickness thus as we have said.
Of the extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in cold and damp lands, just like in the land of Arabs and in the dry and arid lands of little tenderness, and in which there is neither grass nor tree.
And for this reason it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And the gestation of it is from putrefaction that comes from the decomposition of the body, as when worms and snakes and lice and worms are generated between the rot and the flesh.
And the signal of the reception of its coming is from this vein that violently inflames in the leg; and then the area becomes blistered; and then the vein starts to exit from the area of that blister, which seems to be a root of plant.
And then when the extremity appears, then take and wrap around that one piece of lead, whose weight is one dram or two drams, and tie it and let the lead hang suspended from the leg.
And as many times as you see that something is going out of place, wrap it in lead and tie it. And if the movement is prolonged, then you cut a piece of it and wrap the remainder; do not cut that from the root until it is completely removed, because if you cut it, it becomes contracted and enters into the flesh and causes an abscess and pus to form in the area and bad ulceration.
So that it may be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is removed from the back of the patient and no remainder of it stays in the body.
And from this vein there comes out in some men what is in its length of 5 palms and thickness, and it has already seemed to me that one comes out of 20 palms.
And if it happens at the time of its medication, then introduce the needle into the hole of the patient and puncture that long channel in the body, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then treat that place for the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes moves to the muscles, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to the patient many horrible pains, and it exits from each horrid muscle branch.
And thus treat that one as we have said in the division with what has been said above.
Of the section concerning worms generated under the skin and it is called cow disease or bovine disease.
This disease is named in some lands by us as bovine disease because many times worms appear to the cattle and it is a little worm which is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes throughout the body pushing and tearing, and shows itself to our feeling from member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
The generation of it is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just like what happens with worms and snakes and intestinal parasites in the stomach.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then it strongly oppresses it and enters and destroys the brain, and this causes many visible evils.
And so when you want to cure it and extract it, then it is not done if you do not first move its sentiment and appearance, and then remove what is on it and what is below it with ligature and strong constriction, and then dry it out and extract it.
And if it is deeply embedded in the flesh and you do not touch it, then apply a cautery with fire to the place where it is, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place, as we have said.
But if you see that it has reached the head near the brain, then tighten above the eyebrow with strong pressure, and dry out the place, and extract it; and advise the patient to use purification of their body with medicines that evacuate bad putrid humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
Of the division above the nausea.
This illness is called nausea in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then spreads from member to member.
And already I have seen that thing which I will recommend to you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after it had been treated for an hour, I saw that inflammation go away just as if the blood was rising to this place, more quickly than it is possible for it to be, just as if it were silver, I saw how it flows from place to place.
And then I put the needle in the pain of that place and inserted it into the muscle, and then I left it there for an hour.
And then I ran to the other side of the body until I reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to me that it revolves throughout the entire body according to what I had seen; and I was very marvelled by the permutation of it and by the speed from member to member. And I had already seen it beforehand in my wheels according to that manner, however I have seen many times the ones that take pain being transferred from member to member. More pain is not seen with these humors as in women.
And it is not thought to be the cause but rather that it is because of this that the woman was of vile habits and had a dry body and exposed veins, and in this case appears the sentiment of altered flatulence.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this backward curvature in those who are delicate and have a humid body with filled veins.
And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear to them as we have said, but rather press upon that area and place a light and dry dressing on it until the flatulence is driven out, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not often see the humors, then cure that one with evacuation of the body and with that which expels flatulence, and purge those with fetid pills and with pills of serpent and similar things.
Of extraction of arrowheads.
Arrowheads are diversified according to species, and according to the locations of the body in which they lodge, for their diversity is that some of them have large points, and small ones, and concave, and blunt, so are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have quills.
And of the signs of the wound it is when you cut into the arrow, and it pierces the bone, and there comes out from the siphac that which is above the brain, because it happens through the violent flow, and scotomia, and dizziness, and rigor in the limbs, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and the voice is hoarse and speech is destroyed, and there comes out from the place of the wound a white humidity resembling a poultice, and it seems to be similar to the flesh that has been wounded.
And thus if this symptom appears to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
More symptoms of the arrow when it is in the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and it seems that it is fixed in a hard mass, and not a hollow cause; and for this reason the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and coldness of the black wound, and dryness, and shivering, and syncope; and thus you will know that death is descending upon them suddenly.
And the symptoms when the arrow has wounded the lung are expectation of bloody foam from the wound, and the vessels that are near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient is changed, and they exhale a great deal of cold air, and ask for a cooling attraction of fresh air.
And if the arrow is in the membrane which is in the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it is made with great and vehement pain and with sighing, and not all the members of the muscles are moved.
And if the arrow is in the stomach, then for this reason the eyes of the wound will be bloody and somewhat indigestible matter.
And if the arrow is in the stomach, and it's fixed in him, there is some tear of the wound, or the tissue, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope in the cure of the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow is in the bladder, and urine comes out of it, and because of this some cause is released to the outside, and for him there is pain on the patient, then know that it is mortal.
But the other members like the face, the neck, and the shoulder, and the shoulders and the joints of the back, and the arm pit and the thigh, and the leg, and their similar members, are saved according to their major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I recommend to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand by this regarding your own cure.
This is the cause, for when a man receives an arrow in the tear duct of his eye at the root of the nose, and I extracted it from him through the other side, leaving the gray matter of the aurelha ( possibly referring to a membrane or tissue) intact, and he was healed, and no harm remained in the eye.
Extract the other arrow from a Jew's eye, which had fallen into the mucus of his eye, leaving the eyelid intact, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be retrieved except for a small extremity to which it adhered on the surface of the flesh, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, with an iron tip on which there were no wings.
And the Jew was a senator, and the accident did not occur in his eye badly by chance.
And he extracted another arrow from a Christian man, which had fallen into the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and this one had wings; and then he carefully worked on that area between two guides, and it was already submerged in the man's throat; and then he skillfully removed it, and the Christian was healed.
And he extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his stomach, and it was thought that he would die from it; but since after making him wait for xxx days and not seeing any change in him due to the disposition of his condition, he carefully worked on the arrow and skillfully removed it, and the man was healed, and the accident did not turn out badly.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and since he was made to sit for seven years, the arrow went to the root of his thigh.
I see a woman who has an arrow in her upper abdomen, and the wound is consolidated within her, and it does not change her natural dispositions, and the woman does not suffer harm in some of her natural operations.
I see another man who has an arrow in his face and the wound is consolidated, and the arrow remains, not causing much pain, and showing few symptoms of this.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes which was lodged in the middle part of the upper nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
And I was called to his cure when the arrow was lodged within three days.
And then I found the wound of the arrow very tight; and then I inquired into that with a subtle probe, and did not feel it; but she felt it when I pricked the right ear, and then I inferred that this prickling was due to the tip of the arrow.
And I applied a plaster to the place with an emplastrum in which there is attractive and digestive virtue, trusting that the place would reveal to me where the arrow was lodged, so that I could cut above it.
And it does not happen in the location of the significant accident that the arrow has reached that place; and you will continue with the plaster on it for many days and it does not happen accidentally; and the wound is consolidated meanwhile, and the patient frees himself from the extension of it by space of many days until one day he feels the arrow inside his nose and retrieves it to me.
And then you will place on the wound acute corrosive medicine for many days until it is opened, and with the probe you will investigate that, and extract the extremity of the subtle arrow, which adheres to the wood.
And then you will adjust on the surface of the wound with that acute medicine until it appears visibly to me the extremity of the arrow, and I will wait for the time with it for the space of time until four months.
And then since the wound is enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I will manipulate that, and not be obedient to excess, then I will not cease to subtly ingenuity and engineer on it with manners of ingenious device, until one day on those manners of ingenious devices hanging it with forceps, according to how the form of those will appear at the end of the chapter, until I extract it; and then I will restore that wound.
And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored, yet it is restored and the wound is consolidated, and health is given to the patient through complete healing, and nothing bad happens to them for any reason.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some sayings because you pause and give rule and meaning to what has not been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not understood by narration nor does the book comprehend them freely.
And the wise artisan compares little by word; and what is present to what is absent; and finds new operation and new instrument suitable for the descending of the strange causes of the art when accidents happen.
And therefore I say that arrows are not ejected from the members in which they are fixed, but rather in two ways: either by attraction of the place where it enters; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is ejected through the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy place, and is attracted and ejected.
And if it does not obey the effort of the hour in which you take it, then it is good that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes purulent, and the attraction of it and its ejection become easier.
And similarly, if it is fixed in the bones and does not obey your efforts, then leave it for several days and repeat this with attraction and massage each day, and it will already be discharged.
And if it does not obey your efforts for several days, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow on that bone of the entire affected part with a subtle instrument until the area of the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
If the arrow is already lodged in the body and it's lodged in a sensitive area, then you inquire about the extent of the injury, and if you feel it, then you draw out the arrow with instruments suitable for the attraction of it.
And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins here, then make an incision on the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if it has reached the ears, which are held back, then cut the flesh in which it is embedded with all the skill you can; and operate above that, if you cannot operate on the evacuation of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and twisting of them until you reach the bone.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location it may be, then use twisting of your hand with force on all sides until it makes that obey; and proceed with subtle subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and it becomes difficult to attract it and to extract it.
And if you cannot operate on that at your hour, then leave it for several days until the parts that are in the area of it can be cleansed, and then return to it when it is alleviated. But if you find opposition in the flow of blood, then administer what we have said about treatment in the sixth chapter.
And guard your skill of incision in the vein or nerve, or cord, and administer gently in all manner possible for the evacuation of the arrow; and do this with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness as you have recommended and advised.
And then make the arrowhead contract so that the disease is according to the figure according to which you should remove the arrow from him, because it is more judicious. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But the arrowheads that are pushed out by the opposite of the other party, or that already proceed from it to the outer parts, or that cause bulging of the extremity of the arrow due to feeling of the part most susceptible to the gland that is proposed and also that one; then you cut concerning that; and let the cutting be according to the quantity in which the forces take hold; and then pull out that, because it is made lighter for extraction.
But if it is retained in the bone, then twist the limb according to opposition so that the arrow presses into the bone, and increase to your grips, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then return and insert it into what will hold it.
And if the thrust of the needle is in it, then you will press it with your hand.
But if the thrust has failed and you want to administer an impulse, then you will introduce it, and if it is numb, push gently so that it enters the cavity of the body through the eye of the needle and press it with your hand.
But if the needle is hollow, then you will press it strongly entering into it, because the needle is relieved by it.
And if the needle is poisoned, then take care to hollow out all the flesh in which it is, if it is possible for you, and then treat it with what is suitable.
And if the needle is in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and it is near so that you can touch it with your fingers, and it is possible for you to feel it, then feel it and beware of cutting a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then sew the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
Shape of the forces by which the arrows are propelled:
The extremities of their hands are like a bird's beak, which are made with a saw when they grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And from those are made many special remedies, large, small and moderate, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and its poverty, and of the width of the wound, and of the constitution of the patient.
as a rod, so that it is alleviated in the arrow's hollow and it is implanted with that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins for phlebotomy, of which it is customary to perform phlebotomy, are: the two pulsating veins that are near the ears, called temples; the two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and the two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the eyes, called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and the two guides that are at the neck; and the two veins that are on the upper lip; and the two veins that are on the lower lip; and — these are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are under the tongue. More than the veins that are called fleubotomized in the arms is known; for one of those is a cephalica, and it's from the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it's deaf, and it's a middle vein, and it's composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalica; and the people name that one "vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein which is placed in the domestic lettuce, and it's named "citillar", and the commoners call it "vein of the belly"; and funis of the arm, and it's placed above the elbow, and it's that one which is fleubotomized, and it's that one which appears on the thumb for apparent appearance; and salvatella, and it's the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest finger, and it's in the two arms.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of those is which is near the curve of the hollow of the wild lettuce; and the second is sophena, and its place is near the leg of the domestic lettuce; and the sciatic vein, and its place is near the leg of the wild lettuce; and in the leg are other similar veins to those.
The swelling of the veins that approach the ears is treated with ancient remedies and migrations and saffron and ulcers of the bad head.
And the quality of treating those veins is according to what you have recommended to me: that the head of the patient should be shaved, and the head of the patient should be rubbed at the occiput, in the place of the two veins with a warm and good friction; then tighten the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two ears and the places of them approach the ears in two depressed places of the head; and feel that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here put a tent.
Then take the surgical knife, and it is that which is incident, and then insert it into the vein in the tube where the blood flows to the bone. And then lift your hand with the vein and the tube to the separated parts and cut the vein with a cutting incident on the incident cut. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let as much blood come out as you want.
And then apply poultices and dress it so that it will be healed.
And already in the beginning of the book, the incision of those and their cauterization has been preceded.
More of the two arteries that are near the temples, youth of phlebotomy is an ancient migration and poorly managed and assiduous eye disease and body of acute superfluous effusions to the veins.
And the quality of phlebotomy on those is as I recommend to you: constrain the patient with a tight bandage, so that the two veins appear at the feeling for apparent manifestation and it is demonstrated by the pulse of their wrists; then you will feel it with your finger.
And then you lift the skin above the vein to the parts of the wrist, and insert the phlebotomy needle, and raise the vein in this way; and cut that one as you have done on the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the constraint of the patient, and let your finger stay on the vein for an hour, and then apply a poultice and powders and bind that area with a strong bandage, and leave it until it is healed.
And already the reminder of them, and of those the incision, has been preceded in the beginning of the book.
Therefore the treatment of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is closely related to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient facial ailments and for migraines, and also for foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is according to what you have recommended to you; thus it is that the patient holds their arm with a bandage in which the vein appears; and then take the instrument, which is called a lancet, whose form is this:
Pause the prominent point which is at the head of the lancet on that vein and pierce it with a pen or other instrument in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the pressure of the patient and hold it tight until it is healed.
And some veins are opened with a broad phlebotomy, however it is not suitable that the phlebotomy be of an acute extremity like the other phlebotomies, but rather of a broad extremity, and perform the phlebotomy according to the transverse, because the bone is prominent and strong, and the flesh is delicate in the area where the phlebotomy is subtle.
More importantly, the treatment of the two veins that are like the lachrymal vessels of the eyes for diseases of the eyes due to heat and mucus in the eyes, and for facial ailments.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient should hold the neck with a bandage, and apply the bloodletter to those areas, and you stand on the patient's head.
And let bloodletting be done according to the transverse length a little above the bloodletter a little, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the bloodletter is subtle, then the extremity of the patient is cut.
And let flow as much blood as is necessary for you, and place on those cuts, and bind them with a bandage, and then separate those.
More, the bloodletting of the vein of the nose is convenient for acute fever and violent cough, and for the illnesses of the face and migraine and pain that occur in the face, and especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the bloodletting of it is that the patient should hold the neck and you should put the left hand to the nose, and take a subtle lancet and place it in the middle place of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to feeling here, and so the blood begins to flow at once.
Take care that you touch your hand to the bloodletter little by little and make flow the blood according to your necessity; and then tie it with a bandage, because it is restored lightly.
Mainly the youth of phlebotomy guides to a construction of pain and a beginning of leprosy and to motives of sickness and petidity and bad ulcers corrosives, as with herpetic symptoms.
And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that the patient holds each one in their hand with a ligature; and let the artisan be above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a seat.
And then phlebotomize the vein with a long lancet, little by little; and extract blood according to tempered quantity or according to what is needed, as necessity dictates; and then make a similar appearance on the other vein.
And then untie the ligature and bind the two veins with a moderate tightness so that the patient is not suffocated, and let him go to the mat where the wound will be healed.
And the youth of phlebotomy of the Algerian veins cures little aposthems and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the circle of it.
And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient sit in front of you, and bind their neck with a bandage, and then turn back their lips and look at the two veins of which one is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of them, and moreover it is because in the circle of those there are small black veins; and then you make an incision on each one with a careful incision.
Mainly if you are in doubt, and do not know which one of them it is, then intend to make an incision on the most prominent and visible one of them.
And make a similar thing for the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mainly of the two veins that are on the tongue, the procedure is close to the phlebotomy of the cephalic, for afflictions that are in the throat, and for illnesses of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy on those is that it follows the illness between your hands in front of the patient, and elevates the tongue of them, and looks at the tongue, from one side of the vein and from the other side of the vein, and the color of each one is leaning towards black.
And then phlebotomize each one; and beware that you do not cut your hand while phlebotomizing them, because on the other side of them are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized on the elbow are in which it is customary for all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods, or they put on the phlebotomy a mitigating or olive oil with subtlety; or they use a sharp lancet, and apply it if necessary, and this is its form:
The threads of the patient's vein, as many times as necessary, and it is suitable to open the convex full veins showing apparent thickness, and also those that contain thick blood clots.
And this vein cutting is of lesser width and of more subtle extremity, and it suits the cutting of thin veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
Most importantly the operation of cutting the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: it extracts the blood from the illnesses that are in the liver and the colon, and from that which passes to the chest and the abdomen.
And it is suitable for the vein cutter, when cutting that vein, to be cautious and fearful of that, because there is an artery near it, and if he misses and makes a mistake in the puncture of the vein cutting, he will injure that artery and cause a flow of blood, so that it is advised not to cut that vein with a pointed instrument, but rather to cut with a gentle one.
And if the basilica does not appear through obvious manifestation, then it is necessary that you leave that one and that you move to another, or that you search for a certain branch of it; or that you perform phlebotomy in place of the end of the arm, because that is obvious; and dry that one with phlebotomy as we have said.
If you want to perform phlebotomy on the middle arm, then it is necessary that you tighten the stricture of the arm where you touch the place until you constrict the place of the pulses, and place a needle on the thin part of the arm; and tie the arm and dry the vein with a concave section using phlebotomy as we have said; and beware that the percussion does not hit the space of the place of the artery.
And when you see, with the ligature loosened, inflammation in the place where you have made an incision on the thin part, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore evacuate that.
And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy like the urine of a child, and the blood is subtle and red, then you know that it is the blood of the artery; and then touch and stop your hand on that one for a long space; and place your hand, and if the blood is separated, because many times it is separated, then tighten the arm and leave that.
Watch over the patient for the movement of their bowel, and be in dread of it and do not let them eat anything for several days until they are healed.
If the blood does not separate, and you see that medicine is not present, then you will cut the artery if it appears to you; because the extremity of the patient is contracted, and the blood is separated; or you will take a piece of tape, and apply it, and take one bandage and tie it tightly over the area of the vein with strictness and with bindings until the next day.
And then if the blood is separated, it is good; and if not, then treat that with the treatment of that which precedes the memory of the place of the poultices where blood flows.
And the separation of the blood from it is difficult in many cases due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
From the dark vein, phlebotomy is a remedy that extracts blood from the inferior part of the head and the right side of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
And warn the one who performs phlebotomy to be in dread of it during the procedure, because there is a nerve; and therefore if they make an error in the puncture of the phlebotomy and hit the nerve, it will cause stupor to the patient, and their healing will be difficult, and perhaps they will not be healed at all. And this nerve appears visible to sensation; but if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and not shown, then warn that you should place the phlebotomy instrument with which you perform the procedure with caution, and avoid the nerve with your carefulness.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then make an incision in the length of the vein.
The benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it draws out the blood from the head and relieves the ailments of the veins.
And cover this properly, if you want to make a phlebotomy with an olive stick or myrtle stick; for it is the safest of all veins, since there is neither artery nor nerve.
But it is often the case in some people, when there is no evacuation in the primary percussion, that it does not harm to cause an abscess.
The first thing to consider is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in conservation of health and for hope of it and caution of the onset of illnesses, and that it should be done on one of the veins that are in the arm, namely: cephalic, cubital and basilic; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter after digestion, when signs of fullness appear.
And let a phlebotomy be performed on the third day or on the first day after three hours have passed from the beginning of the illness.
The more phlebotomy is administered, the more it provokes convenience and necessity for that, either at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
And it is said that if a child is under 14 years old, it should not be phlebotomized, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month or seventh, and the elderly who have passed 60 years should not be phlebotomized.
And when someone wishes to be phlebotomized in any manner, it is said that one should purge the lower intestines before phlebotomy with a cleansing enema, if there is retained feces, so that the veins do not attract the superfluities during the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are purified, and do not nourish the main members.
And those who are nauseous, or have chills, or cramps, nor those with a sickness or fever until it is reduced, nor those with dropsy, should not be phlebotomized. More so, because phlebotomy is contraindicated for colic passion and vomiting, and abdominal pain, and the multiplication of coughing and labor and exercise of fasting or vigil, and any cause that dissolves virtue, whether it be corporeal or animal.
And then consider in subtlety of humors if the blood is thick, with food and drinks, and with medications if it is possible for him to take them.
And then enter into bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or it is exercised by some exercise so that the blood is thinned.
And perform the phlebotomy on him in the morning, around the hour of tierce, as we have already said.
And be careful that the patient is guarded that day from all bad accidents and animals, as well as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, such as turmoil and excessive sorrow and worry and appearances of similar things.
And in his chamber, let the causes be present in the use of that which customarily belongs to men with aromatics and fragrances and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And let the one performing the phlebotomy sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
And then extract the blood from the arm, and let the phlebotomist rub it with his hand two or three times; and then tie the ligature with a strap and wrap it two times.
And if it is a moderate constriction, because the constriction when not excessive, or the constriction is with an excess, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is with softening, and then it prohibits the body from excessive blood.
And then apply the constriction, so that one who must be a bloodletting expert should rub their hands together between them so that the veins are inflated, and declared to sensation.
And then the bloodletter anoints his hand with a little ancient oil properly; and then lets his right hand index finger rest on that vein, at the location where he wants to perform the bloodletting, so that the vein is slightly opened, and the stroke is controlled because among the veins it is the one you find like a cord running away from the bloodletting, and of those it is full of windiness and when you apply the bloodletting on that one it is constricted before the bloodletting, and the bloodletter is discovered; and the bloodletting does not miss the vein, and if it misses, that one is narrow.
And therefore, for this reason, it is required that the bloodletter be firm and solicitous in all these cases.
And then pause the phlebotomy, unless the vein is exposed in a good location, which is good; and if not, you will proceed to another location, placing a small cushion under them, or above them with a bandage, if the area is not contaminated.
And if the area is contaminated, or the patient is weak, then you will let it be for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because a strong tightening could cause a contagious infection, nor enter into bathing.
And then proceed with the phlebotomy if it is loved (or desired), likely meaning "if it is needed" or "if it is necessary".
And if the perception is small and you fear subtly that it will not be enough of what you want, then you will proceed with the phlebotomy in that vein according to rectitude and adjust on the perception a small one, and make this with a bandage beforehand so that the area does not become contaminated, because the area becomes contaminated in most homes for lack of a small perception.
Unless the area has already become contaminated, then do not proceed with it, because it does not excuse any of your actions; and stop on that particular part of the olive oil bandage, because it soothes the body from the blood. And it is better in this place to use olive oil than other oils.
Similarly, administer an ointment of oil in all phlebotomy, in which phlebotomes the veins to prohibit the flow of blood, and make a tyrical preparation with sage and hazel, when one of these is placed on the area, so that the blood is thinned and revolved when it is gross.
And if in the area of phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, so that many dressings are needed, and especially for one who has not been bled but only dressed, or in the opening of the small vein, then you apply, and place on the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, and hold it for an hour, until it is dissolved.
And cover the orifice of the blood of that vein with a plaster in complement of it or of another vein.
And if a blackness or greenish color remains in the area for some days, do not be concerned; and if you wish, apply on that area a paste of aloes or of ground mirra dissolved, or a paste of mint juice or of chamomile or something similar.
Many dressings are needed for abscesses and swellings that come from phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And then stop your hand over that, and if you find a softness there, apply compression, because if that prominence is bad and evil; and therefore be careful not to stop on any cause of what we have said, for the flow from the arterial blood will be strong.
And make a plaster for that which has contracted, so that the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And take out of the blood all that which comes from a man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that appears on the blood as it is apparent.
For if the blood is black, then let it come out until it becomes red; and likewise if you see it thick, then let it come out until it becomes subtle; and likewise if it is sharp, until the acuteness of it becomes dulled.
And take for the one who is full and strong and needs blood extraction in a single occasion, that phlebotomy of the vein should be amplified and the phlebotomist should be skilled.
And in one who is frail, the opposite of that should be done, and take that blood is extracted in multiple occasions, and that the vein is strict.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of a vein is that it should be a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is saved from flow of blood and from injury of nerves, and it is more useful and more safe than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And to which it is accustomed to happen syncopes after the phlebotomy, and it is good that you prepare before the phlebotomy with a little of warm infusion of milk or simple oxymel; and extract from the blood in three or four withdrawals.
And if it is a coldness of complexion, then take before the phlebotomy an infusion to warm with a syrup of mirra or with a flavored syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or with a fragrant and smelling syrup.
And if syncopes occur after the phlebotomy, and it is caused by the issuance of much blood, then it is good that you take in drink water of carnation and syrup with subtle fragrant smell; and use aromaticity with a sponge, and anoint the chest with that.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
And whoever wants to evacuate their own arm and dissolve their own blood, take the one for which phlebotomy is for prompt evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, as is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuing days.
However, whoever wants to evacuate their own arm and let out their own blood a second time, and their body is strong, then do this close to the seventh or ninth hour of the first phlebotomy.
But whoever wants to attract the blood of their body against the contrary of the part to which it declines, should be evacuated on the second or third day.
But that body in which there is much blood already and it is sharp and causes fever, should have its blood let out once and a large quantity of it should be let out and the aperture should be widened until syncopy occurs, since you have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and put your hand on the pulse of the one from whom the blood is being let, so that death does not occur in place of syncopy, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not attempt to when you wish to release the arm and evacuate the second vein, since the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult to extract blood, that you press strongly on that area with vehemence and the elbow is extended, for this is very bad.
Having the incision in such a way that it is a secondary phlebotomy; or let that be with the sharpness of the phlebotomy that coagulates the blood at the orifice of the vein; or apply on that area of tyrical or sage-like, and compress with gentle compression so that the blood comes out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if necessity provokes you to evacuate the blood again, and it is not an excuse, then prick that area or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "cord of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the ulnar or basilic, when they are not blocked or narrowed, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient puts their hand in cold water so that the vein becomes more swollen and the vein appears manifestly.
And then tighten it over that limb with a moderate stricture in the middle; and apply a flea-bite according to the transverse smallness, not lengthwise nor according to the longitude.
And let the opening be wide and let your flea-biting be such that you bite just above the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then put the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from the treatment of the hand in hot water, and it is better to bathe the body in cold water during winter.
And the flea-biting of this vein is less savage than that of all the other veins, because there it has no pulsating vein, nor nerve.
And the flea-biting of the little finger of the right hand is conducive to the ailments of the liver.
And the quality of the flea-biting is that you tighten the hand with a bandage or with your own hand, after you have put it in hot water, until the vein is inflamed and is demonstrated to the sight; and then bite transversely; and if it does not penetrate, at least it will not harm.
And take care that you do not cut your hand with the flebotomy, because you leave it so that the nerves of the bare fingers are exposed.
And immediately put the hand in hot water and let the blood flow in it, because if you do not put it in hot water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you apply oil and salt on the vein, so that it is not consolidated suddenly; and similarly you should do in all other veins.
More often the phlebotomy of the left hand is suitable for illnesses of the spleen.
And do similarly in the phlebotomy of the arm as you have done in the other.
And the junction of the vena cephalica in phlebotomy is for illnesses that are on the left side of the body, such as are illnesses of the mother, and retention of menses, and for illnesses of the kidneys and ulcers of the thighs and legs, and for their similar illnesses.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of the arm is that the patient should put their leg in hot water and make friction on the area where the veins appear; and tie above the joint of the foot with a ligature; and the place of the vein show the thumb aside, and from that it branches out to the surface of the foot, many roots.
Then apply a wide poultice on the leg or thigh of the patient, from the knee to the ankle, with an aggregation of it, which is better and healthier.
And if you apply a poultice on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath the surface of the foot, and pause your poultice application with which you apply through the passage, as if you wanted to make an incision.
And let the poultices be visible.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse the patient's foot in hot water and let the blood flow into a container until it is evacuated.
And if the poultice applicator makes a mistake in the first application, then apply it again with a little of the poultice, because the place is healthy; and do not fear the patient's malice, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do the same with the siphon of the other foot likewise.
And for the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is from the knee down to the calf of the left thigh of the patient.
And the junction of the poultice application on them is a pain in the hip when it is for blood cauterization.
And the quality of the fleubotomia of the patient is that it enters in a bath, and tightens and strengthens the thigh of the patient from the side of the wide intestine under the sole of the foot with four fingers on one subtle long bandage, which does not appear except for that.
And then when it appears, you perform the fleubotomy in that following each engine that is possible for you and according to the traverse, and it is better; or incise that by incision or cut that by section, because the place of the patient is salty.
And it is in many homes a known remedy; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then perform the fleubotomy on some branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot towards the said auricular and anular.
And beware of the nerves, and make flow from the blood the quantity that you want.
And then release the tension and stop on the place of the fleubotomy, cut and strengthen the area, because gentle handling is healthy.
Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those things.
Ventouses are of horns, or of brass, or of glass.
And ventilation is made according to two manners: one of them is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
And this purging which is its scarification is according to two manners, for it is done with fire or without fire.
And to the purgings that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are 14 locations on the body, of which one is where purgings are placed on the nape of the neck; and the middle location is in the two parts of the throat together; and purgings behind the jawbone below the mouth; and purgings of the two spatulas; and purgings of the shoulder, and it is above the end of the arm; and purgings of the two axils, and they are of the two arms; and purgings of the two hams; and purgings of the two thighs.
And purging does not extract the blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not have virtue through them, just like it is done by phlebotomy; nor is it necessary that purging be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by excess until the body is completely evacuated.
But if necessity provokes purging for illness or for flow, we administer it at every hour from the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of it and at any time.
And therefore when any of these causes occur, especially if it is during the third or middle of the month, then they command that a purging should be done after having passed two or three hours of the day.
And it is said that purging of the neck is what helps to alleviate heaviness in the head and that which is settled in the senses; but it is better if this is accompanied by evacuation of the entire body.
And this purging is at the location of phlebotomy of the head.
It is not advisable to use on him that which is of cold complexion, or in which there is a catarrh, because it causes great harm.
And for this reason, it is not suitable to use those old things on the heads of those who have cold-related illnesses.
More so to the one on whom it is continuously applied, forgetfulness is caused; and for this reason, it is suitable that you command the one who applies the treatment to put his hand with a bit of warmth on the areas of the feet, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Greater effectiveness of alkahel is in place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilic vein: and for this reason, it is suitable for asthma, and for the constriction of the spleen and the division of the turmoil of the spleen, and for coughs, and for flatulence.
And it is suitable that the alkahel ointment be applied in a small amount, because if it is placed on the feet, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the application of alhagdahan is suitable for accidental pains in the head and for ophthalmia, and for migraine, and for foresight, and for pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And command the assistant to not press their hand with a scalpel so that the artery does not get cut and acidic flows of blood do not occur.
And evacuation of the mucus that is collected in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, and resemblance to the appearance of illnesses that are in the mouth, and instead of a phlebotomy on the upper lip that is between the two lips.
More evacuation that is done on the two spatulas collected with a cupping glass, which is made by replenishment of heat.
And the evacuation of the two divisions of the blood collected from the beginnings of the tubes, made close to phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilic, median and cephalic, because that attracts the blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins of the other large veins so that the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the assistant to not proceed too far with the scalpel, because the area is devoid of flesh, and beware of the nerves and arteries.
And it is an evacuation on which evacuation is done to the bones and collected from the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and the ulcers, and beware.
And command the enema-giver to make a large enema, and let it be of warm water, for the location indicated by strong compression; and strongly let the subtle channels of the enema be opened with a scarification.
Greater enemas of the thighs relieve by evident evacuation, for they extract the blood from the whole body, and alleviate ancient pains of the kidneys and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and provoke the menses, and alleviate bothor and edema; and are in place of phlebotomy of two sophas, and of aloes, and of two cavities.
Inflame the belly that makes all the body swell and causes syncope in many men.
And of the enemas by aloes, the juice is given to the juice through the enemas of two thighs.
And the quality of the application of the enemas is that you should apply the enema at the beginning with a warm and tempered succion, and do not prolong the application of the enemas, but rather lift them gently, and remove them immediately, and so that the humors come to the location through gentle arrival. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the location already reddened, swollen, and inflamed, and that the appearance of the blood shows.
And then you scratch and go up the discharge little by little, and then consider the condition of the body.
For that man who has tender flesh on his thighs, beware that you scratch him only once and do not repeat it, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And order the bloodletter to amplify the scratching and cut a little deeper, and apply the discharge with ease.
And if the blood is thick, then beware that you scratch two times, for in the first scratching the path of subtlety to the blood and its thinness is opened. More so in the second one, to the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then let a scratching be done on the third time so that it cleans the dregs.
And gently, when we want to extract a little blood, one scratching is enough for us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scratch a lot; and if we know that the blood is thick, then beware that we scratch with a deep scratching.
And the limit of scratching is where the depth of the vein is only so much.
And if the patient's codena is thick, hard, and dark, and their pores are very constricted, it is necessary that the areas of the ventoses be anointed with lenitive, resolutive, and aperative remedies; if it is summer, then use oil of aloes, or oil of violet, or oil of bitter almonds, or oil of cypress; and if it is winter, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of iris, or oil of chamomile, or of sage, and apply these to the affected areas.
And if the superfluity is thick and raw, then the oil should be of marjoram, or of balm, or of aloes, or of anise, and apply it to the affected areas.
More so if the ventosed area is of tender and delicate flesh, then it is necessary that it be prohibited from oil, and it is necessary that the areas of the ventoses be washed with warm water or warm water of salt, or water of cypress, or water of border sage, and apply these to the affected areas.
And for one whose wound is of much humidity, wash their ventoses with sharp vinegar, or with water of myrtle and sumach, and apply these to the affected areas.
And from that of which the superfluities are gross, wash the vents with old wine, or with water of senna, which is greater, or with decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and to their likeness.
And it is advisable that the ventilation be protected from in front of the bath; it is also advisable that it be administered immediately after the bath for an hour or for two, and it is advisable that they sleep afterwards with the ventilation.
What is it that ought to regulate the bloodletting before the ventilation treatment.
It is advisable that you consider the beginning: then if the one who is to be bled or the one who must be bloodletted is choleric and has hot and inflamed blood, then it is advisable that they take cooling causes, such as mild vinegar, endives, bitter oil, and latigas, and julep, and similar things.
And give them to eat delicate foods such as poultry, and lean game meats, and cooked dishes with verjuice, and similar things.
And from that of which the complexion is cold, it is advisable to take in drink almond syrup, or syrup of dried julep seeds, and sumach, and with sweet-smelling aromas mixed between wine and nutmeg; and that they be advised to use little drinking and eating, and give them foods such as game birds and hemp seeds and pistachios and small game meats.
And it is known that on the day of venesection and phlebotomy the bleeding should be greater than the drinking.
And it is known that there should be given to drink in certain hours to certain men tyriac alpharac, or medication of musk, which is musked, or alcelita before the venesection or before phlebotomy or after, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is refined; and it is not known that they should take that scaldfit.
The best venesections that are made by scarification are those that are applied on the liver, and on the middle and gout, and on the navel, in the areas of the joints, and the pit of the arm, because these members do not suffer from scarification on themselves.
And it is not sought for those but attraction of blood from a member, thus as they apply venesection on the breast in disease of flux of blood of the nose; and they use that to dissolve cold and viscous venosity of the member, thus as they apply on the belly and the navel; because that rarifies the member and calms it and reduces the pain when they resolve the venosity.
And it is applied on the joints when there is opacity or porosity, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out the opacity and eradicates the porosity from its place.
It seems similarly when it is placed on the liver and the middle that gives ventosity in those enclosures.
And these ventoses are administered with juice only; and some of them are given to be cooked at the fire.
And some of them are administered full of warm water in the ailments of the middle.
And this is because the ventouse should be filled and made larger, it is hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs are cut.
Form of a ventouse administered at the fire: let the width of the orifice be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the pouch be the size of a palm; and let it be on the side of it, in the place that is in its circuit, the size of it, the hole be small according to the quantity that an needle enters into it.
Let it be made of ram ( possibly a plant or herb) or citrus, with thick margins, wool, nails and treads so that it does not let the member move from its position on it.
And let there be in the middle of it a transverse rod of ram or iron, where a candle is placed at the fire.
And already this ventouse should be larger than the one we have recommended; and the smaller part of it according to the ailments and the age of the one who uses it.
And the flatulence of the elderly and thin people is different from the flatulence of the young and those with large bodies.
And the quality of treating this flatulence with fire on the member is that it extends the stick with fire of flax decently in front of a small candle of wax, and place that on the middle of the transverse rod in the middle location of the flatulence, so that the fire is kindled around the affected part to prevent the body of the patient from being burned.
And then apply it on the member of the patient, and let it be on the hole that we have mentioned, until when we have the flatulence and do not indicate that it should be stopped and the vapor rises through that hole, then the flatulence will be dissolved.
And apply the stick according to its manner, and repeat it if it is indicated for that condition.
But in the case of a flatulence that is administered for the illness of bloating, with water, in which there is no transverse rod or hole, and it is not applied except that it should be filled with water, and it is placed on the member alone.
And this is its form: And this flatulence, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter 97.
Bloodletting is not administered in many members except in the members where it is not possible to apply cups, due to their smallness, such as the foot and gum and their relatives; or in a member devoid of flesh, such as the said nose and its relatives.
And the quality of using those that you have found to be bloodletting in the veins of clean and purified blood.
And let the day and night be bathed in warm water until they are hungry, and let no cause remain in their belly; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning with flebotomy and with cups; and let the member of the patient be rubbed until it becomes red; and let cushions be placed upon them.
And when they are filled and fallen.
And if it is possible to suck from the place with a cup, it is even more desirable in treatment.
And if not, then wash the place with sour wine and apply warm water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed out.
And if the flow of blood is prolonged by the application of bloodletting, and it is excessive, then take a cloth dipped in cold water, and apply it above until the flow is stopped.
If the blood is multiplied, then pulverize the vitriol trissat, or galbanum and similar things according to the stiptic causes, until the blood is abscessed; or place poultices of roasted fava seeds on the area, and let them stay until the seeds adhere to the location, and the blood is abscessed.
And then, if necessary, an iteration of bloodlettings, when it is possible to change those.
And if bloodlettings are prohibited from suspension, then rub the area with recent blood or stick a needle in the areas until blood comes out; and then poultices will be placed, for those when they feel some blood come out as soon as they touch.
And when you want them to fall, pulverize over those a little of triturated aloe, or salt, or ash, and apply as needed.
Thus begins the project of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is of many seen necessities in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh, son, be aware that foolish doctors and the common people mock this chapter, and those who for a long time have not respected the books of the Ancients nor have read a single letter from them.
And for this reason it is made that this manner of the sciences in our land is private; and you do not forget it in any given time to be completely; and one does not habituate that which is pressed, except for length of reading of the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, until one extracts the science from those.
And then direct experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my experience has passed; since I have abbreviated it for you and others, and delivered it from the occupation of lengthiness; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed in it many forms of treatments that are administered to it, as is done by addition of declaration, just as it is done in two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summary and collections from the essence of fractures of bones, from which a necessary premise is, before we begin the remembrance of fractured members and various ones. Therefore, I say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning is forbidden to the artisans and a station on the truth of those; so it is you and those who are prompt that they may know or learn this noble art, other than you.
And thus I say that when there occurs a fracture or dislocation or sprain or fall, then it is advisable to begin with phlebotomy or to prepare for it immediately, or all at once, if no cause prohibits it, such as lack of virtue, or if it is someone to whom it is unsuitable, or old age in decrepitude, or a time of intense heat, or of intense cold.
And then be content with a diet of fresh herbs and meat of birds and crab; and prohibit coarse meats and filling up on food and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are assured of an apostemal cautery, and if you do not fear an effusion of material to the member.
Then return the patient to their primary regimen, in which their custom is accustomed.
And thus when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is advisable that the patient be fed with nutritious foods of moist and gross and heavy nourishment, in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from whey and curd and water, and rice, and cabbage, and fish, and cow stomachs, and hocks, and fresh peas, and coarse and similar things to these, and with this regimen is made coagulation of fracture and pus and lighter mucus.
And it is known that the broken bones, when they are in the men who are in the first vigor and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the desiccation of the limbs of theirs.
But the superior nature adjusts and joins above the broken bone of any part a similar cause to glue in which there is grossness that adheres and strengthens that which is together conglutinated and joined together, until it reaches the end of strength and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, until some cause does not prohibit it from its own works.
And for this cause it is necessary that you apply the plasters of the patient, plasters in which there are gravity and viscosity and grossness, just as we have said.
And it is known that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all the other members are different among themselves.
And you come with the reminder of the entire species of fracture, explained in the seventh chapter distinctly from the others.
Much diversity of fracture is found in this medicine. And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in their medicine; for there is made a curved fracture and another that occurs in the stars; and some seen are made fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagitta and astragali and the proceeding and non-proceeding processes, thus as it is done in the pain when it is prepared to write, and there is fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
And for each species there is a proper engine or torment in restoration of the thing, according to what will come as a reminder of it distinctly in its places.
Great signal of fracture of the bone. And by this is recognized fracture of the bone: it is crookedness of it, and of that eminence and appearance of it to the feeling, and so of it when you press on it with your hand.
And then when there is not apparent crookedness in the place nor is it felt by touching when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not fracture here.
It is possible that there is a twisted or small fissure, and it is not suitable to put your hand on it and compression of everything; put a pause on the subject of the medicines of which you have remembrance, and it is appropriate for that moment to be applied strictly to the location.
And you know the place where it is curved and not divided into two or other things that do not touch the satagy, as the whole part of the comparison is in question, then it is suitable to begin from your hour to rectify the twisted thing that has an aposteme, a cautery.
And if it has an aposteme of caution, then leave it for several days until the aposteme stops; and then apply the ointment according to each manipulation that you know of lightness and of art.
And you know that restoration of it and puncturing of it is less serious than the damage in which the satagy occurs.
And then strengthen it according to what will bring back the remembrance of it.
More so if the damage is in the bone of the satagy, then it is necessary to extend this broken member by two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And let your position be such that you hold the limb in its natural shape, while the extended parts of the limb are stretched, then you will perforate so as to return those additions to their place and according to each maneuver that you can put them in their places.
And beware, according to your strength, that you do not fall on the patient during the operation, nor cause harm; and proceed according to your own power so that you apply one bone to the other as their companion, according to their best forms.
And it is advisable that at that time you touch with your hand the one in need, and if sometimes there is a different cause, correct it and adjust it according to the amount of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, as foolish doctors often do, who cause abscesses or tumors to form through their operation, or cause contraction in the limb, just as we have seen happen through the operations of their foolish practices.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil member is that which is recommended; for you should know that the constricted members are diversified in their smallness and in their largeness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the elbow, it seems that the wrapping should be of very thin cloth.
But those that are thick, such as the thigh or the leg, it is suitable that the wrapping be tight and strong, for a tight binding connects the large member and strengthens it entirely with constriction, so that no bruise enters into it.
And then begin, then make your evacuation of the urine, apply a convenient plaster to that, on the place of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to what the member deserves; and strengthen your hand a little with the plaster.
And then go to the most superior part of the location of the fracture, and hold yourself so that you do not touch your constriction at the place where you have strengthened the fracture. And then extend yourself to the wrapping of the location of the fracture a little, and loosen the constriction bit by bit, until you take from the place a large part.
And then take another bandage and wrap the other wounded area around the location of the wound with wrapping, and place your hands on the wrappings at the site of the fracture; and let your operation be in the tightening of the wrapping and in softening of that which we have said in the primary wrapping above.
And then insert a cloth or cloth pad between the wrappings of the plaster to which the distortion of the fracture should be adjusted, if there is distortion; and if not, do not put anything on it for any reason.
And then put a pad on the other bandage, and adjust it over these wrappings decently made as needed, if in the location there is no inflammation or cautious aposteme, then put it on the thing that causes the aposteme or that brings the inflammation; leave that for some days; and then strengthen your hold on the wrappings.
And let the wrappings of the splint be made from reed cane, well-shaped; or from wood of pine; or from palm branches; and let the width of each wrapping be according to this form and figure:
But it is necessary that the splint which is placed on the fracture be a bit thicker and wider than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to how it suits the member in size and smallness; and strengthen over the splints with another bandage according to your primary tightening; and loosen above with a thread decently as we have said regarding tightening, and it should be your tightening according to the location of the fracture itself, and the more it is distanced from the fracture, the less tight the wrapping.
And it is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and be made of soft material; and if the threads are too thick, as has been seen through the operation of certain foolish surgeons who tighten the threads of the tort, it is a great error, when the tightness exceeds equality.
And likewise, very fine threads are not convenient, because you will not achieve with tightness what you want, and it is not necessary that between this and that there be a space of one finger.
And if the patient is treated at the extremities of the stelas, tighten the binding in those places, then place stoppers made of wool or lanolin so that it does not cause them harm.
Certain injuries of the fracture are with a wound, and accidents occur in the kernel, and I will come back to the memory in that one in the chapter according to singularity.
And know that every broken limb is not put in splints on the first day; the reason for which is that the limb, when it is large, does not require that you place it on splints immediately but rather after some days or seven or more, according to the security of the arrival of the apostemous abscess.
And this is the method of the plasterers by which the Ancients restored them, which they placed on fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manipulation of plaster as a restoration of fracture, suitable for multiple complications and especially for women and children, because it is about this that neither heat nor cold comes: and it is that you take powder of mullein, and it is the marrow of the flour that you remove the movement of the mill from the walls of the mill.
And shape that dough as it is, but rather sift it with a sieve of wool, and pause the preparation of the non-sticky or subtle substance; then use that one.
Another manipulation of plaster for restoring fracture and dislocation and sprain: recipe of asafoetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is extracted from wild mint salvage, all one drachm; of mirrh and wormwood one drachm; of garlic one drachm twenty; all things are crushed and sifted and mixed with water or wool if the preparation of the patient is appropriate; then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones gently, and confirms many men.
Another manipulation of plaster which you shape for fracture and sprain: recipe myrrh and half a drachm of white altaea; of myrrh and wormwood one and a half drachms; of acacia six drachms; of Armenian boll twenty.
All things that are crushed in a mortar with crushed motion, and are sifted, and are mixed with water or with white of egg, should be administered.
Manual of plaster to apply to joints and separated bones from their places, and accidental pain in those and in fissures and fractures: take a linen cloth and submerge it in warm oil and vinegar, and place it on the area.
More in this plaster is not the virtue of restoration, but of caustic abscess and expelling pains properly.
Another manual of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; crush all and make a plaster from them.
Manual of quick plaster administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of remaining abscess: take roots of lavender, chamomile and flowers of violets, flour of peas, of all one part; all are crushed and mixed with wine, if the member is not scaled.
But if it is scaled, then mix it with water of colic or humid water and use it for that purpose.
Another manual of plaster more strong in resolution than the first one, when there is a hard abscess for the restoration of the member: take roots of lavender and seeds of linseed, and balustia, and melilot, marjoram, flowers of violet, chamomile, all one part; all are crushed and mixed with water of sage or sweet water or wine, according to the quality of the member and the repose of its color.
According to the esteemed Hippocrates, one should not dissect a corpse that has been placed on the third member of the restoration of the body, unless made of wax and oil, for no other cause; and it is recommended that there be a middle ground between coarseness and subtlety.
In Galen's view, it is seen that they are placed on the broken member regarding the restoration of the body and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat, thus like myrrh, resin, and similars to them of those causes that we have recommended.
Manual of plaster that relieves lesion and pain: take equally, wax, human skin or partridge's brain, and salt, divided into parts; let them be crushed and sieved, and then mixed, and make a plaster.
But the quantity according to which one must see that the ligament is broken and then dislocated, is that you consider if there is no accident of pain nor swelling nor the bone is fractured, not removed from its place, then you should not untie or loosen the limb. And if there occurs at the place vehement pain or swelling or inflammation, then you should constrain or untie it immediately, and apply the plaster to it.
Take a cloth and a marine sponge soaked in warm water, and submerge it in tepid water, then wash the area where the swelling is and the pain will be soothed; and place the limb to rest for an hour; and apply a poultice of flaxseed or oil or rose oil on the affected area, covered with a cloth submerged in warm water or oil, and leave it there for nine hours until you are sure of the aposteme's reduction, and the inflammation of the limb is reduced, and the pain is alleviated.
And then apply this subtle plaster with a gentle hand and without strong pressure for its primary construction, and subtly work it into the area until it is healed.
And if at times the aposteme and the redness and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have been completely alleviated, and you are in need of a plaster and a bandage, then apply it in this way as you did from the beginning.
And if none of the causes that we have mentioned happen to the limb, then do not undo it for three days or four or five or seven; and some applications are left on for twenty days according to what appears to you by the loosening of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and the coagulation of the flesh comes together over it.
Then adjust the strictness more in the second constraint than in the first one, and adjust it according to the swelling of the patient's vein, as the memory of it is recalled.
Mostly if you have already cleaned and drained the area of the fracture more than it should be covered, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; and so soak that with warm water all day long; and do this for three days; and loosen the strictness a little, and through this operation run to the member the nourishment, and the swelling will be healed.
But that which foolish restorers of the fracture of the limb do, by soaking it when it is not restored at the beginning, as it covers, and it is restored as twisted, is error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were done in this manner, the Ancients would have enlarged their freedom and would have worked with that.
And I have not seen any of them do this, for which it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
Chapter according to: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are made by percussion of the spine, and the percussion breaks all the bone inside the siphac, which is called the bone, thus as it is made in the chest, and for this reason this species is named axial; or the spine strikes some part of the bone, and strikes the flesh of it and does not pass the wound to the back of it; and this species of fracture is named levatio absoluta.
And the injury of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is bruised or crushed; and the cause of it is percussion with stone or falling on stone, and likewise its symptoms.
And this fracture is penetrating that approaches the peritoneum which is beside the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the injury of these two fractures is great or small.
And of fracture it is that which is bruised in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason is named this type of fracture "hair-like" or "delicate". (Note: a more fitting translation could be "and of fracture it is that which is bruised in the bone, in the thinness of the fine hair, and for this reason is called this species of fracture "cap
And it is a fracture that is made or by fall or by percussion of stone and to its symptoms, which makes enter some layer of the bone into the divided parts within, and it is made in the concave place thus as accidents to the marrow when accidents happen to their percussion and it is separation of their entry into the divided parts within.
And mostly it happens in the bodies of humid bones, thus as with the heads of shoulders. (or "thus like the heads of joints")
And all these species of fractures are called "sategias", and they are weighed as if separated pieces. (or "they are like separate fragments") And you will come with a remedy for all that in its place.
And we recognize all these species of fracture by detection on those and by inquiry of them with probes and evidence of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the species of hair-like [fracture] is recognized by the fact that it appears on the bone, and is scraped off, and cleaned with a probe, because the fracture appears black.
But in the cure of fractures consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest sign on fear, such as is vomiting from anger, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and excitement of the veins and redness of those, and similarities to them in the major conditions, it is not healed unless treated.
And if you see non-threatening accidents, then you wait for healing, then you begin the treatment of it.
Which thing happens because if the plague has come to you at the beginning as it is plagued and that is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study on the evidence of the tooth on the 14th day according to every disposition.
And if it is in the summer days, then it is advisable to remove the bone from the teeth on the seventh day, knowing that what is left of the bone is corrupted by the panicle, and that accidents happen which we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already reached the panicle covering the brain, and is with broken and torn parts, then it is advisable to sew the torn and damaged part, as I will recount to you.
And that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover the bone according to custom and method as possible according to the shape of the wound, and that it be easier for the patient.
And if it happens to you to need the detection of the bone, or flows of blood or a cautious aposteme, then you oppose yourself to what is advisable, and that you fill the place with warm poultices and rose oil, and make the wound rest until the aposteme is settled, and be safe from flows of blood; and then begin in the circuit of the bone and in the removal of it.
And that this be according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you cut the bone with a cutter of straight edge, and this is its shape: Then administer another cutter, a bit wider than that one; and this is its shape:
And then administer to the incision site a poultice that is the size of.
And that there are various incisions named by you, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are at the extremities of the body, and are made of iron or felt.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incision so that it does not bother the head and heal that one.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary that you perforate around it, where you administer the incisions with the trephines, which are called non-deep trephines.
And they are not called thus but because those do not touch the term of the bone of the skull to that which is near it, for which reason the trephine has a round extremity or edge over that which is put the head of the instrument resembling an edge or a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a large number of these trephines, of which each one suits the thickness of each bone, while being present in every skull of the brain, the extremity of which is sharp, and the length and width are according to the quantity of thickness of this skull.
And this is the form of three species of probes: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the probe on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone is penetrated; then return the probe to another location, and pause there where the entire thickness of the radius or surrounding area is.
And then insert the lancets into the lanceted areas that are between each hole of the bone, and make a subtle pus on it with the tip of levity, as we have said, until you penetrate the bone, or with your hand, or for some other cause due to certain instruments which will prepare for that, like tweezers and subtle forceps.
And take care that you guard with all caution that the lancet does not touch any part of the spleen.
And thus when you circulate the bone perforating, and it is separated from the spleen if it continues with it, and you extract that, take care to rasp and equalize it in the roughness of its surface that is on the bone with another instrument similar to a lancet, but take care that it is sharper and more subtle than the other lancets.
And if any part of the small bones remains and is rough, then take it with ease where you need to use the instruments; and then heal the wound with ointments and unguents which we have mentioned.
The other hand of the operator is more relaxed, lacking in fear, which Galen and Avicenna describe with great eloquence; and this is their sermon: it is necessary for you at the beginning to start discovering the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is most violent and most apparent, until when you have discovered that part and you have placed your hand on the extremity of this incision, gentle and joyful, which is the form of this:
And it is that the lenticular part is the knee and does not cut any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides before in length, thus as veins; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the hip on the face of the acute incision on the bone.
And then strike on the incision of a part with a small hammer until you have cut all the bone with ease, as it is revolving, and be sure of the peritoneum that does not happen to it in the accident that you fear in any handling, and if the medic was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was asleep.
When a cause is broken in the bone of the peritoneum in any location of bone, the incision of that one with the extremity of the incision, that lenticular one, will cut it with ease, because it is delivered from its pain and its fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the periosteum, and that which is separated or stopped by the bone is the surface of it, and remains in its roughness and subtle scratches, then it is necessary to scrape away that roughness and subtle scratches with subtle scrapers, for which you have prepared the name, in various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in every location the most convenient of them and the most suitable for them according to that in which you have performed your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
And then administer in your scraper the one with which you scrape the bone at the beginning the widest of those scrapers, and then use then the thinnest of them, and do not stop doing that continually until you reach administering the thinnest and most subtle of all those.
More so in each of the other small fractures and delicate breakages, then administer care according to that which you have lost for the correction of it.
And it is a cause that is not diminished among all those who have studied in that art. And this is based on what we have written and shown regarding large fractures.
And if the periosteum is torn when you scrape the bone, then take a cloth of linen according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and apply it to the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and rose oil and apply it over the first cloth and do the most gentle pressure that you can on it, so as not to harm the cyst; and then administer on it a broad plaster, and do not bind it except for the quantity that the wound has, just so much.
And leave that one in this treatment for a day or two until you are secure from an aposteme of caution; and then untie it and administer medicine to it with which superfluous dryness is relieved, such as linseed and flour of vetches, and powder of cypress and aristologia, and resembling those things.
And it is that you make from these medicines a powder that is powdered over the wound, such as they are dried; and universally, administer to it all medicine of property by which it is that it cleanses and does not bite.
And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your care is clean; and not be in the excess of ointment or other; nor do you let virulence accumulate in it; for when it is adjusted over the panicle of the brain, it corrupts it and pours out, and falls upon the patient with a malignant malignancy.
And it falls on the siphac of the head, as from it is clarified the bone and especially when the care of it is despised, and it is blackened on the surface of it; and then consider that if it falls to the patient the accidents that we have said, you should know that it is very dangerous to neglect.
And if it doesn't come from black bile but rather from the paused medicine, and it is due to the virtue of that medicine that the black bile is made, then take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and apply those to a cloth, and place that cloth on the navel; and treat it with the species of curative treatment that are suitable for it to be healed.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not broken in two parts together with the bones above, or one of those having some cartilage, because there are two bones in it, and the part on the outside is cartilaginous, and it does not break but rather becomes bruised and twisted and dislocated.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should introduce the small finger into the nostril, and bind that fracture inside with the tied bandage, and outside with the bandage in front, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And let this be done by you with ease, and beware that you do not cause harm to the patient during your operation.
And if the break is in the uppermost part of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then you should cut at the extremity of the thread on which the dressing is applied.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the likeness of that.
And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then apply the vinegar or ten of them to the rest of the abscess's cauterization.
And insert into the extremity of the nose a thread of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one piece, or put two small tubes, if the fracture is in two pieces, and let it be in the tube the thickness of as much quantity that fills the hole of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers said that the tubes should be wrapped in leather, and should be changed every day, but it is not seen by me; however I have seen that the thread should be wrapped in a plaster made with powdered mummy; and then lay the tube so that the bone is held firm and the cartilage is hardened.
And some wadded things are inserted into the nose, in place of a tube, that is to say a cotton plug wrapped in linen cloth; and it should be that you have the fracture of the nose with vehement movement and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do this, and if you want, do tubes.
And if there's an accidental wound with a postulated abscess, apply a plaster to the nose with wax or a cloth soaked in warm oil and rosewater, or on the opposite side.
But if it doesn't develop into an abscessed wound, then it is advisable to plaster the aforementioned area with flour of chickpeas and powder of dried roses mixed with egg whites; and apply this on the ulcer, and do not put anything on the nose for any reason.
But if the nasal bones are fractured with a small break or are comminuted, then it is advisable to cut into those, and extract those with an instrument suitable for that purpose; and sew the gash, and cure it with something that nourishes and consolidates, and apply plasters suited to that.
And if there's an accidental wound inside the nose, then it is advisable to cure that with warm poultices and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and the break is not with a wound, consider then if the fracture is only superficial, and not broken into two pieces, and curved to the inner partitions, then its treatment is easier.
And then, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and likewise if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and press with that finger the curvature of the fracture gently to facilitate the separation of the parts, with one hand on the outer part of the jaw and the other hand on the inner part of the fractured bone; and decently move that one.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary that you administer extension to both parts according to rectitude so that their alignment becomes possible.
And if there is a conjunction of teeth with disruption, then strengthen those with which you expect to remain with thread of gold or silver or silk; and place a bandage over the broken jaw, and a doubled cloth over it, and a large stellar bandage decently made, or a single bandage along the length of the jaw; and bind that above according to what seems suitable for the binding and what is convenient for the application, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and calmness, and place his diet of soothing foods.
And if you think that the shape has already been altered in some way, then take care to dissolve it on the third day; and then rectify what has been altered in them and apply a plaster made with powder of mola, or white of egg, or flour of cypress, since you will have applied the cerate of them, and place the woolen cloth over the plaster.
And then put and adjust that plaster on them, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, so that it does not come undone until it is healed and strengthened the fracture; for many times observed this fracture is strengthened in three weeks.
And if another observed abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of them until it is healed, and the abscess be reduced.
And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider if it is a piece of bone separated or splinters, then you should subtly remove those splinters with what is convenient for the remedy of those injuries.
And if the orifice of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with a fleobotomy according to the quantity of your need.
And then when you have removed those splinters, and not all of them can be removed, then you should close the orifice of the wound if it is wide; and if not, place on it one of the plasters that is convenient for it and that adheres to it, until it is healed.
Chapter five.
On the restoration of the hernia when it is strained.
When the intestine is torn from the part in front of the navel, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
When it is torn, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch the intestines; and it is easier to restore; or it is such that it touches the intestines, and it is difficult to restore; or it is such that the fracture is with a wound.
And the operation in this case, when the fracture is with a wound, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the intestine and follows the torn hernia, and the other stretches out the skin over the affected area.
Then bind the fracture with threads or ties so that it is given the shape of the intestine as it should be, and there is neither protrusion nor concavity in it.
And if you need more extension, then it is necessary that you place a piece of cloth or wool under the patient's thigh, and its size should be according to the quantity of your need; and stretch and elevate the hernia and tie the cloth around your hand so that you bind the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot bring the extremity of the furcula to the parts in front, because it has penetrated too far, then it is necessary that the patient be placed upside down on their neck, and a cushion be placed on the middle muscle of their thigh in large size.
And the minister presses the muscle of their thigh to the parts inside until the bone of the furcula is elevated that is in the groin in its own, and then you correct the fracture and bind it with ties on the toes.
More often if you feel stagnations of the furcula and they are inflamed, then it is necessary that you make an incision above that and extract those stagnations to facilitate.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision with one of the incision tools that you have prepared for this, after you have placed under the furcula the instrument that serves the ciphac; and the instrument is made of wood or iron, of which this is the form:
And it is similar to a spoon of which this is the concavity; and let its width be according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; that it have two extremities thus as occasions, and one extremity be broad and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound, which you have made when you extracted the sagittal bone is large, and there is a risk of apostema, then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear apostema, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the cleft in the wound.
And if apostema occurs, then put a dressing with sharp vinegar and rose oil on it, and apply it to the area.
And thus, that the splint is not removed from the broken bone; and for this reason that you see the patient every day, when the bandage is softened or the splint is seen to be in a bad position, then you correct it and tighten the bandage.
And then stop the patient's sleeping with their neck, and place their pillow under their sleep at night a small cushion; so that when they are elevated by their assistant on that side, then the fracture of the leg is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or their arm is tied to the neck.
And do not untie the bandage unless there is an accident in the area of the abscess or apostem, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the condition of it to that effect, and adjust the tightness and restore it, and let it be until it is restored and the fracture of the leg is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some observations in some men it is done in less time than that.
Chapter six.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula is thrust into the patient's side and does not cut the flesh but only the margins.
And then when the location of the patient is cut — and it is cut in the middle location of the patient — and it is not recognized except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare and reduce it according to its natural shape in every manner possible.
Then apply a poultice made of ground alum and vinegar to the location; and apply a dusting of doubled cloth; and apply to it a subtle plaster of table or board, according to the quantity of the entire spatula or a little more.
But if the plaster forms a hollow in some of the locations of the spatula, then fill that hollow with vinegar and alum, and apply the plaster equally.
And strengthen it with a long bandage from constraint, and with the firmness of the plaster, so that it is not removed from its location.
And examine the dressing every day; and all visits that it is softened, replace another visit and strengthen it and reset the plaster if it is removed from its location.
And lay the patient on their side.
The spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And then when this period is completed, you dissolve the ligament, and be assured that the dissolution of this is not harmful to the bones for which the beginning is not tender nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed to the place of the fractured bone and you put a bandage on it, then you sew over it, and remove it, and do as we have said in the case of the fracture of the wrist, of swelling, of abscess, or cautery, if it happens here.
Chapter 7.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot, when it is broken in the middle area of it, and this causes pain; but the extremities of it are not moved, except those that are broken and comminuted.
And of the accidents of it, when the middle of it is fractured, it is that it declines to the inner parts and happens to it great pain, and difficulty in walking, and coughing, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity where the bone is fractured and is not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be lifted onto their back, and a cushion placed between their shoulders; and press on the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it with the hands of two assistants, and proceed subtly in the operation of it and in the adjustment according to all manner that is most possible and that suits it, until the shape of the bone returns as it should.
And then pause over the plaster and stop and pause on top of the subtle table of salt or of warm poultice and of their similar lightness, since you envelop that in a cloth; and then subtly apply it to the broken bone so that it is not dislocated; and go with a bandage according to the condition of the back some tightened places, and tighten that one with a strict bandage; and then consider the bandage every hour, and when it is loosened, tighten it.
And if it is necessary to provoke the dissolution of that which needs corrosion or purging, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then touch and divide that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what occurs through that with the art of curing; and then return the plaster, if at times adapted to the face; and adjust to it a strictness until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
It is known that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in coarse locations which are on the back; and of their extremities, from the partition beforehand, nothing occurs to those contrary injuries except through what are cartilaginous. The recognition of the patient is not diminished by the sentiment of their inquiry with them.
And the restoration should be such that it joins the fracture with the fingers according to the possible method, until it is joined as it should be, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel, if necessary for that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the internal divisions, then it causes the patient vehement pain and puncture, similar to the puncture that occurs in one who has pneumonia, and because of this the bone puts forth the wrapping; and it causes difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of bloody mucus; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the medicines are prepared for that with many preparations.
And of them it is said: it is good to give the patient foods that cause inflammation and swelling, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the outer parts.
We would have avoided this because it should not be a light cause to generate a surgical abscess, if it doesn't happen; and if it does happen, then it already helps with that.
And they said some of them that it should be administered with a poultice and then sucked with force; and it seems reasonable, but however it is feared that the poultice will attract the excesses to the place due to the debilitation.
They said some of them: that the place should be covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and that powders should be applied between the ribs until it is filled, which should be the binding plaster when you envelop that affected part; and that the patient should be treated with a cure of pleurisy and of food and medicine.
And if the cause violently constricts the patient who does not suffer, and the bone punctures the vein with a sharp pointed instrument, put above the patient, then it is necessary that we make an incision on the place, uncover from the broken rib, and put above that instrument which conserves the diaphragm, the remembrance of which is preceded, and that we introduce the bone with facility, and extract that.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if there occurs an aposteme (abscess), then cut it and push powders into hot rose oil and apply on the place, and that the patient should be treated with what is suitable for the internal abscess.
And let it be breathed upon the side on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Chapter nine.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Some times it happens that the fracture affects the neck bones, and similarly their cartilage, and likewise the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be cured or not, then consider this: for if the muscles are already softened and numbed and deadened and cannot be moved or stretched or strengthened, and when you constrict them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, there is no feeling of pain, then you should know that it is incurable, and in such conditions it is mortal.
And if you touch them and feel constriction in the fingers and puncture, then you should know that the knot of the bone is saved and that the disease will be cured with treatment.
And if it happens to the vertebrae of the neck similarly and you want to know if it will be cured or not, then consider the weight of the person.
Then if you see that it is already softened, the same thing happens to them that happened to the others, and also when they lie on their back, they have bloating and evacuation against their will, and sometimes it is retained above their back and they want to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is mortal, and therefore do not bother with their cure.
More often if no accident occurs from those things, the cause is better and the injury is lighter.
And the treatment of it is that you perforate with a needle to the seat of the postulant abscess, which you place on the inflamed spine or on the mangled and rubbed sole, or in the hollows of the shoulders; place it on that thing for several times a day until the abscess is seated.
Then place one of the comforting and exciting plasters, and stretch it over that with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected side where they feel pain until they are healed.
And if it happens that the bone is dislocated or any cause that has already been separated from it, then you must cut on the tendon and show that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then cure it with a plaster for the unctions of the ulcers, until it is healed.
More often if the skin of the bone is cracked, and it is the end of the wound, then you must put your right thumb in the patient's bottom, and join the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible for a second adjustment; and then place on it a plaster and bandage, if needed, and then bind that.
And if you feel shattered nerves in it, then apply a poultice on that, and remove that, and cure the wound with the treatment that is preceded by the fact that it will be healed.
E si sentes satagias trencadas
Of restoration of the narrow passage or Of the restoration of the strait/ channel
The bones of the narrow passages are broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is not but a communication in the extremities of those and are cut in length and decline to the parts inside; and it happens to the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is numb when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that until it is over the fracture, which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is in the extremity of it only, then you splint it according to what is appropriate for equalization until it is assembled into its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the hip or what already declines to the lower parts, then you make the patient lie on their belly so that it is prepared for you to restore that fracture. And then when you have splinted it, put a plaster on it, and apply a bandage of cloth or of cotton, and bind tightly so that there is no danger of fracture puncture nor movement of the splint.
Engage the cavity with what fills that space so that it takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their side or over their left side.
If there is an aposteme abscess, then you stop the extension of it and its restoration until the aposteme abscess is sedated, and place on it what will seat according to what has been said previously; and then return to its restoration, and strengthen that area with a bandage.
And if it happens in the seventh bones or they are broken, then pull them out.
Chapter eleven.
On the restoration of the fracture of the assistant or helper, (but more likely) Of the restoration of the fractured joint.
The adjutori is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, (more likely it refers to a joint in the upper limb) or (possibly) The adjutori is that which is the
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a wooden splint according to this shape:
And let there be two ligaments in the two extremities, and then let it be suspended from an elevated place.
And let the patient sit on a chair; and then put outside the broken arm on the splint until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place where the curvature of the splint is attached.
And then raise the limb affected by the severe cause, or let the minister extend it to the parts of the patient's body; and then the doctor should place his hands together with the patient's hands, until the fracture returns to its proper place.
And the other method is that the patient should be lifted onto their shoulder and raise the hand of the neck with a bandage; and then order two servants to hold, one of them holding what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holding the patient's pus; and each of them extend to their respective part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tie above the fracture with a bandage and also below it with another bandage, and each of the two servants will extend to their respective parts.
And thus if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, it is proper that half of the bandage be placed on the cilium and the other part be placed around the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, it is proper that the bandage be placed on that spot and also above the elbow.
Wrap that with a dressing and bandage, and then as soon as it is wrapped as is proper and applied with good application, then tie it if there is no danger of causing an abscess or caution.
More often if there's an urgent need for a cauterized abscess, then apply the strictness within the seventh day, and let it rest on the woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil mixed with rosewater until the abscess bursts, and then you will be strong to extract it.
And the method of extracting it is that you apply a plaster on the fracture, and then put a dressing of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that splint, and place your hand opened over the shoulder muscle.
And secure the cloth and tighten it on the splint of the arm so that the arm is in its place, if not prohibited by some cause from the broken bone.
Then use a stick.
And it is that you place on the fracture that stick which is thickest and strongest of the other sticks; and put between each stick the width of a finger, and let the length of the sticks be according to the break with an addition of three fingers from the entire fractured part.
And then tighten on the sticks with the strictness that was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your tightness on the place of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture is more aligned, the tightness should be less.
And so if you observe the positioning of the stars and the strictness as we have said in the hour in which you restore the member to its proper position, then you do.
And if you fear a hot abscess, then loosen the strictness and the stars within the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no accident occurs in the place of bruising or inflammation; or it is prohibited for food to reach the member due to an excess of strictness; and thus rectify all that according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause of that will occur, then do not loosen the ligature unless after three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands be over their stomach.
And apply to the assistant a poultice full of warm wool, and consider at all hours of night or day that the figure of the broken member is not deformed nor dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, thus rectify all this with your virtue.
And give the patient food in the order that we have mentioned before, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it is strengthened; and then cover with a cloth that grosses the food of it.
It is customary for the assistant and the patient's leg to be strengthened in a few days; then it is necessary that they be unlocked and a bath be administered and medicine applied with an ointment that corrects the condition.
And if the fracture is a pulled one, then you should not unlock it for two days or two months.
Chapter twelve.
On the restoration of arm fractures.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forks; of which one is small, and it is the one that is commonly called the elbow, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed above the small one, from the upper part.
And it happens that only the larger fork is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes they are both broken together.
And when the smaller fork below is broken, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even easier.
And when the fork of the upper arm is broken, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller fork below, then it is convenient for the doctor to make a small extension with ease so that it can be easily straightened.
More often the larger intestine is what is torn, then it is necessary that you apply extension with great force.
And if both intestines are torn together, then it is necessary that you apply the most intense traction with greatest strength.
And it is necessary that you place the figure of the hand for restoration of it and extension of the stretched-out part on a cushion, and let the palm of the hand be at the divisions above, more than all the other fingers, and the said finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be seated on a low chair.
And let there be a cushion in front of it in its height or depth, so that the patient does not lean forward.
And then the minister extends the arm of the affected part more towards the left hand or to the right, and another minister extends above in a similar manner.
And then the doctor reduces the bone within so that it returns to the best position that it can.
And if in the fracture of the bone there are fragments, then you must drill to remove all the pieces from their place with your instrument.
And if it appears that the fragment is separated and touches the tendon and is not part of your hope in the restoration of it, then you sew over it and leave it according to the method that we have spoken of above.
More often if the fracture is on the plague, you have already done a single chapter, and then take the cure of that.
And if there is an abscessed tumor at the beginning of your restoration, then apply a cloth with wax made from olive oil and white wax, and let it be between speculation and subtlety, and tighten the cloth over it with subtle strictness until the abscess breaks; and then remove the wax and apply a plaster prepared from powder of rounded clay and the clarity of dove's dung, and apply bandages; and let the bandage be that which is placed on that fracture, both soft and strong.
And you should know that the name of the bandages of the arm is seen in the major preparations, or whether the fracture is in one splint or in two splints together.
And then apply your tightness over the place of the fracture strongly and vehemently, and when it is more necessary to constrict the parts separated from the fracture or the lower parts of it, apply the constriction a little softer according as the remembrance of it precedes in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and humid, and not harsh or rough, and the thread with which it is tightened should be moderately between subtle and coarse, just as we have recommended.
Examine the limb and the ligament closely for several days. And if a cause arises that requires correction, such as swelling that occurs in the limb, then wrap the limb with hot water until the swelling subsides.
And leave the limb unconstrained until it rests, and then apply the bandage again.
And if the fracture is already softened and the bone is already reconnected and resembles its original shape, then correct everything with your skill.
And consider more so if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, then wrap it so as to soften it a little and leave it for several days until it heals, and then tighten it.
More so if to the patient no cause of those that we have mentioned occurs, then it is not necessary that it be untied for about twenty days or around that.
And the hand of the patient should be suspended by its virtue of restless movement, and make it sleep on its back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter thirteen.
On the restoration of fractures of the thigh and of the fingers.
It is known that to the thigh and to the joints of the fingers a painful fracture occurs, and it does not happen to them but rather an injured wound of visible swellings.
And when fracture or injury happens to the thigh, then it is advisable that the patient keep quiet and lay down in bed with both legs equally extended, and place your hand on the thigh over the affected area.
And let the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor adjust those ends so that they are joined with good junction.
And then it is advisable to apply plaster and cotton, unless an apostemic cautery is needed; and place a bandage underneath according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
More so if the crack is in the inner parts of the palm of the hand, then make a figure of a sphere from cloth, and command the patient to hold it with their cracked palm; let it be bound with long cloth.
And let the bandage of leather be wrapped in cloth in which there is padding, so that the leather is applied to the palm; and tie it as needed.
If the fracture is in the forearm, then it is necessary to place a splint above and another splint below the fracture on the palm, so that the hand can be opened and straightened; and then apply a bandage, just as the hand is turned to the forearm between the fingers with a ligament.
And if a fracture occurs at the knuckle of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be immobilized according to what is necessary and apply a bandage around the palm and if you wish, place a small splint on it so that the fracture can be elevated and not bent.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle one, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be immobilized and tied with a bandage around the finger to which it belongs; or all the fingers can be tied together in a continuous manner, and this is better; or place a small splint on it, as we have said for the thumb.
And consider, in your treatment, and then apply that, the application of a heated poultice and oppose — in your operation — to what is necessary when any of those causes occur, as it is iterated in the narration of it.
Chapter fourteen.
On the restoration of a fracture of the thigh bone.
The thigh bone, which is called broken and declared by the sensation that it is turned to the front part above and to the worst below.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed below the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and on their face.
Then the healer extends all the bandage to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
More, if it approaches the root of the thigh, then the bandage is applied to the groin at the part of the perineum, so that the extension comes into place, and the other bandage is below the fracture.
And similarly if the break is near the groin, then the bandage is made near the groin, and the extension is to the parts below.
And then the doctor puts the bone in its place with both hands, so that it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by a good joint; then one must apply plaster and bandage, if there isn't an accumulation of pus on the limb. More often if it happens in the apostema, then you will leave that for several days until the apostema abscess is drained, and then return to your cure.
The stricture of it should be made thus: take a bandage that wraps around the fracture, and fold it two or three times, and remove the excess from it; and then wrap the leg up to the ankle and to the root of the thigh.
And insert the end of the bandage between the thigh and the leg near the knee to the separated parts, and let the ends of the bandage protrude from the upper part of the two parts, and then wrap around the leg and the thigh what is left over from the excess of the bandage.
And then put a splint on the thigh in the place of that fracture itself, and put one of them a splint on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the emptiness between the leg and the thigh with warm cloths, so that the stricture is consolidated.
And then start with a strong stricture on the middle of the place of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as much as you can loosen the bandage at the place of the fracture, the tighter it should be and less stiff and softer.
And then extend the two extremities of the thigh to the separated parts of the hips until it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the spine on the other side so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
And then place the structure on that, given that it should not cause corrosion or abscesses to the member, nor cautery or inflammation and symptoms similar to those; and if any of these causes occur, then immediately treat the dislocation of it, and rectify what occurs, according to what we have said many times before.
More so in the bone is the weight of the bone which presses, then it is necessary that you alleviate that according to what is possible for you; and if not, make a wound on it and remove that, and cure with that which precedes the remembrance until it is healed.
And many times this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by another thing that is adjusted to its spine, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
But however in the restoration of it in such a way made, it should not cause lameness to the patient; and if it is restored alone, another thing that should be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he limps with the one that is strongest.
And it is known that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a few months or a few years, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and of the other conditions.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder blade of the upper tooth.
It is known that a fracture of the shoulder blade of the upper tooth usually ends badly unless a suitable mixture of herbs is applied.
But if there is a fracture, then it is not just a crack or hole in its parts, and this is with an ulcer or six ulcers, and about that the sentiment has been stated.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken from its parts, with the said things, should be aggregated and joined together as much as possible for equilibrium and facilitation and fabrication.
Then apply a plaster and put it on that rounded stick, if you need it for that purpose; and bind them together with a bandage suitable for this.
And then consider all the conditions that we have recommended for other fractures, such as an aposteme dressing and similar to those injuries which are opposed to any accident with what is convenient for it to be healed.
Chapter sixteen.
On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
It is known that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large and is named for the leg itself; and the other is subtle, and is named fibula.
And the same types of fracture that occur in the two bones of the arm also occur in each of the species of leg fractures, and for this reason the restoration of one is similar to the restoration of the other, and the operation for it is the same.
And if both bones are fractured at the same time, the leg is rendered completely useless.
And if the thinner bone is fractured, the leg is partially disabled.
And if the larger bone is fractured, it causes more harm, and is one of those conditions that cannot be alleviated.
Then administer extension, alignment, and ligature of the splints according to that treatment.
But above all, be cautious that if the leg fracture is a bad one with many complications, that the extension should be milder and less tight, and that it alleviates your condition.
And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you prepare the splints and complete the entire treatment, then you will take pieces of cloth from the same material as the ones that are placed on the soles (soles of the feet), which are made of branches of palm; choose from those the ones to which a small thickness is requested, and not of the rough ones, and let their length be according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the thinnest part.
And then wrap each bandage in two wraps according to the length of it, and place one over the division of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and let them extend from the knee to the base of the foot.
And then tie the two splints in three places on both extremities and at the middle place, for with this structure the leg is prevented from bending to the right and left division, and it stays in good position.
And already a wooden splint is administered according to the length of the leg; and it is placed on it, on the leg, so that it conserves that movement.
Major improvement will occur if you apply this to a fracture, and when you have applied it, the wound will heal properly.
And then consider each day the leg and study it for previous studies, and you will guard it from apostema and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of these causes happen, then apply to him what is suitable so that it may be healed.
Chapter 17.
Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
The ankle does not experience total fracture; but the bones of the foot experience some fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely experience fracture, and it does not happen to them except for bruising due to bad positioning.
And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient should put his foot on the ground prepared in that way as before.
And then put one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and press those, and squeeze, and push those back into their places.
And then apply a plaster cast and bandage underneath, and put on the belly of the foot a small table with two flat surfaces.
And then strengthen that leg with a straight structure downwards, since you have wrapped it with bandages and other treatments for the aforementioned conditions.
And when three or four days have passed, then you will find the ligament loosened, for you will find the bones reset, or re-aligned, or re-located, and the operation in those is thus completed.
But if some of the vertebrae are dislocated, then restore them, and reset them in the same way as you do and teach to yourself in the restoration of the vertebrae of the back. And then put a splint on the dislocated finger according to its length, and let it be bound with a little bandage; and then give the foot this board which is recommended to you, and strengthen that leg with a straight structure downwards.
But if what is dislocated of the bones are two or three or more, then you put a splint on each finger according to its quantity wrapped in lion's bandage, and strengthen the board at the lowest part of the foot, and let it be above one of the ends of the board outside the belly of the foot so that it holds well.
And it is fitting for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which have been told to you in other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and apply them to every accident according to what is suitable.
Chapter eighteen.
Of the fracture of the knee of the woman and of the bone of the thigh and of the rod of the man.
When the knee of the woman is fractured, then make that plaster cast, and place it inclined to the part of the back a little, and let it be held from behind.
And let the midwife put a poultice on the knee of the child, and let it be made on the knee of the woman as on a sphere; and let the woman be bent, and lift the back of the child little by little, until all that is dislocated is reduced so that the part of the knee is in its place as it should be and the fractured bone returns.
And let dusting powders be applied to the back of the child, and when it wants to urinate, help the child with ease and let it urinate, and reduce and return that which is according to the method according to which one treats at the beginning, and then return to the first powder.
And do this for seven days or around that, until it is restored.
And if you want, take a bladder of a sheep and tie on the thigh of the child a cane thread; and insert all the bladder into the knee of the child, and blow into the thread with force until the bladder is inflated inside the knee, so that the fracture returns to its place.
And then fill up with cotton or plaster for several days according to what we have recommended, until it becomes healthy.
And when the bone of the penis in a man or woman is fractured, then administer in the restoration and reduction of the liquid that we have recommended for the hip bone.
And this liquid is not hidden in these nearby fractures, and few have come to know it, especially for those who have some study and use and understanding of my book; for that fracture means to you in the major preparations, a right way in restoration and in the strictness of it, and therefore understand well.
More in the rod of a man when it is fractured, take a poultice of oil, and put the rod in it; and then place a pause on the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and then let it be left for three days or around that time, and it will be healed.
Chapter 19.
On the restoration of fractures of bones when it is caused by a wound.
It is convenient for one to whom a fracture with a wound happens, and especially if the bone is large, such as the bone of the thigh or of the arm, or similar to that, that you should consider and perform surgery on it as soon as possible, if the conditions for surgery are suitable for you, as we have said before.
And if the plague causes bloody discharge, then it is necessary that you cover yourself with protection so that you do not breathe in the dust of the patient's feces, unless another cause is present.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
But if a hot abscess occurs, then you should delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day at all, because you will cause bad accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent and exposed above the skin, then it is necessary that you force reduction of it and push it in with your hands to facilitate and minimize its protrusion.
But if protrusion is not to your advantage and the preparation of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers and the width of which is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the doctor to take from those three or four according to the quantity that is indicated in the treatment of all types of fractures.
And let it be reason, and let there be a small groove in the paw so that it is not doubled over during the compression on that one at the time of the operation.
And let it be of sharp extremity to which there is margin on the six extremities; and let the thickness of it be tending upwards, and of its mass entering into the divided parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which is little spade or small blade.
Because it is necessary that the extremity of the sharp one be placed above the extremity of the bone that stands out.
And insert that one in a channel so that the bone returns, and let it be adjusted with some equation or balance.
And then make an effort to adjust the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of the broken one is subtle, and does not take the instrument for good reception, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely to what we have recommended, then cut it to what is suitable for it from the incisions that we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
And return that which remains in the bone of roughness and of scarce cartilage.
And when the bone is reduced, and with the reduction the patient finds violent pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer with the patient for great relief.
When the restoration that you make to the bone is completed, then submerge a black cloth in warm vinegar, and specifically if it is in summer, and do not apply cerate or other causes with oil on the wound, so that it does not induce putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer threads at the time of completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered unless the trauma is so severe that it requires bindings and dressings according to the quantity of the wound.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not touch the wound to the fracture, because many times it happens that foolish doctors cause death or rotten illness or infection on their patients, unless they are wise. And if the swelling of this one relents, softens, differs from the swelling of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear those accidents worse than what we have mentioned, and find pain in the place, then do not think to apply threads there, but rather make an application of durable cloths in place of threads and tie it with those.
And when you have already applied the plaster one or two times to the wound, which has generated pus in it, then remove the cloth that you had placed over that limb, and apply ointments, which according to our custom are used to treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar medicines.
It is advisable for you to dissolve the ligament and consider the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that pus can flow from it to the lower parts with ease.
If the wound takes many days to heal, and is not consolidated nor has the pus been discharged from it, then you should know that there are stagnations of the petechiae for which you must inquire into the wound with a probe. And of those stagnations, separate and extract those that can be separated, but leave those that cannot be separated and cause the member to become putrid and produce pain, and make an incision into those according to what is possible for you.
And if there occurs to the wound ichor or pus, which is a sign of corruption and putrefaction, then you should apply one of those remedies that are suitable for it, according to the treatment of which the preceding narration is given in the following chapter.
And from this you should understand that my sermon is to be presented with your weight: when the large bone is broken, place it on the member in the same way as the bone of the thigh and of the hip and similar to those of the large members, and do not attempt to pull or extract it for which motive several fatal accidents happen due to this, death; having laid aside that which weighs down, because for forty days or thirty; and then treat the wound if it is visible to you, and if not lay aside that.
Chapter twenty.
On the treatment of swelling that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture.
Many visible accidents happen to this swelling in the vicinity of healing of a fracture, and especially when it is near the joints, and the shape of the member is disfigured by it; and therefore it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer to it those medicines that have been proven to be effective such as aloen, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similar ones; so that you take some or all of them, and mix them with vinegar, or with white wine, or with sour wine, and apply them to the swelling in a poultice, and bind them on it with a good bandage.
And release the strict binding that does not untie for many days; and place a plaster on it and another underneath, until the swelling is reduced; or strengthen over it a lamina of lead descent, since lead has the property of reducing all that is inflamed in the limbs.
But if the swelling is already converted into stone and necessity provokes to remove that tumor, then cut it for the sake of the superior part of the body, and cut out the superfluous and eminent parts, or shave it with a razor soaked in remedies until it is reduced; and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and a plaster is applied to the subtle and fragile member not according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and a plaster is applied to the subtle and fragile member, then this is not done except for many reasons: among which one is the excessive solution of the ligament and the bad joining of it; or for excess strictness of the ligaments so that nourishment is prohibited from flowing to the member; or for an excessive multitude of superfluous embrocation; or for superfluous movement not at its hour; or for lack of health in the body of the patient and for weakness of it.
The cure for this is to give the patient something to make them thinner and to make their heart tender so that the blood will multiply in it; and administer a bath; and apply warmth and joy to them.
And then apply a plaster on the member, so that the plaster draws out the morbid matter, or continues to suck out the water with a warm poultice, until the nutrition circulates and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter 22.
On the cure of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibited is the operation of their resetting, or reshaping, of that which is deformed.
When it happens to the member that has already been restored, then apply the healing of its crookedness and prominence to the broken and knotted bone, and it is for this reason that the shape of the member is spoiled, but however the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, therefore it is not suitable that you should receive the word of someone who insists that the member is newly broken.
But already many foolish doctors and restorers, who have done this in our land, have been shamed; and this operation is very blamable, inducing great fear of the sign of which is deadly.
But if the lameness and knotting are recent, then it is suitable that they be wrapped in warm water in which have been cooked softening herbs, such as meadowsweet and roots of the same, and melilot, and similar to these; and let a plaster be made with mollifying plaster, like ben's diacalcium; or that a poultice be prepared from root of marsh marigold and be mixed with rosewater or oil of cypress, and be applied to it; or that fatty figs be crushed and applied with woolen cloth, and similar to these of the medicines that are called by the name of consolidating remedies.
And in some cases it is dissolved with continuous friction of the hand on the most humid areas, and movement of the limb should be administered to the entire affected area at all hours.
But if the tortuosity has already advanced and is made strong and converted into stone and necessity requires treatment with iron, then it is necessary that the worst part be cut out and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and that which superfluously adheres to the bone with subtle incisions, and assistance should be administered to facilitate the solicited area.
Chapter 23.
Of sermon on dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints from their proper place, by which movement is prohibited, and the shape of the limb is distorted, and it brings upon the patient great pains and large sores.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to perforate as soon as possible so that it can be reduced, and do not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the area becomes infected and strong with what is made, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason it is not advisable to massage or stretch during the time of infection, because many times it brings about spasms and severe pains.
When that happens, then it is necessary that you prepare yourself for the phlebotomy of the patient, and let it be understood that the application should prevent the abscess; and the member should be wrapped with hot water and oil, and the reduction should be facilitated.
And let every member be healed with the water of which the memory will come to its place.
And already the chapters of dislocation are ordered according to what is proceeded in fracture; from the part of the body that is upper inside to the part that is below.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
When the two jaws are dislocated if they don't articulate; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are returned to their places with little manipulation, and slightly mollified; or they are dislocated by complete dislocation and compression, until they are mollified at the joint, so that the saliva of the patient flows and he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his speech.
When the dislocation of it is slight, then in major preparations it returns by itself for a slight cause.
Mainly if the dislocation is entire and complicated, then it is advisable that a reduction of the discomfort be administered, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the assistant holds the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts the said thumb of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both thumbs together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hands be outside with the ones that hold; and commands the patient to cease moving their jaws and relax those muscles of each part; and the doctor pulls the jaw and forces the jaw until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, until the reduction of both becomes easier and the reduction of both is not delayed at all, as we have said.
And then when they return and are pulled back, and the patient's mouth is closed and not loosened, then apply on those pillows of cloth with wax, and make a mixture of wax and oil to be rubbed; and apply it with ease and soft bindings.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head resting between two pillows, so that they do not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to chew any substance; having their food nearby, let them eat it, until when the pain is relieved and the jaw is massaged, then turn them in the desired position.
And let this be administered easily, and do not work on the opening of the mouth unless eating and drinking and evacuation are facilitated, until the jaw is massaged and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce the two jaws when they are dislocated at some hour and not converted to their proper place, then apply warm poultices and assiduous fevers and soda, and let the stomach of the patient be evacuated, and let them vomit pure bile.
And when you see that, then know that it is a loss; and many times death will occur to the one to whom this condition happens in X days.
Chapter 25.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the jaw and of the extremity of the muscle.
The jaw is not dislocated from the tooth that is next to it on the chest; and sometimes it is dislocated to the front part, and this is declared by feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient goes on top of two seats and extends the two arms. Then bind the area with your palm with strong binding, for it will return.
And apply a poultice on that plaster and dust and sprinkle on that.
More, the extremity of that which is the hip joint and continues with it, is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and adjusted as we have said and as it appears to you.
And apply a poultice on that plaster, and dust, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And with this medical treatment the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated in one way, but in three manners, of which one is that it is dislocated from the top to the bottom.
And the second is that it is dislocated from the underside of the muscle, and this is done with tension; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
It is dislocated and exits to the right of the thighs when the hip is weak, and it is more dislocated in those where the flesh is sparse; on the other hand, it is dislocated less when there are many fleshy parts, it exits with difficulty.
And the blow strikes some men with percussion or a fall, and the muscle of it is affected by a caustic abscess, and it is treated for that which has already been dislocated.
Then consider that you squeeze that which is inside where you were certain of it, and then proceed with the treatment of it.
And the dislocation of it is acknowledged when it is on the right and left parts of the hip; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, because you find among them manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the concave muscle and on the hip to the right of the touch of the head of the muscle as if a egg, and the patient cannot move their hand to their ear, nor can they do so with any movement.
If it is dislocated from the chest or above, and you then find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And of this dislocation, easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the hand of it to the separated parts below; and then pauses with the weighty fingers on the titillic of it, and raises the joint with strength in its own place, and the minister raises the hand of it, and stretches that out in its; and then pauses that with the weight so that it returns lightly.
But if through what we have said it does not return, and from the beginning there is dislocation, for many days, then it is good that the patient be bathed in hot water and be given a mixture to drink that softens and loosens, as if one were to mix equal parts of oil, fenugreek, and honey in water.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and paused with the fingers on the titillic of it in expectation of the lane that is between looseness and strictness, and then the doctor pauses his talon on the sphere, and raises the head of the muscle with virtue, and draws the hand of the patient so that it is not displaced to the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not dislocated to the parts below, until it returns to its own place.
And if you want, reduce it in this manner: it is that you make a man be present who is longer than the patient, and stands on the side of the bed, and inserts his muscle below the titillic of the patient and raises the titillic of it to the separated parts above so that the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below of their belly. More often if the patient is lighter, then it is good to have another cause suspended, so that weight relieves, because the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is reduced easily in another manner: and it is that a stick be fixed on the ground with a round cap, of rounded figure, like a mortar's pestle, which is neither too thick nor too thin, and let the patient be seated on it; then let them sit on the cap of the stick with their legs spread, and the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and let their hand be extended to the divisions of the other part; and let their body be extended from the other strong part, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
And if the reduction of it is difficult by all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick the quantity of which is in length two arms, and the width of it is four fingers, and the thickness of it is alleviated at the tip of the little finger according to this form:
And then on the round cap let linens or cloths be placed so that the stick does not hurt the patient.
And then let the thigh of the patient be placed, and let their hand or arm be extended over the stick between the divisions, and let the stick be tied on the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Approach the arm and place it on a ladder of steps according to the width, and the hand should be extended to the parts of the hips, and the other thing should be suspended from the other part, so that the joint is held in this way.
And when the instrument of it is completed according to whichever manner is possible for you, and then you will place on them a little sphere of flax of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared from powder of molybdenum or aluminum and wool of horse over all the muscle, thus as it is rolled upward, and then tighten the little band with a decent strictness; and the ligament should be rolled over the plaster, and the hand of it should be attached to the neck of it, and should be elevated, and the hand of it should not be moved for seven days.
And it is good that the food of the patient should be gentle, until the member is comforted, for it is better for their healing.
And then the food should be given in greater quantity and exercise some movement; and if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
More so if the joint is dislocated by excessive moisture that affects it or for another cause, then it is good that a cautery with three probes should be administered to it, as it is previously stated in the chapter on cauteries.
And if the joint is thus treated and for seven days the ligament and the joint are not immobilized, and the plaster and the bandage are reduced over certain visible wounds, and it is not tightly bound and cannot elevate that arm to the separated parts, then you will know that the nerves of the muscle, which are at the head of the muscle, are either inflamed or stretched or softened, and you will know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
From the dislocation of that which is made from the foot and the thigh or the back parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And let it be administered in the other bandage, and cure it until it is healed.
And if there occurs to it the slowing down of healing in the member and slowness in its movement, then let the patient use warm baths visible wounds until that slowness is alleviated and it returns to its first nature.
Chapter 27.
On the cure of dislocation of the hip.
You should know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and this is dislocated in all parts, and mainly in the front part more than the back part, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you when you examine the patient or touch according to any figure that may be dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip with your hand, it is clearly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that the upper muscle.
And it is known that the thighs are connected, and the dislocation should be reduced as soon as possible before it becomes an apostema (abscess), because if it reaches the abscess, reduction is difficult, and far from being cured; especially when it affects the posterior parts, which is worse than all other types of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many times death occurs due to that.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that the hand of the patient should be extended with two others, and their arm should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the hip and holding them, and they press the joint with the heels of their hands together, or with the edge of their palm until it returns to its place.
More often if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns so that the hand doubles over its own hand, until it strikes the hip with the edge of their palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer a vehement extension and very strong movement.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that same joint with two ministers so that it is not wrenched away during the extension.
And then wrap the arm from all sides, since it is enveloped in a double layer of cloth over their hand, or a bandage.
When the doctor touches the joint with their hand, anoint it with some oil so that it facilitates the causes that help with the lubricity of the joint for ease; and then strongly massage the joint with a violent rubbing until it returns.
And then reduce the patient's body that is placed on a plaster in which there is stipicity and evacuation with album of urine, and it is extracted with strict decent descent, the arm is suspended from the neck, and it is left for several days.
And then it is dissolved; and thus if the joint is formed in its own place, then you dissolve the bandage of theirs and leave that.
And if you see the joint is not strengthened, then repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it for several days until it is extracted; and then dissolve that.
But if it happens to them by gravity then the reduction of the joint, and their disposition is in movement, administer humidification in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is alleviated; or apply an aleatory plaster on the joint, which is a fatty cushion; and then tie it, and leave it on the bone day and night. And then apply the paste, and put that in a bath; and when sweating, then rub the joint with tempered friction, and apply it on that alleviating place, so is movement of motive, one time, and the second, and the third. in the bath's interior, until it becomes clean.
And if you want, place on that wound of cow's humid and scratched with butter and strain over that; and make some visits, for that is humid and returns to its disposition.
Chapter 28.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, it is about the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Shoulder dislocation of the hand sometimes is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy, and the opposite is for other joints, but especially it is necessary that there be speed in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated, before the place becomes swollen or an abscess forms.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the servant extends the hand of that one, and the doctor places his hand or the palm on the prominence of the joint, and presses that until it returns to its place.
It seems that the patient's palm has been placed on the stomach of the hand, then the patient should put their back on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is before the back of the hand, then the position of the hand of that internal member should be on the table, so that the doctor's hand can reach that weakness of the joint.
And so if it returns immediately, that's good; and if not, then strengthen that part with a plaster cast, putting the abscess and letting it heal; and don't repeat this, because if you do, you won't be able to operate on the reduction of the pus that passes into the body over time.
Moreover, the joint is bent according to its curvature; and don't tell the patient any cause, but rather that the hand is loosened and can't strengthen any cause; then know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then it's not an injury in it, but rather something strengthened with a cautery for the purpose of strengthening it and confirming some cause.
Then when the dislocation is returned, put on it a plaster that we have recommended, and let it be and strengthened for several days; and then it should be loosened and let heal, and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
If the movement of the patient is hindered and they are experiencing some gravity in their intestine, then apply a warm poultice to the affected area and massage it gently several times, until there is relief.
Chapter 29.
On the treatment of displacement of the fingers.
Some occasions the fingers become completely dislocated.
And when a finger is dislocated from the palm or the belly of the hand, then stretch the finger and push the dislocation back in with the thumbs, until it returns to its place.
Then support the head of the finger, and suspend it above the area where it is dislocated, and let it rest for two days.
And then suspend it and stretch it until it is straightened and restored to its normal position on the same day, or within that same day if possible with continuous effort.
And when it is night, bind it according to the aforementioned method, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise it with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And do the same with this, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and bind it to that part and perform the first operation on it, until it is healed.
It seems similarly when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter three.
On the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When there is a complicated dislocation of one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and many vertebrae are displaced from their place, then in that case there is no cure, for death awaits the patient.
And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion is outside of their will, and they cannot retain it; and many members of theirs are softened, such as some limbs or both thighs or both arms, or one of these; or a vertebra is dislocated from its place, because many times it is dislocated and many times the displacement to four parts occurs.
Therefore, that one is already dislocated to the back parts and is called spondylolisthesis or more likely  it is named gibbosity.
But the cure of it is that first consider if the gibbosity occurs from youth, because in that case there is neither cure nor complete healing.
But in that which happens by fall or by shock or similar to these, the Ancients already said the manners of cure with sermon being prolix, from which the most returns with profit; but I have already abbreviated it for the sake of brevity, due to the proximity to my intention, to which I have explained and formed from diverse instruments, with which I will show and expand.
And of those, none are cured except the one that occurs on the back itself with what I have recommended.
And it is that the patient should be laid out on their face on a high bench near a wall, and a stool should be placed under them to support them so that their foot is not hanging.
And then a wooden stick is placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bench near their head, and another stick in the air holds their feet at the other end of the bench.
And one assistant holds the stick, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another assistant holds the other according to that method.
And then wrap around the head of the patient and underneath the sheet is tied firmly; and extend the end of the sheet to the stick which is near their head, and tie it to them; and then bind the other sheet around their hips and thighs; and behind their legs; and then adjust all the sheets and tie them to the other stick which is near their feet.
And then extend the minister's hand to the ligament at the part of the thigh, and do not move the two thighs and the ligaments of the nearby places where they are fixed, but rather hold them firmly as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine for strength until it returns, or he places on that one table, and then adjusts on the table the nearby feet until they return.
But if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three arms, and carve on the part of which we have said that is near the patient a place in which the extremity of the table. And then place the edge of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other extremity, and stretch tightly until the spine is constricted and returns to its place.
And if you want, take the turn which is turned around with the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground at the back of the patient two feet, the length of which is one arm, and fix the other end of it also two feet; and let the length between each foot be a palm, and already made in each foot a hole through which the turn turns, and each one is held firmly on the ground so that it does not move.
And let there be a wooden pole in which the turn is made, and let it be wrapped around the two trunks of the two poles.
And at the extremity of it is a trunk in which the pole is formed, the length of which is one palm and that which is wrapped around; and on the other two poles is similar to that one.
And then tighten the ligaments that you have tied on the chest of the patient in the pole which is near the head of it, and the ligaments that you have tied on the thighs of it in the turn which is near the feet of it.
And then behind each turn there should be a servant who will turn it with their hand, and the doctor will anoint the spine as we have said.
And then after the spine is returned and the area is anointed, then take a plaster made with egg albumen, and apply it; and put it on the plaster of the table from which the width is three fingers or about that, and the length of it is the quantity that takes the place of the swelling, and on the part of the spine above.
And then let it be tied with a ligament as we have said, and give the patient subtle nourishment so that they may be healed.
And if there is some remaining weakness in the area at the end of the treatment, then it is customary that medicines which soften and loosen be administered for a long time, which we have recommended; and already administered in that place a plaster of lead.
And some times accidents occur in the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back, and it is suspected that it is due to that dislocation; and it is that bone which has already been weakened so that it is not advisable to administer this medicine to him, for it will bring about a rapid death.
Chapter 31.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
It is known that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not only cause dislocation, but also do not occur with the same small movement and cavity that occurs in the other joints.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, for it can be dislocated upwards, or downwards, or forwards, or backwards.
And mostly it is dislocated upwards, and rarely forwards or backwards.
And the sign of dislocation upwards is that, when you adjust the leg of the healthy side to the sick side, it appears longer and the knee is more prominent than the healthy one, and the sick leg cannot bend towards the thigh, and it is the place where the thigh is separated by a swelling of hot cauterization, so that the head of the hip has already come out.
In the case of the person in whom dislocation occurs at the joints, it is that the accidents of this are contrary to this accident.
In the case of the person in whom dislocation occurs at the teeth, it is because the leg or thigh is expanded according to its complement, but it does not double that pain which is in the tooth, and if it perforates to go and cannot above that to the teeth; and the urine of him is retained and his anus is swollen, and you must watch the walking of him on the sole.
In the case of the person in whom dislocation occurs at the back, it is that he does not expand the tooth, nor can he double that which doubles his anus, and the leg of him is thus shorter than the other, and the anus is softened, and the head of the thigh is in that place.
But reduction of the species of this dislocation is what you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already become accustomed to having it, you administer reduction to it and ointment according to its disposition, then it is not entirely in this cure; and therefore it is not suitable that a prognosis be made in this case.
In that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should reduce it by returning the joint to its proper place and extending it to the inner and outer parts, and moving it to the right and left, for it will strongly return and not require another cure.
But if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare a strong minister who extends the patient's leg from the affected part, or with their hands, or with a bandage that is tied over the patient's knee; and another minister should extend the hand of the one behind to place their hands under the patient's buttocks; and you should hold the linen binding firmly over the knee, and have another minister hold the extremity of the binding.
And it should be extended from the inner part or from the front to the back of the hip, or from the back to the buttocks.
And the extension of all those things should be in a way that the patient is raised from the ground and remains hanging.
And this type of extension is common to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary to apply the specific treatment that I will speak of regarding its own cure.
In the reduction of the displaced joint, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is in the inner parts, make sure that the patient is placed on their back; and place a pause to the ligaments at the base of the thigh in the location where between the head of the thigh and the spot where the hamstring is found; and then stretch the ligament upwards from the part of the hip to the uppermost part of the buttock.
And then another strong minister should take the patient's arms, and press the thick part of the thigh, and stretch it to the rear parts with violent extension, so that it returns to its own place.
And this species is of the easiest cure among those in which this member is reduced, more so than the other species.
But if you are excused from this and do not obey the treatment with this species of cure at all, then it is necessary that both feet of the patient be tied together with a strong ligament, lightly, on both ankles and both toes.
And let the length of each one be four fingers, and the patient's leg be extended more than the other by two fingers.
And then let the patient be suspended from the top of the beam, and it should be on a mattress; and the length from the ground should be two arms.
And then command a strong youth to gently press the head of the thigh, and let another youth be suspended with the patient, and the other youth pressing the thigh strongly from below, so that the joint returns to its place with speed.
More in the proper reduction, when there is dislocation to the outward part, it is good that the patient puts on a poultice as we have recommended in having coldness; and let the ligament be strengthened over the sick thigh properly and over their chest.
And then let two cloths be placed, one at their feet, and the other at the head; and let adjusted cloths be placed in the middle of the poultice made on which humid draps are wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by what the cloth is between their thighs, because the extension to the outward parts should not be attracted.
And then let each minister extend to their part, and the doctor with their hand guide the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then cover so that the leg is gently extended, and it is according to this medical narration on pus; and the doctor puts the palm of their right hand on the patient's languor, and returns the heart to the other hand, and with that tightening stops the extension of the front parts and the part of the teeth.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then do not cover so that the patient's leg is extended to the back parts, and it is raised from the ground; instead, cover that it is placed on a hard surface, just as we would do if their hip is dislocated to the front parts, according to what we have said about placing them on two hips; and it is on their face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, there is no error.
And cover that compression be administered with a board on the place where the joint is.
Then, as the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, and that is you extend the patient's two legs, and when you see those groins and the patient stretches their leg and expands its six articulations, then you know that the member is returned as it should be — and then you adjust the two hips and put a plaster cast and stretch with a bandage so that the hip is not displaced in any of the parts; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
Then return the ligament and the plaster, and compare one leg with the other.
When, if you see those swellings in the garment, then you know that the dislocation has already been treated, and therefore let the patient go to the bathroom.
And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and plaster it, and stretch it according to your first instruction, and let it be for three days.
Then undo that, and make him delay walking on crutches for some days, until he is comforted.
Chapter thirty-two.
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is dislocated in three ways, for it is dislocated forward, and backward, and to the sides more than the front parts; and the front parts are not dislocated.
And the sign of its dislocation is that it commands the patient to put their leg on their thigh; then you know that the ankle is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient do this: lift their leg up, so that they extend their leg if possible; place their two hands on their face; and hold their foot between your two feet; then make the ankle adhere to your palms, and press those together over the ankle with force, and another servant lifts their foot until the ankle returns to its place.
The sign of recovery in him is that his leg adheres to the thigh with a light non-working movement.
Then apply a plaster to that and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then remove it.
And do not allow the patient to walk for several days, until he is healed and comforted.
More so if the reduction of it to you is excessive, then administer a strong extension with ligaments which in the cure of the hip the preceding narration has described.
Chapter 33.
On the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle sometimes is injured by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the injury, and the dislocation of it is caused either by internal or external parts.
And the sign of its dislocation is that the ankle is swollen due to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of its sprain is from gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with ease and held steady until it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to the injury, it is necessary that you make the patient straight, and have a strong and powerful servant behind them in the middle of their back.
And then put your right hand on the upper part of the foot and your left hand on the lower part of the foot in the area of the calf.
And then pull the foot towards your right hand, and with your left hand hold for two fingers, and stretch with your left hand; and press the chest of the foot with your right hand above the leg to relieve the effort.
And do this twice according to what we have recounted.
And then press the chest of the foot on the leg for the third time, and you are at the calf.
Therefore, if it returns in one or two times according to this method, and if the foot is restored to health, it's good; and if not, then repeat the operation, because that will restore it.
But if the reduction of the limb is prohibited to you that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stretch a piece of cloth firmly on the ground, and let it catch between their thighs, and you have enveloped them in a sheet so that the disease does not escape.
And then one minister holds their thighs, and another minister stretches the foot with their hands or with a bandage that lies on the ankle of the foot; and then each minister stretches against the extension of their partner, and the cloth is stretched between the patient's thighs, retaining it, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the lower parts above their extension.
And then the doctor should adjust the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant should hold the healthy thigh to the patient's sides, so that the dislocation returns to its proper place.
And so when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then apply a plaster and extract that with a strong bandage, and tie the foot to the leg with a bandage.
And beware that you protect the nerves which are located behind the ankle, so that the bandage on that area is not violent and tight, so as to constrict it strongly.
And then leave it like that for two days or for three; and if the bandage is loosened, tighten it.
And then undo it on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days. But if it is forgotten to remove the dressing from that place, it is not done safely that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted on it, and then that which does not receive treatment.
And if a hot abscess occurs to it, then beware that you administer in the evacuation of it that which we previously mentioned, in another place of treatment and of application, until it is reduced.
Chapter four.
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
It is advisable that one who is dislocated should be treated with a gentle extension of the limb; and this is not difficult, but rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then it is advisable to make the patient place their foot on the ground or on a table, and let them stand like that as if they were walking.
And then put your foot on theirs, and press their foot on what seems to be the joint, and press down with your foot in an upright manner until it returns, and you will see that it has been properly treated and does not appear out of place.
And then put a table under the belly of their foot that holds the entire foot, which has two ends, and tie it with a decent and firm structure for three days; and then undo it and make them rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and the recovery is assured.
Chapter thirty-five.
On the types of dislocations that are made with a wound or with a fracture or with several things at the same time.
When accidents occur due to certain causes, and you are piercing through the treatment of that and in the restoration of it, many seen successes lead to death.
And for this it is not suitable that anyone presumes over the treatment of it, except one who is wise in the art, with long usage, merciful and pitied, slow, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses in the commencement of medicines that cause abscesses to be cut out only, and lift the patient to divine judgment, but rather to the one to whom you expect salvation from loss, and from the sickness alleviation, and in which appears some hope. And then strive to remove yourself so far from it the reduction in the commencement of the cause, waiting for an abscess to be cut out.
And then if the member returns as we wish, then administer treatment which will cut out the abscess and cure the wound with what is convenient for it from the ointments of the dried placents.
And if there is a dislocation with a fracture and it occurs in the bones that are separated by joints, then you will pierce through their articulation, and do in this what we have said about simple illnesses of this type that precede in the locations of these.
And beware and avoid according to your ability the one who is in the intestines of fear, as my preaching has preceded you; for that which is better for you, you owe to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutations to your body, verify those in your time. Thus the words of Albucasim are perfected by the means of which God is blessed. A translation of "Amen" in
