Now that I have completed this book for you, my sons, which is the last of the science of medicine with its completion, and I have reached the end in it through its expositions and declarations, it seemed good to me to complete it for you with this Treatise which is a part of practice, that is, surgery with the hand.
Since the practice with the hand has fallen in our region and in our time entirely neglected: until perhaps its knowledge perished, and its trace was cut off: and nothing remained of it except small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which were altered by hands: and they fell into error and hesitation, until its intentions were closed, and its power was lost: It seemed to me that I should revive it with the order of this Treatise according to the way of exposition, and declaration, and abbreviation: and to come with the forms of the instruments of cautery and other surgical instruments: which is achieved by the addition of declarations, and by the necessity of its progress.
The reason why a good practitioner of it with his hand is not found in our time is: because the art of medicine is long, and its author must be trained beforehand in the science of anatomy, as Galen narrated, until he knows the benefits of the members, and their forms, and their conjunction, and separation, and has knowledge of the bones, and nerves, and tendons, and their number, and their emergence, and of the pulsating and quiet veins, and the exits of those places.
And because of this, Hippocrates said that the name is abundant with the name, but scarce with the work, and especially in the art of the hand.
We have indeed already spoken of this at the beginning of this book.
For he who is not knowledgeable about what we have said concerning anatomy will not be cleansed but will fall into error by which men are killed: as I have seen many of those who are formed from this science and boast about it without knowledge and without experience.
This is because I saw a foolish doctor incise a scrofulous abscess on a woman's neck, and he cut some arteries in the neck: hence the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead under his hands.
And I saw another doctor who presumed to extract a stone from an elderly man, and the stone was large. He therefore proceeded to do so and extracted it along with a piece of the bladder. Therefore, the man died on the third day.
And I had indeed been called to extract it: and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the patient that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was receiving payment from one of the Dukes in our land for medical services: and it happened that a black eunuch who was with him had a fracture in his leg near the heel: and the doctor, in his ignorance, hurriedly bound the fracture over the wound with bandages and splints with a strong binding, and did not allow the wound to drain.
Then he treated him according to his own desires. Then he left him for several days and instructed him not to loosen the bandage: and he remained thus until his leg swelled with an abscess, and his foot reached destruction.
I was called therefore to him: and I hurried to loosen the bandage: and peace followed, and he escaped from his pains.
However, the corruption was already confirmed in the member: and I could not restrain it.
Therefore, the corruption ceased to spread in the member until it perished.
And I saw another doctor who punctured the cancerous abscess: and it became ulcerated after days, until its wickedness was magnified with its lord.
Which means that when the cancer is purely from a melancholic humor, then it should not be approached with iron at all, unless it is in a limb that can tolerate being totally amputated.
And for this reason, O sons, it is necessary for you to know that the practice with the hand is divided into two parts: namely, an operation associated with safety, and an operation with which there is danger in most conditions.
And I have already warned in every part of this book where the operation brings fear and dread.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to be cautious about it and avoid it, so that fools do not find a way to speak and disparage it.
Take therefore measurements with care and protection, and tend to your patients with ease and firmness, and make use of the better way leading through God's grace to salvation and a praiseworthy continuation: and leave behind terrible illnesses difficult to heal: and free yourselves from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation may not enter into your faith and comfort.
For it remains more for your glory, and higher in this world, and finally for your dignities.
For Galen has already said in some of his admonitions. Do not treat illness badly: lest you be called bad doctors.
Now I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
First Chapter.
Regarding the Hot Cauterization and Sharp Medicinal Cauterization, categorized and ordered from head to foot, with forms of instruments and cauterization tools: and everything necessary for the procedure.
Second Chapter.
Regarding cutting and piercing, bloodletting and venting, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows and similar objects: all categorized and ordered with forms of instruments.
Third Chapter.
Regarding restoration, dislocation, and treatment of twisting and similar conditions: categorized and ordered from head to foot, with forms of instruments.
But before I recall the procedure with it, I must say about the benefits and harms of it: and in what complexion it is administered.
I say therefore that the discourse on the quality of the benefit of the cautery and its harm is a lengthy and subtle discussion, a science and an hidden secret.
Also, many wise people have spoken about it and disagreed on it: and for me, a little of their discourse is sufficient, fearing lengthiness.
I say therefore that the cautery is beneficial universally to all complexions, which are with matter and without matter: except for two complexions, which are the hot complexion without matter, and the dry complexion without matter.
In the hot and dry complexion with matter, they disagreed. For some said that the cautery is beneficial in it. And others said the opposite of that, namely that the cautery is not suitable for the disease which arises from heat and dryness: for the nature of fire is heat: and it is inappropriate to be healed from a hot and dry ailment with something hot and dry.
And he who says the opposite said that through the cautery there is benefit in every hot and dry disease which occurs in human bodies: for when you compare the body of a man and its moistures to the temperament of fire, you find the body of a man to be cold.
And indeed I say through his words: because from experience it has already revealed that to me on several occasions.
However, it should not come to that unless one who has already been tested and trained in the chapter on the last exercise of cauterization, and knows the diversity of human complexions and the disposition of diseases in themselves, and their causes, and their accidents, and the duration of them.
From the other complexions there is no fear for you: especially in cold and moist diseases. For all doctors have now agreed on them: and they have not disagreed about treating them with cauterization.
And know, sons, that from the secret of healing with cauterization by fire, and its goodness over cauterization with burning medicine is this: for fire is simple, whose action does not reach beyond the part that is cauterized: and it does not harm another connected part except with slight damage.
The action of burning medicine reaches to that which extends from the members: and it may cause a disease difficult to heal in the member, and it may even kill.
But fire, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause that, unless there is an excess.
Now this has become known to us through experience, because of the length of service and study with the art, and standing on the truth of things: and because of this, I am excused for the length of the discourse.
And if it were not, because it is not permitted to this my book, I would bring you the hidden secret in fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies expelled by itself, by which it expels diseases demonstrated philosophically, which would be sharpened by your minds.
And know, O sons, that they disagree on the time when it is appropriate to perform cauterization, and they place the better time in spring.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times: because the harm caused by the time is overshadowed by the benefit that is brought with the cauterization. And especially if the cauterization is for pains caused by necessary, strong, urgent pains that do not tolerate delay: because it is feared that a greater harm may occur, which enters due to the time, than a small harm.
And do not let this fall into your minds, O sons, which is not feared except by the common people and foolish doctors, namely that there is no recurrence of that disease which is cured by cauterization: and they place this consequence, and things are not as they think: because cauterization is only in place of medicine, which alters the complexion and dries the humors which are the cause why pains occur.
However, cauterization exceeds medicine by the speed of its healing and the power of its operation and the strength of its dominion: and it is possible for the disease to return at some time according to the complexion of the sick person, and the location of his disease, and its power: and what is prepared in his body from the aggregation of excesses in him: and what comes to him in his acquisition from foods and similar things from those causes, unless the disease is one for which cauterization is administered.
A subtle illness in the limb of few excesses and moistures, like a tooth cauterization, because of pain, and similar to it, for it is possible that the pain does not return in it. But that happens in few cases.
But the common saying again, that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, is a correct statement: not in what they intend by it themselves: for they believe that there is no cure which compares with medicine, nor with anything else after the failure of cauterization.
The matter is contrary to that, and the intention, that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, is not what it seems: for when we administer modes of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help, then we apply cauterization at the end, and it does help: thus it follows that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and many foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron: and they said this only because of the equality of gold and the nobility of its substance: and they said that the site of the cauterization does not produce pus. But that is not absolutely true: for I have already tested it and found that it does not do that in some bodies without other factors.
And cauterization with it is good and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you heat the cauterization with gold in fire, it is not clear to you when it is heated to the degree you want because of the redness of the gold: and when it quickly cools down, and if you add more heat to it, it melts in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls from that into employment: and because of this, the cauterization is done more quickly and closer with iron among us, from straightness to the operation.
And indeed I have already arranged this Chapter on Cauterization according to the chapters: and I have ordered them from head to foot: so that it may help the seeker find what they want from it.
Chapter II.
This cauterization is applied to the dominance of moisture and coldness over the brain: which two are causes of phlegm, and the abundance of fluids flowing from the head to the regions of the eyes and ears, and an abundance of sleep, and toothache, and sore throat: and generally all illnesses that occur due to coldness, such as paralysis, phlegm, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The method of cauterization is to instruct the patient to purge with a cleansing and dissolving medicine for three nights or four, according to the requirement of the patient's strength, age, and habit.
Then instruct him to shave his head with a novacula. Then have him sit between your hands in a square position, so that he has placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever therefore your middle finger reaches, mark that place with ink.
Then cauterize with olive oil; this is its form.
Then place it on the marked spot with ink, by the descent whereby your hand is gradually tightened, and you will rotate it. Then quickly remove your hand and look at the place.
If you see that the amount of the head of alkil or the amount of zehurub is now exposed from the bone, then raise your hand. And if not, apply your hand with the same iron, or with another one if it cools down: until the bones appear, which I have told you about.
Then take some salt, and dissolve it in water, and soak the cloth in it, and place it on the spot: and leave it for three days.
Then place on it a cloth soaked in butter, and leave it on the spot until the burn scab is removed. Then treat it with the ointment tetrapharmacon until it is healed.
They have said that the longer the wound remains open, it discharges pus: therefore it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized down to the bone: and the cautery should be held until something of the density of the bone is burned.
Then it is scraped after that which was burned from the bone, then it should be treated.
And others say that it is necessary to use the cautery until it makes a strong impression on the bone so that the bone falls off, which becomes like the shape of a knife: or an instrument which women place with a small amount of ink: and they estimate that vapors of the head are exhaled from this location, and the wound is left open for a long time.
Then it should be treated until it becomes solidified.
To me, these two types of cautery do not seem to apply to everyone but only to certain individuals according to the way of fear.
And to leave it, in my opinion, is better for its safety.
For the head is weakened by the breaking of its natural continuity: as we have testified in other members: and especially when the head of the sick person is weak by nature: and indeed the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and I use it: therefore act with it for safety.
Chapter III.
When chronic pain occurs throughout the entire head and persists in the patient, they use herbs, cochiis, head purges, oils, and emplasteries. And especially if it has already been cauterized with the cautery we mentioned and it does not help at all: then consider. For if the head of the patient is strong in its natural constitution, and is not weak, and finds intense cold: then cauterize with another cautery a little under it. Then cauterize the entire horn of his head with a cautery, so that it does not penetrate the skin, and uncover from the bone the amount we have mentioned. And cauterize it with one cautery on the back of his head, in the place which is called the vase: and it is the place where the cupping vessel is placed: and raise your hand in this, and do not uncover the bone. For the patient finds because of that a very severe pain, and different from the pain of all the other head cauterizations.
And I will say this is the Cautery in its place: and it must be a cautery with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of it more subtly than the cautery with which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occur in part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and it is cleansed with purifying medicines for the head, and the rest of the treatment which I mentioned in the divisions of diseases is administered, and if it does not improve: then cauterization on it is according to two methods: either cauterization with sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
The cautery with sharp and burning medicine is to take one garlic clove, and peel it, and cut off its ends from both sides. Then cut the painful area with a wide lancet until you make a place under the skin where the tooth is caught.
Introduce it under the skin until it is hidden; then bind over it with a poultice of proper constriction, and leave it for fifteen hours; then release it, and remove the garlic, and let the wound be for two or three days; afterwards apply to it a cloth soaked in butter until pus forms at the site; then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do this with some burning medicines, which I have written about in the twelfth treatise, on Burning Medicines.
The cauterization of it with an iron is according to this method. A cautery with fire, whose form is this.
And it is called Clauilis: because the shape of its head is like the shape of a nail, in which there is something curved, and in the middle of it there is a small protrusion.
Then place it on the area and hold your hand steady: and you should rotate the iron gradually with speed: and the amount that is burned should be according to the thickness of the skin, like its midpoint. And lift your hand so that the artery below is not burned and a flow of blood occurs.
Then soak the bandage in salt water, and place it on the area, and leave it for three days: then apply the bandage with butter: afterwards treat with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish, cauterize this half of the head with the second knife tip of the Cauterizer. And beware of cutting the artery in this half of the head, not properly the old one.
On the method of cauterizing in the old half of the head.
When you treat half of the head, using what we have said from the previous treatment and what we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not help: and you see from the illness that what we have said about the first cauterization with medicine or with fire is insufficient, then it is necessary to heat the knife cauterizer until it whitens after you mark the place of pain with a line whose length is half a finger, or something like that: and remove your hand once, and hold it until you cut the artery and reach the bone.
However, you must be careful not to cauterize the moving jaw used in chewing, so that the side or the nerve which moves it is not burned, causing spasms.
And be on guard and beware of the flow of blood from the artery that has been cut. For in cutting it there is fear, especially for one who does not know what he is doing, and who is not skilled or experienced: and he leaves the operation at the very beginning.
And I will come with a reminder of the treatment of blood flow occurring from an artery according to its method, and in its place in this book.
If you see from the illness that this cautery is not sufficient for it, and you see the body of the sick person tolerating the cautery in the middle of the head as we have narrated, treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery with a cautery having two knives. For cautery is better than this and more beneficial.
Regarding the method of cauterization for ear pain.
When pain occurs in the ear due to cold and is treated with solutions and other treatments that we mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply cautery with fire: and it is that which is called Punctum, whose form is this.
Then make punctures with it after igniting it around the entire ear, as it revolves: or around both, if the pain is in both at the same time. And keep the cautery away from the root of the ear for a moment after you have marked the places with encaustic: and let the quantity of cautery be ten points on the entire ear, and about that.
Then treat the areas until they heal.
Regarding the method of cauterization for torture.
Chapter VII.
Torture which is treated with cauterization is only of the kinds that occur from phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of diseases.
And avoid cauterization for the kind that occurs from dryness and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this kind of torture with plasters, and head purges, and gargles, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the second a little below its temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cauterization on the opposite side of the affected area. Because softening does not occur unless in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is to cauterize directly at the upper end of the ear under the horn of the head a little, and another at the temple, whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cautery until the amount equal to the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a type of knife, whose shape is as mentioned before; however, it is not as fine as you see: and it must be a knife with a slightly excessive thickness.
Then treat the areas with what precedes: until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in old apoplexy.
When apoplexy becomes old, and you treat it with what we have said, and your treatment does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on each horn of his head, and a cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have said, and a cauterization on the back of the head, according to what has preceded: and the method of the cauterization should be according to what has preceded.
It is also cauterized with a cautery on the mouth of the stomach: and it is the last resort.
Then it should be treated with what has preceded.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in the drink given first to the patient there be hyraceum and pills cleansing the brain.
Then shave the patient's head entirely, and place on the back of his head a plaster of mustard as described in the chapter on plasters: and apply it several times.
This is indeed the method of cauterization: and do it according to the same order which I said there.
If therefore he is healed by that, it is good. If not: then make three cauteries on the back part of his head, which should descend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye: and place between each cauterization the thickness of a finger.
Then care for the cauterization, with what precedes it.
If however you wish for an addition, and the patient is tolerant of it: then make a cauterization in the middle. If you wish for an addition: then cauterize it over the two horns.
Then care for it until it heals: let the cauterization be oiled according to the form which was mentioned.
On the method of cauterizing in paralysis and softening.
Chapter Ten.
It is necessary that you proceed with the cleansing of the head with hellebore, and with what we have said.
Then shave the head of the patient: afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery on every horn of the head, and with a cautery on the back of it, and with three on the cervical vertebrae.
If however you need in the illness a softening of the body more than those, and the patient is tolerant, and the illness is strong: then cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and the last with a cautery, until it is burned deeply from the skin as much as possible, and lift your hand. Then care for it until it heals: and thus oil the cautery.
On the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, unless his epilepsy is due to phlegm.
Therefore, you should first cleanse his brain with hellebore and with the other treatments we have mentioned in the division: when the patient is severe, or tolerant in receiving medicines.
If it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then a gargle and cleansing mastications for the brain are administered, after improving the food over many days.
Then shave his head, then cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head, according to the preceding method: and with another cautery on the back of his head, and with a cautery over all the horn of his head. If the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize him with the cauteries I mentioned for those having paralysis, and softening of the body over the cervical vertebrae, and dorsal vertebrae: and let it be an olive oil cautery according to the preceding method.
If the patient is a child, then apply a fine cautery according to this method.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries we mentioned for those having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess inclined towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him in drink that which will cleanse his brain, according to what has been mentioned in the division: then shave the head of the patient, and make afterwards a properly made tortella from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the patient sitting squarely shall be held on all sides.
Then apply the ointment. And it is better from old sheep's butter. And heat it over the fire with moderate heat, to a degree that can be tolerated by a finger when inserted into it. Then clean it in the middle of his head in a circle, and leave it until it cools.
Do this for the patient once every week, along with the rest of his good regimen, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making very many small points, except where you hold the hand with the cautery: let it be smelled.
For this type of cautery moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place on it a cloth soaked in butter or hen's fat.
On the method of cauterizing for water descending to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When the beginning of water in the eye is declared to you by the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and purify the patient, with what cleanses his head.
And keep him away from all moistures, and have him sit in a bath, on fasting for several days.
Then instruct him to shave his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize it over both temples with two cautery points, if the onset of water descent occurs in both eyes at the same time: or from one side, if the onset of water is in one eye: and cut off with the cautery all veins and arteries which are under the skin: and let the cautery be long in width across the temples: and beware of blood flow.
If you see anything of it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with the wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting off, and beware of blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, below two bones, with two finally produced cautery points.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in ancient tears.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and persistent: and they are above the veins and arteries which are on the external surface of the head, it is verified that this is due to cold, phlegmatic excesses: then cauterize with the same cautery as I described in the onset of descending water, a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries over both temples, and two cauteries on the neck below two bones. And if additional treatment is needed, then cauterize it on all sides of the eye carefully, above the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
On the method of cauterizing for nasal odor.
When you treat it with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment does not help: then hurry and give the patient infirmocochias for three nights; then shave his head and cauterize it with a medium cautery, with olive oil. Then cauterize it with a key cautery, two cauteries, above the eyebrows slightly under the hair.
And be careful of the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the key cautery.
On the method of cauterizing for the relaxation of the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is relaxed due to illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, using this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it slightly above the eyebrows with two cauteries on each side: and they should be placed away from the temples: and the length of each cautery should be according to the length of the eyebrow: and do not extend your hand with the cautery, but according to the amount that the third eyelid is burned.
On the method of cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs turn and pierce the eye.
Cauterization is done in two ways: either with fire; or with burning medicine.
In cauterization with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to remove his hairs, if he is one of those who clean them, until they grow out and are even. If they prick him at their origin: then bind his eyes with a cloth, so that they do not move, until they heal.
When they grow out and are even, then place the patient's head in your lap: then mark above the eyelids of his eyes with a stencil, in the shape of a myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place the cautery imbued in egg white: or in psyllium mucilage on the eye.
Then heat the cautery, which is of this form.
Then cauterize over the figure you marked gradually in many places until the surface of the skin, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, is properly burned entirely visible.
And the sign of the healing of your work is: if you see the eyelid already contracting, and the hairs rising at the point of the eye.
Raise then your hand then: and leave him for three days.
Then place the cautery with butter on it until the eschar is removed. Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
If any of the hairs return after an hour, and the eyelid softens: then apply the cautery again to that place, as you did at first.
If the hairs are on the lower [lid]: then cauterize it until it rises to its natural position: and equalize so that the hairs do not poke the eye.
It is that you should instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they lengthen and even out. Make a shape of a myrtle leaf from cloth paper.
Then take from known soap and from unslaked lime one ounce each; then grind them together well, and make it quickly so that it does not cool. Then spread it over the paper you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place under the eye a cloth soaked in egg white: and let the patient's head be in your lap.
And place your index finger on the medicine and press it for a moment. And you should move it whenever the patient feels the bite of the medicine: for its bite is like fire.
Therefore, while this bite which he discovered persists, then discontinue the medicine, and move it with your finger. Therefore, when the bite ceases, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And then consider, if you see the eyelid rise, as it rises with contraction by fire or with incision, it is good: and if not, then repeat on it from the medicine on the spot where the medicine does not leave a mark and does not darken, until your operation equals and the eye contracts.
Then place Cow-dung with butter on it until the burned skin is removed. Then treat it with a diaphoretic ointment, or another, until it heals.
And it is necessary for you during the operation to guard with utmost caution that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid softens after some days, and something struggles out from hairs in the eye, then repeat the medicine on the spot that softens from the eyelid itself, as you did at first. Then treat it until it heals.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And you should know that the eyes of humans differ in size and smallness. Therefore, let your consideration be according to this: and the way of righteousness is not hidden from him who has a zeal for this art.
On the method of cauterizing in lacrimal fistula.
When you treat a fistula, with what we have said about the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not help: then, you must cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and let the attendant hold his head between his hands in such a way that it does not move or shake with his head.
Then place a cloth soaked in egg white or in psilios mucilage over his eye: then cauterize with fire, the form of which is this.
Let it be concave, like the shape of a vulture's feather quill from one end, with which the cauterization is done: and if you want it to penetrate to the other end, and if you want it to go upwards, try it thus.
However, this concave shape is better for your work.
Then express the fistula if it is open, and extract the pus from it, and dry it: and if it is not open, then open it and extract its pus.
Then place the cauterization tool, which is made very hot, on it.
And hold your hand near the cauterization tool by the eye, towards the nasal side, so that your hand does not waver or disturb the patient: and place the cauterization tool on the eye fat, and burn it.
If therefore you reach with the beginning of your cautery up to the bone, it will be well. And if not: then apply the cautery once, or twice, if you need that: and leave it for three days.
Then apply a poultice with butter, and treat it with a drying ointment until it heals.
If forty days have passed and it has not healed: then apply a sharp corrosive medicine over it until the bone is exposed: and scrape it according to how it comes in its chapter.
And there is another method of the cautery for fistulas, which some first mentioned. Attend to the location of the fistula and find it: then place a fine camahan into the fissure, that is, a fine cannula, whose form is this. And pour into it the quantity of a drachm of molten lead, and hold your hand with a good retention of the cannula, and do not move the patient at all, so that the molten lead does not run or reach his eye.
And it is necessary to place on the patient's eye a poultice soaked in egg white, or in water.
For the lead burns the site of the fistula and heals it with a marvelous healing.
If the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nasal passage and redirect the fistula to the course of the nose, according to how it will come to its own proper place.
On the method of cauterizing in fissures of the lips.
Fissures often occur on the Lip, which are called Chaps, and especially on the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat these fissures, with what we have said in the division of diseases, and if the treatment does not help, then make a small knife-shaped cautery with fire according to this form.
And its concavity should be according to the fineness of the knife.
Then place it ignited quickly on the fissures until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
Then treat it with cerote until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in oral fistulas.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then it forms pus and bursts: afterwards it becomes chronic, and pus runs, and a fistula is formed: then you treat it, and if the treatment does not help, then you must heat a cautery according to its size so that it fits into the fistula. Then insert it heated into the opening of the fistula and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches its depth and end: do this once or twice.
Then treat it afterward with what we have said about the treatment until it is healed.
If therefore the pus is removed and it heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what will come upon its head.
On the method of cauterizing in gums and softened teeth.
When the gum is softened due to moisture and the teeth are loosened, and you treat it with medicines and it does not improve: then place the patient's head in your lap.
Then with a fire cauterize it, whose form will come after this, so that you place a cannula on the tooth: and insert into it a ignited cauterium quickly: and hold your hand for a moment until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And lift your hand: then repeat the cauterization several times, as you wish.
Then the patient should fill his mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour: and then spit it out.
For the loose tooth is secured, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
On the method of cauterizing for tooth pain.
When the pain of the tooth is due to cold, or there is cold in it, or a worm, and treatment with medicines does not help: then cauterization is applied in two ways: either cauterization with butter: or cauterization with fire.
The cautery of it with butter is to take cow's butter and boil it in an iron spoon or in a vessel. Then take the cloth and wrap it over the end of the bandage. Then submerge it in boiled butter: and place it on the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools: then repeat it several times, until the heat penetrates to the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or cloth in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth: and place a heated iron on top of it until the heat reaches the deep cavity of the tooth.
The cautery of it with fire is to use a brass tube or an iron tube. And let there be something thick on the body of it so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
Then with fire cauterize it, whose form will come: and place it on that tooth: and hold your hand until the cautery cools.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed, either on that same day or another day.
And it is necessary after applying that cautery that the patient fill his mouth with good butter and hold it for one hour: then spit it out.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Cauterize with whichever end you wish according to what is possible: and this is the form of the tube.
On the method of cauterizing in strophulus.
When strophulas are caused by phlegm and cold humidities, and are not obedient to digestion through medicines, and you wish to digest them quickly: then use a concave cautery, whose form is this.
Having two open ends, so that smoke may escape from the cautery at one end: and place it ignited upon the aposteme once, and a second time if needed, until it reaches the depth of the aposteme.
If the aposteme is small: then place the cautery according to the size of the aposteme.
Then leave it for three days, and place upon it a poultice infused in butter until what the fire has burned is removed.
Then treat it with tooth ointment until the cane-shaped form heals.
On the method of cauterizing in hoarseness of voice and constriction of breathing.
When humidities overcome the lung channel, and especially when it is with a cold disposition, then it is necessary that the patient be first evacuated with dissolving medicines.
Then cauterize it at the nockeri near the root of the throat in a depressed area: and beware, lest you reach the throat with the cautery, nor on the skin, except slightly.
Then cauterize it with another cautery near the joint of the neck at its last vertebra ultimately: and let the cautery be according to the manner which preceded.
Then care for it with what has precedeed until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in diseases of the lungs, and cough.
When cough and disease of the lungs are from cold humidities, and the patient does not have fever, nor consumption, and the disease is chronic: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the clavicle in depressed, mild, empty places. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples: and let the cautery be a cannula according to the form which preceded.
And if you wish your cauterization to be done by pricking with a cautery which is called Point, whose form preceded in the pricking of ear pain: and let the pricks be from thirty points up to about another.
Then care for it with what has precedeed until it heals.
And now let the cautery have three branches: according to this form. Therefore, it is alleviated with that cauterization when you do three cauteries with it once.
Chapter XXVII.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to moisture and does not return to its place at the time of its usual return from dislocation until it becomes accustomed to returning, then it dislocates from a small movement, which occurs as we have already testified, then you must first reduce the dislocation. Then the patient should lie on their back or on the healthy side. Then lift the skin that is inside the Titillici upward with the fingers of your left hand: and if the joint dislocates inward.
Then take a cautery with two prongs heated by fire. Its form is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of the cauterization will come with four cautery marks.
And sometimes the cauterization is done with a cautery having three prongs, hence the figure of the cauterization then has six marks: and the prongs are according to the fineness of the wire.
And this is the form of the cautery having three prongs.
And sometimes one is added to this manner, hence there are eight cautery marks.
Then place ground onions with salt on the cautery. Then make the patient adhere to tranquility, so that the limb is not moved for some time until it is strengthened.
And if the dislocation is upward, and that rarely happens, then cauterize it above the shoulder with a key cautery or by puncturing with many cauters.
For the joint is strengthened, and the moisture is removed: and the sick person is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and excessive moistures occur in the stomach, causing it to deviate from its natural disposition, and phlegm increases around it, and usual methods of treatment are not beneficial: then the sick person should lie on their back and extend their legs and hands. Then cauterize with three cauters, a spoon-shaped cautery of the size of one finger and a key cautery, and two cauters below from both sides of the single cautery, until the shape of the cauters forms a triangle. And space them apart so they do not join, when they would form pus.
And the depth of the cautery should be two-thirds the thickness of the skin.
And the shape of the cauters should be according to this form without addition: and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery which is used for this cautery be one according to the shape of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking one who fears this cautery: and it is to mark a point on the stomach according to the size you wish with encaustic; then cauterize it with a puncture cautery; then treat it with the preceding treatment until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing the cold spleen.
When pain occurs in the spleen due to cold and moisture, or from thick wind, until it departs from its natural complexion by expelling excesses, and the patient is treated with what we have said but does not improve: then the patient must lie on their back, and mark out three cautery points with encaustic according to this figure and in the same quantity below the spleen near the hypochondria, where a person's elbow reaches. And let there be space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be straight according to the length of the body, and do not press your hand with the cautery too much.
And let the quantity burned be according to the thickness of the skin, a quantity not exceeding half of it: and let the patient stand on their feet.
If, however, he cannot stand, then let him lie down, with his legs extended and arms raised.
This is the form of the cautery.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these points with a knife cautery when you have finesse and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed too deeply in cauterization, so that the thickness of the entire skin is burned, causing the whole body to be burned and reaching the intestines: for the skin there is thin, so be aware of this.
On the method of cauterizing abscesses of the liver.
When it happens that a swelling appears and you want to know if this pus formation is in the substance of the liver or in its covering: then if it is in the substance of the liver, the patient suffers from pain and heaviness without sharpness; and if it is in the covering of the liver, there is intense sharp pain with it; and you see now that its treatment has tired out its doctors.
Therefore, the patient should lie down on his neck. Then mark the place of the pus formation with cautery: then heat the cautery which resembles a rod. And this is its form. And cauterize with it once, until the skin is entirely burned and reaches the siphac, until all the pus comes out: then treat it with the treatment for burnings, until it heals.
And one should not use this type of cautery unless their study in the art of medicine is prolonged: and through whose hands such illnesses occur repeatedly with experience: then indeed they may dare to perform such an operation.
But to leave it alone is better in my opinion.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in pleurisy.
The ancients said, use a cautery with roots of aristolochia for cold pleurisy in the following manner. And it is that you take from the dried long roots of aristolochia one longer root, which is found among them, and let it be as thick as a finger. Then submerge it in oil: and ignite it in fire. Then cauterize with one cautery where the fork joins the neck, and with two small cauteries under the slightly inclined glands on the side that is below the beard.
And with two cauteries also where the fifth and sixth ribs incline towards the back slightly: and with another cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three cauteries from the back: one where the two spatulas meet: and with two cauteries from the two sides of the chest, the lower cautery being between the two spatulas.
And you should not compress your hand with the cautery, but let the skin be clearly smelled.
And some ancients have said that there are those who use a cautery similar to a rod: they heat it and insert it between the ribs until they reach the abscess with it, and the pus comes out: as we have said regarding the abscess of the spleen.
But in this perforation with the cautery, there is a fear that either the patient dies immediately, or an ulcer forms at the site, which has no cure.
Regarding the Method of Cauterizing the Spleen Chapter XXXII.
When you treat spleen disease, with what we have said about treatment in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then cautery is applied in three ways, which are all correct.
One of which is to make three cauters, or four by lining according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the liver's cauterization, whose figure preceded.
And let there be between each cauterium the thickness of a finger, or more or less.
And let the method of the cauterium, which we have mentioned in the cauterization of the liver, be equal.
And do not press your hand with the cautery: and let the patient lie supine on his back.
And another method of cauterization is: to ignite a cautery having two prongs, which we have mentioned in the chapter on the dislocation of the shoulder: and elevate the skin which is directly over the spleen, where the left elbow of the patient reaches: and let your elevation be such that you raise the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauterizations fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert the two prongs that are very hot until you penetrate the skin from the other side: then withdraw the cautery: thus four cauterizations are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with another cautery having three prongs.
Then care for the cautery after you leave it to emit pus for many days: for it is more beneficial than all that have preceded in the treatment.
Regarding the method of cauterization in hydrops.
Cautery does not apply in hydrops, unless properly positioned.
When you treat the water swelling with the methods of cure that we have mentioned in the division, and if the treatment does not help, then you must cauterize it with four cauterizations around the navel, and one cauterization on the stomach, and another cauterization on the spleen, and a cauterization on the liver, and two cauterizations behind the back between the vertebrae, and one in line with the chest, and another in line with the stomach: and let the depth of the cauterization be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the cautery open so that it may discharge pus over a long period of time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment after cautery with it: which requires that two intentions be combined: and healing will hasten to him with God's help.
The form of the cautery with which the stomach is cauterized should be key-shaped: according to its previous form: and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped: according to its previous form.
On the method of cauterizing the feet and legs.
When abscesses form in hydrops and are filled with yellow water: you must cauterize on the back of the foot at the nockerati, which is between the auricularis and anularis: and lift your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then lift your hand: and do not repeat it at all.
For yellow water will exude, and the cautery should be in this form.
Then make two cauteries on each leg, and let the cautery be made with the knife-like end of the cautery: and let a cautery be made along the length of the leg, one below the knee, and another below it, about the middle of the leg: and on each hip two cauteries: and leave the open cautery without treatment for a long time: so that some water may sweat out of it: then treat it with the other things we have said.
On the method of cauterization for abdominal treatment.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
When the abdominal ailment arises from cold and humidity, weakening the retaining and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines: and it is treated with methods of healing but does not heal: and you see the patient tolerating the cautery of abundant power, then cauterize him with a large cautery on his stomach, according to what precedes in the cautery of the stomach with the circular cautery, and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle claw-shaped cautery: and a large cautery on the alcatin above the alhosos, or two cauteries.
And if you see excessive humidity and the patient tolerating it, then cauterize him with a cautery on the comb area, and a cautery on all the ilium: and perhaps add two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one.
For it is an effective treatment, whose benefit does not fail.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they arise from thick, cold humors, or corrupted moistures, and are treated with what we have said in the section on treatment, but if the cure does not help: then cauterize with three cautery points above the lower spine under the almeidati somewhat triangularly, and beneath the navel with a cautery almost two digits away.
And if you think that his stomach is overly cooled, and his food is not digested, and you see his face swollen with pus, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery, as previously described: and with a cautery on his liver, and another on his spleen with a key-shaped cautery: and leave the cautery open for some time: then treat him until he is healed.
Chapter XXXVII.
When you cut off althelul, then heat the cautery which resembles a rod. Then insert the heated cautery into the cut althelul: and hold it with your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows: do this once or twice.
If there are many althelul, then cauterize each one with a cautery as we have described. Then treat them with what helps heal them from ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize it with a large cautery on the alcatin, it is less effective in treatment.
On the method of cauterizing an anal fistula.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
When the patient does not obey the cutting and procedure which we have described in its place, and is terrified by it, perhaps he is healed with a cautery.
When therefore an anal fistula occurs in someone and becomes old, pus runs from it, and corrupted humors. It is therefore more appropriate to probe it with a fine. Then know the quantity of its depth with a probe.
Then ignite the cautery, which is like a rod. Then insert the ignited cautery into the fistula itself and the amount in which the nail entered.
And repeat the cautery on it until all the corrupted bodies are burned, once, or twice, or thrice, according to the amount of your need.
And guard yourself from burning the nerve, if it is there, or large veins: or if the fistula leads to the bladder or to the intestine, then guard yourself from all these areas.
And do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area: and you think that it is not penetrating.
Then care for the area until it heals.
If the area is sealed and materials are removed from it and remains so for a long time: then you know that it is now fully healed.
And if materials do not separate from it, then you know that it is penetrating, or there is a corrupted hole in its depth, or something like that, of which the recollection will come in its place.
Regarding the method of cauterizing the kidneys.
When pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or severe flatulence, and it is reduced because of the illness of the infirm, then it is necessary to cauterize it over almethen on the kidneys, with a nail-shaped cautery over the entire kidney, as previously mentioned.
And perhaps we cauterize it a second time in the almidah. Therefore, three lined [things] will come. Therefore, they will be more final in healing.
On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When debility and softening due to cold and moisture occur in the bladder, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it on the lower part of the sumen above the bladder, where the hairs of the comb begin, and with one cautery on the right side of the sumen, and another on its left: and let the length of that lateral cautery be according to the size of the thumb knot: and cauterize it with the lower back cautery, or two cauters if necessary for that: and let it follow the previous cautery at the clavicle.
On the method of cauterizing the womb.
When cold and moisture occur in the womb, preventing conception and corrupting its menses, and delaying their onset, and pain occurs at their arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize it with three cauters around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with one cautery below the scapula on the back, or with two cauters: and let the cautery be at the clavicle.
On the method of cauterizing the ankle in dislocation.
When mucous humidities are poured out to the hip socket of Anchae, and become the cause of its departure from its place: and the sign of this is that one leg is extended over the other when they are placed side by side: and the site of dislocation is found empty in it.
Therefore, you must cauterize the affected area over the hip socket of Anchae with a similar circular cautery: after you mark it with encaustic around the circumference of the socket, as it turns: and let the socket itself fall in the middle of the circle.
If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries using a large oil cautery: and the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the entire skin.
Then care for it until it is healed.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in sciatica.
When pain occurs in the hip socket and its cause is cold and humidities: and the patient is treated with what we mentioned in the division, but the treatment does not help and it becomes chronic: then it is necessary to relieve the patient of thick humors with foul pills, or with artificial pills, and similar ones. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cautery for this is according to two methods: either a cautery with burning medicines, or a cautery with fire.
The cauterization with fire is according to many methods.
One of which is to cauterize above the lid of its container with three triangular cauteries, according to this shape. And give them a good or bad depth. And let the space which is between each cautery be the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be olive-shaped.
Sometimes, however, the cautery is made in the middle on top of the lid of its container. Therefore, there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose form preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the lid, with one: so that the circle contains the entire lid.
And burn the thickness of the entire skin.
This is the method of cautery for sciatica, when the pain is attached to the lid itself, and does not extend to the hip and leg.
If it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip, on the spot where the patient indicates there is pain, and with your cautery on the thigh four fingers towards the woodland side: and let the cautery be knife-shaped.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the patient indicates that the pain extends nearly to the toes of the foot, then cauterize it where they indicate with a pinpoint cautery, three, four, or more if it is needed.
And if he indicates that the pain is under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize that place with one surgical cautery.
And be careful in all your cauterizations so that you do not go too far with the cautery to the point of burning a nerve or a large artery, and thereby bring about a very harmful damage or contraction on the patient.
And indeed I have seen one or another of those who cauterized above the ankle and went too far in the cauterization, and the leg swelled until a tumor followed to the foot, and it was completely perforated and the entire foot corrupted; then peritonitis occurred, and death followed that.
If the pain is in both parts at the same time, cauterize both according to this method.
And some wise men have said about the cauterization of an anchor, for which this is the method of cautery. Make a similar instrument from iron, whose diameter is half a palm: and let it be at its opening according to the thickness of a kernel of a finger, or slightly less: and within that instrument be a third instrument.
And let the space between each instrument be the width of a thumb joint: and let the instruments be open on both sides: and let their depth be about one or two thumb joints: and make them handles of iron suitably fitted to the instruments.
Then it is heated in the fire until it turns red and throws out sparks: then it is placed on the anchor's ulcer of the patient lying on their healthy side. Therefore, cauterize him with three round cauteries in one turn.
Then leave him for three days. Afterwards, apply plasters with butter: and leave the wound open for many days. Then treat him with ointment until he is healed.
Albucasis says, we have used this type of cautery little, O sons, because of the terror of its appearance: and moreover, because we find few who can endure it.
However, it is among the good cauteries for one who endures and finds its proper place.
The cautery with burning medicines is such that you make two jars having a perforated ring, into which descends the hinge of its lid made of bronze or iron, the length of the wall: each should have two knobs, or something like them, in height.
And let the space between the two be the width of a finger, and let them be open below and above: and let them be able to clamp together according to this form.
Then place it on the lid of the anchor, with the patient lying on the healthy side. And press your hand strongly on the lid of the anchor. Then pour between the two circles with hot water, which has been heated briefly with fire, and keep it for the duration of an hour: and let the patient tolerate its bite and its burning, for he will find the bite like fire, until the bite subsides.
Then lift your hand with the instrument, and clean the entire area around the wound with warm water: then leave it for three days.
And place butter on it until the blackness of the burn is removed: and leave it for several days, and pus will flow from it. For it is the last in healing.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the thigh or leg: make a poultice on what contains water, according to how you did on the wound equally.
And this is the method of warm water: and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Take alkali and unquenched lime, each one part: grind both, and place them in a new pot, whose lower part has one small hole through which a finger can pass: and place another glass pot under the bottom of the pot: then pour sweet water over the alkali and lime to submerge both by a finger's depth: after which you should press them with your hand firmly: and leave the pot until the sharp water descends into the lower glass pot.
Then collect all that water and pour it over another lime: and distill until it is renewed.
For it will then be very strong in sharpness, which is used in many medical procedures and in the cauterization of other parts. For it causes its own burning action.
And among the medicines are those with which the ankh is cauterized, such as tesiie, and mango paste, and lime with soap, so that each is thoroughly mixed.
And Galen indeed reported the treatment of an ancient man who was cured of the pain of the ankh and the sciatic vein: and he praised it greatly. And he said that no other treatment was needed, and that he was cured in one attempt, until he reported that he perhaps entered a bath carried in and exited it already healed.
And it is taken from green seitaragi: and if green is not found, take the dry, fresh: and grind it much with some fat, and place it on the ankh where there is pain, or on the leg, or on the hip: and bind it, and leave it for a duration of three hours, or to the extent that the patient feels the sedation of the burning. Then put him into a bath.
When therefore his body becomes moist, put him into the bath. For the pain retreats, and it is healed.
And know that one should not use the cautery with these medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides also said that goat dung, when used to cauterize the sciatic vein, helps it: and the cautery is made in this way. Wool is taken and soaked in old oil and placed on the deep place which is between the big toe of the foot and the instep, and it is closer to the instep.
Then take dried goat dung, and ignite it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the wool, and leave it until it is extinguished. Then do it again. Do not stop doing it until the sensation reaches the nail through the treatment and the pain ceases.
And this method of cauterization is called Vaccinum cautery.
Regarding the cauterization for back pain.
Pain in the back sometimes occurs due to various causes, whether from a fall, or from a blow, or from excessive evacuation, and similar things, from the infusion of cold and moist matter; and cauterization is only applicable in this particular type which arises from the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the patient with foul pills and similar treatments, three lines should be made on the back where the pain is, according to the width of the area itself. After marking with encaustic on each line five cauteries or more according to the quantity that comes from the patient's tolerance and strength: and the cauterization should be done with a cautery point.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a median claw cautery according to this form.
On the method of cauterizing at the beginning of gibbosity.
This disease often affects small infants.
And the sign of the onset of this in children is that it occurs upon him a constriction in breathing during elevation and movement: and you find at the last vertebrae of the spine and its joints that it has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When therefore you see it and wish to treat it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery according to this form.
And let the cautery take effect on every part of the vertebra equally: and if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a point cautery in two lines, or three: and let the points be close to each other.
Then care for the area until it heals with what we have said.
And beware of applying the cautery to the gibbosity that occurs in nerve spasm.
On the method of cauterizing in gout and joint pains.
When joint pains are caused by cold humidities that are dispersed to any part of the body, then when the pains occur in the feet, it is customary among physicians to properly call this gout.
When therefore gout of cold causes is treated with methods of cure and the pains are not removed, then the cautery removes them.
And it is so that you cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the feet, with many cauteries: and let the cautery be Oleander.
And if you need to prick on the surface of the foot, then do it with a puncture cautery. And if the pains ascend up to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize over the entire knee with three or four cauteries on all sides, with this same Clavic cautery.
And if more of this cautery are necessary for you, then cauterize it. And do not plunge your hand with the cautery, but let it be about the thickness of the skin only.
And if the pains ascend to the knees and the back, then apply what we have said about the cautery in its chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands, then prick around the wrists as two lines are drawn.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick them on every joint and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pains ascend after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both on all sides.
And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen or from the reception of medicines. For if good regimen is established and the phlegm is evacuated, he will be healed with the help of God by this cautery.
On the method of cauterizing in hernias.
When a hernia occurs in the groin, and the intestine or bowel descends near the testicle, then you must advise the patient to abstain from eating on his day. And let him use laxatives, so that the stool may descend from his abdomen.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and advise him to hold his breath until the bowel or intestine appears or exits.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and mark with cautery below the hernia at the opening of the crest, with a mark whose end resembles half a circle directed towards the upper part of the body.
Then apply the cautery with this form of fire until it becomes white and emits sparks. Then reduce the intestine or bowel to its concavity. Then let the assistant place his hand on the area to prevent the intestine from protruding: and you shall have parted the patient's thighs, and placed a cushion beneath him, and another servant on his legs, and another on his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery on the marked spot, with your hand holding the cautery straight. And hold it until you reach the opening with it: or repeat with it another time, if you have not reached the opening with it on the first try.
And wisely observe from the exit of the intestine during your cauterization hour, lest you burn it, and by this happen to the patient either death or great harm.
And you should know that when you do not reach the mouth with the cautery, your operation does not help.
And it is necessary that the cautery for infants be fine, according to their size.
Then care for it with other ointments until it heals.
And let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you provide nourishment for the duration of his healing, which soothes his stomach: so that the intestine does not come out during effort and defecation.
Then when he wants to rise after forty days, administer a properly made bandage, and let it remain for another forty days.
And he should be reduced from labor, and from fullness of food and drink, and from loud voices.
For when he follows this regimen, he is healed with complete healing.
And I will speak of the treatment of ruptures with incision in its chapter.
When ruptures occur in the rest of the abdomen and are initial, and you wish that they do not worsen, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size: and let one-third of it be burned from then on. Then care for it with what we have said: and nothing more shall be added.
And some have said first: that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this shape.
After it is marked with encaustic, and a line is placed across the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with a key-shaped cautery.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for pains due to falls or blows.
Chapter XLVIII.
When pain occurs in some limbs due to a fall or blow, and that pain persists for a long time, and treatment with medicines does not help, then it must be cauterized with a Point cautery.
And the cautery should be appropriate for the entire member according to its size, and its tenderness, and its weakness, and its strength, and the location of the twist, and the pain from it.
If it is healed by the first cautery, it is good. If not: then repeat on the same cautery.
For it is customary for these pains to shift from one member to the adjacent one. Therefore, it is necessary to address them with cautery until the patient is healed.
Of the method of cauterizing in leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes greatly benefited by the cautery. And especially the type of leprosy that occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melanchole: when you wish to cauterize it, consider carefully.
If the leprosy is stubborn, and you have treated it with what we mentioned in the division, and it does not diminish nor remain stable: and you fear that the corruption may spread over the entire complexion of the patient: then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the known part of the head, and the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on the two temples, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And finally, apply your hand with the cautery for a moment until it makes a small imprint on the mouth, and the scabs are removed from it: so that the expiration of gross vapors from it may be alleviated, and cauterize also over the spleen itself, as previously described.
If the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears clearly: then it is necessary to cauterize with these cauteries which we mentioned in the chapter, and a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both jaws, and two cauteries on the cervical vertebrae, and six on the dorsal vertebrae, and one large one on the alahosos near the tail bone and one above it, on the almeidati: and two on the hips: that is, one on each hip, and two on the knees: one on each knee, and two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows, and two on the tender areas of his chest: and cauterize him on every joint, from the joints of his hands and feet: and cauterize on every heel of his feet, and on the palms of his hands.
And beware of the nerves which are above the posterior part of the heel, lest you burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the mouth of the pelvis, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And you should know that the more you apply the cautery, the greater the benefit and the more it helps.
And you should know that the sick person does not find pain in the cautery as much as healthy people do: because their body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of various sizes and smallness according to the limbs and joints: according to which precedes from the kinds of instruments.
Then treat the cautery with flour of the herb and honey, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in stupor.
When some limb is numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize the numb limb with cauteries according to the size or smallness of the limb.
And let your cautery penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin. Then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes it is cauterized for a kind of numbness that affects the hand and foot at the vertebrae of the back near the exit of the nerves that move that limb: and the numbness is removed.
But let not one who is not wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the moving nerves presume upon it.
Chapter Fifty-One.
When Alvarus becomes old and none of the medical skills are effective on it: then cauterize over it with a deep cautery briefly, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color changes.
Then treat it with the flour of the herb, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and blood of a dove, and blood of a swallow: let there be one part of each; mix all these together, and spread them over cloth, and apply in place until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it, as it revolves.
The wise have said that it should be cauterized with the final cautery in the middle.
But it does not seem right to me: for I fear that it may ulcerate: and I have already seen this happen several times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around it with a circle, as we have said: or with many cauteries.
On the method of cauterizing in adubelati.
When someone has an abscess and its maturation is delayed either due to excess causing it or due to the age of the patient if they are frail and have little blood, or due to time and a need to hasten the maturation of the abscess, then cauterize around it with many small cautery points. Then release her. For it will hasten with the maturation.
If you wish to perforate it with a cautery, then use fire with the cautery, which has this form.
And place it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery be applied so that the subsequent course of the disease may be alleviated.
Then care for it until it is healed.
About the method of cauterizing in a corrosive disease.
Chapter LIV.
A corrosive is nothing but corruption in a limb that spreads and corrodes it: just as fire eats dry wood.
If you see a corrosive in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then use many cauteries, small and large claviculae, according to what is suitable for the place where the corrosive is.
Then cauterize it from all sides until you root out the entire corruption, and nothing of it remains entirely.
Then leave it for three days, and place ground sulfur with oil on the cauterized areas until all the eschars are removed, and all corruption is gone.
Then treat it with flesh-producing ointments.
If you see that after three days flesh is born healthy, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then apply the cautery again over what remains of the corrupted areas.
And it is sometimes treated with sharp medicine when corrosive. For it arises from the place of the cautery.
However, cautery with fire is faster in providing relief: and I have already mentioned its cautery with sharp medicine in the division: so take it there when you need it.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in claws and warts.
Chapter LV.
This illness often occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a thick, filtered substance that harms the foot.
And there are indeed two methods of cautery for these: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
As for cautery with fire, make a concave cautery similar to the feather of a vulture: it should be made of iron according to the size that can contain the claw on all sides: and it should have fine edges.
Then place it ignited upon the nail. Then rotate the hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail: and leave it for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply plaisters to it with wild mallows, crushed with salt: and leave the plaister on it during the night. For it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then treat the area with a flesh-generating ointment until it heals.
If they are not converted and often occur on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet: then apply cautery to them with warm water: and it is as follows, take a tube of metal, or iron, or from an eagle's quill: and place it over the nail, or althelul. Then pour a small amount of warm water into the tube: hold your hand, and rotate it with the pressure of your hand for a moment, so that the edge of the tube is impressed on the root of the nail, and let the warm water find its way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and let the patient wait a moment over the effect of the warm water's action for about an hour.
Then leave it, for the nail is eradicated with its roots.
Do this one by one until you have addressed all of them that are in the body.
Then treat them after they are eradicated with something that generates flesh from ointments.
On the method of cauterizing in trembling.
When trembling occurs in someone due to cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or another cause: then it is necessary to cauterize with four or five cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and a caustic between each vertebra, and on his chest with a caustic, and on his stomach with a caustic.
For trembling is calmed with olive oil cautery, and recovery from cold illness is hastened.
On the method of cauterizing Albathir.
Chapter LVII.
Sometimes in the body, Albathir causes ugly boils, that is, pustules, which are caused by corrupted thick materials.
Therefore, when they first appear, they should be cauterized on the entire head of the pustule with a fine cautery using myrtle wood, the end of which is burned with fire. Or with the root of long aristolochia. Or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method: and they do not increase: and the excess causing them is dispersed, and they are healed from them.
However, it should be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the method of cauterizing in blood flow from an artery in a wound.
It often happens that blood flows from an artery which is cut at a wound, whether occurring externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or of a member's cautery, and similar cases; and it becomes difficult to stop it.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then quickly reach with your hand to the opening of the artery, and place your index finger on it: and press it strongly until the blood is blocked under your finger, and nothing can escape from it.
Then place small olive cauters and more numerous large ones on the fire, and blow on them until they become thoroughly ignited.
Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the wound and the place where the artery is broken, and place the cautery on the vein after you quickly remove your finger: and hold the cautery until the blood is stopped.
If the blood flows out when you raise your finger from the opening of the artery and extinguish the cautery, then quickly take another cautery from those that are prepared in the fire.
Therefore, do not cease to do this with one after another until the blood is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is there, and do not cause further harm to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to stop it, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is drawn out, its ends are contracted, and the blood is severed. Or it should be tied with a strong thread. Or let medicines with the property of severing the blood be applied to it, and constrict it with a properly tight poultice.
Whoever administers its severance with a ligature and constriction with cloth, or by application of burning substances and similar methods, does not completely heal it, except rarely.
If it happens to someone and a physician or medicine is not present: then begin by placing the index finger over the opening of the vein itself, as we have mentioned, and constricting it very tightly until the blood is blocked from the upper part of the wound, and over the artery. And the finger should not be removed, but always cool it with very cold water until the blood congeals, thickens, and is severed.
And during this time, one should consider what it needs from a cautery or medicine.
 On Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in Wounds, and Similar Matters.
We have already said in the first chapter about every illness in which it is appropriate to use fire for cauterization and burning medicine, and its occasions, causes, instruments, and forms of cauters.
And I have placed the chapters from the top to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter by the same method: so that it may relieve the seeker of what he seeks.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you to learn, O sons, what is in this chapter concerning the fear which is mentioned in the first chapter about cauterization.
And because of that, it is necessary to have a more vigorous caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, evacuation with blood often occurs, by which life stands at the opening of the vein, or incision on the abscess, or opening of the fistula, or treatment of the wound, or extraction of the arrow, or incision on the stone, and those similar to these: from all of which trembling and fear are associated, and death often results from most of them.
And I warn you not to let hesitation overcome you, for sometimes methods of people with the methods of illnesses fall upon you in this art. For there are those among them who become angry with their illness, and death is And when the illness is from fear which signifies death.
And from them is he who gives his ringing sound and enriches you with it, hoping for health, and his illness is deadly.
Therefore, you should not agree with him who comes to you from them, whose manner is such. And let your caution be stronger than your desire and your greed. And do not presume anything from it unless after certain knowledge, which verifies with you that to which a praiseworthy succession arrives.
And use it in the treatment of all your ailments, by prognosis and indication of that to which health appropriately leads.
For in that is your assistance for gaining fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you with His understanding, O sons, and not deprive you of guidance and inspiration: for that is in His hand.
And I have indeed arranged this Chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what preceded in the chapter of Cauterization, from the neck down to the feet: so that your search for what you want from it and what you need may be alleviated.
Regarding the treatment of water that accumulates in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
Know that this ailment often occurs in children at birth: or when the midwife grasps the child's head without gentleness.
And it sometimes happens also from a hidden cause which is not known.
And indeed I have not seen this disease in anyone other than children: and death came quickly to all of them whom I saw. Therefore, it seemed to me to abandon the treatment of this condition.
And indeed I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head swelled every day until he could not sit up because of the size of his head, and the swelling increased until he died.
And this moisture indeed gathers either between the skin and the bone, or it gathers beneath the bone on the surface.
And the operation for this, if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make one cut in the middle of the head in width: and the length of the cut should be about two finger widths, until the moisture flows out.
And this is the form of the spatula.
If the moisture has increased more and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in this form.
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the sign of this is that you see the sutures of the head open on all sides: and the water is depressed when you press it with your hand towards the interior, and this is not hidden from you: then you must make three cuts in the middle of the head in this manner.
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. Then bind the wounds with cloths and poultices. Then fumigate it with wine and oil from above until the fifth day.
Then loosen the bandage, and treat the wound with tents, and ointments.
And do not let the head be bound with equality. And feed the weak with all dry food of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to determine where the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of fluid appear.
For sometimes it is more on the occiput, or on the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore, make an incision where the abscess and the accumulation of fluid appear to you: and cut it open as much as possible for you.
And be careful not to cut the artery, and let there not be a flow of blood, and the patient does not die from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
Regarding the incision of the arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When catarrhs affect the eyes or the chest of someone, and it becomes chronic, and the treatment with medicines does not help: then the final remedy for that is the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you want to incise them, the patient should shave their head. Then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries may appear. Then the patient should bind his neck with any cloth he has. Then observe where the vein pulses. And the locations of both are the depressed areas behind the ears: and it is rarely concealed, except in some individuals.
Then mark with cautery on both sides: and cut each one with a scalpel on both sides sharply, the incision reaching the bone: and let it be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel under the artery, and cut it higher up with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be about two joined fingers.
For when the vein is cut, blood exits with a pulsating flow, which leaps into the interior frequently.
If the artery does not appear to the senses, then it is necessary to measure from the ear a distance of three fingers. Then mark with cautery, and cut until you reach the bone.
And what is necessary to let out of the blood is six ounces, and you may emit more or less from it. All of this according to the amount that appears to you from the strength of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
Then attend to the wound. Then if anything remains attached to the bone from the incision, then cut it off, so that a warm abscess does not occur: then bind the wound with strips of linen cloth.
Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
On the removal of arteries which are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When an individual suffers from chronic hemicrania or acute catarrhs due to the sharpness of humidities and heat in the temporal arteries, or severe ancient sodas and similar conditions: and if treatment with medical cures does not help: then we have found in these illnesses the extraction of arteries from the temples or their cauterization, as we have narrated.
And the method of the operation for their extraction is to shave the hairs that are on the temples and focus on the visible artery in the temple. For it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is rarely hidden except in a few individuals or due to extreme cold.
If it is hidden from you, then let the patient bind his head with any cloth: then rub the area with a coarse cloth. Or steam the area with hot water until it appears to you with a clear manifestation. Then take the spatula which I shaped a little while ago. Then scrape the skin with it easily until you reach the artery. Then throw the hook into it, and pull it upwards until you extract it from the skin, and make it come out of the tissues beneath it on all sides.
If however the artery is thin: then wrap it with the tip of the hook. Then cut from it the portion according to the amount by which its ends are lengthened, and drawn together, so that bleeding does not occur. For if it is not cut, and if it is not severed, the blood does not fully stop.
Then evacuate six ounces of blood, down to three.
If the artery is large: then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a double, strong thread, of silk; or of the gut of a hen, so that corruption does not set in too quickly before the wound heals, and bleeding occurs.
Then cut the excess that is between the two ligaments. Do this at that hour, or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a knife cautery up to the mouth: until its ends are cut and it remains in place for the same procedure.
And it is better work, unless the patient has a fever, or has a heated temperament. For cautery is one of those things that helps to stop moist discharges. Therefore, it is better treatment.
And after the extraction of the arteries, the place should be filled with old lint: and properly made poultices should be placed on top.
And after the dissolution, it should be treated with drying medicines that promote flesh growth, and with lint, until it is healed.
If during the operation a flow of blood occurs from an artery, then quickly proceed to sever it with a cautery, or fill the place with zegi: and hold your hand until the blood is severed. If none of those are available to you, then place your finger on the spot until the blood And pierce the area with water of intense coldness until the sharpness subsides and constricts as necessary.
And because it is lighter and easier to extract from the artery, you should cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives: let the sharpness of the two knives be similar to almadatem. However, they are much less sharp than the two knives. For if they are sharp like the two knives, cold affects both quickly: and they do not cut the flesh swiftly. Therefore, because there is a little thickness in them, the heat of fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut quickly: with this method, the work is better than any other, lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And let the space between the two knives be the thickness of a finger, after you mark two places with cautery: and place both extremely hot until they reach the opening, and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between its ends is extended. For they do not coalesce completely with this cautery.
Chapter IV.
Concerning the treatment of sharp and constant tears from the eyes.
When the tears are constant and their flow is from the veins which are on the outer part of the skull: and no remedy with medicines can close them, and you see the face of the patient already reddened, and he feels a crawling sensation in his forehead, like the crawling of ants: and his eyes are weakened, moist, so that their eyelashes are already corroded by corrosion: and his eyelids are heated by the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients required this operation for their treatment, and named it the cure with the Sword.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave the hairs that are on his forehead. Then make three equidistant cuts on the forehead according to the length of the forehead: and let the length of the cut be about two fingers, and one cut is equidistant in the middle of the nose, and the second along the length slightly from the movement of the eyelids, and the third from the other side: and beware of cutting the arteries which are on both sides: and keep your hand away from the connection of the two jaws, and let the space of all the cuts be the amount of three fingers joined: and have a piece of prepared sponge ready, or many dried cloths with which to dry the blood.
Then insert a spatula with two sharp ends, of which the following is the form. From the incision which is on the temple side, to the second incision: and scrape with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, with a knife, which is above the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision to the second incision. Then remove this spatula, and insert into the first incision again another instrument which is called a sharp little knife, blunt on one side, not sharp on the other side. And this is its form.
And place its sharp side towards the flesh attached with skin, and its blunt side towards the bone: and push it until it reaches the middle fissure: and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision continues until it reaches what appears of the skin.
Then make it in the middle fissure up to the other fissure.
And after a equal quantity runs out of blood, press the places from the clotted blood pieces.
Then place on every fissure lint from old cloth, and put on them small pieces imbued in wine, oil, or vinegar. And see that a warm abscess does not occur.
And on the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer a large infusion with warm water. Then care for it with basilicon ointment, and the other things with which wounds are treated: until it is healed.
Chapter Five.
Concerning the treatment of acute tears and catarrhs to the eyes from the inner parts of the head.
When acute, sharp, persistent catarrhs happen to someone, and you see their eyes weakened, small, and already the sight of them is weakened: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out from them, and there is a sharp, painful pain deep in the head, followed by sneezing: then consider these occurrences, that those materials and catarrhs do not come unless from many veins.
And the better treatment for them is this. And it is that you instruct the patient to rub their forehead. Then make one incision in the middle of the forehead, or another shortly across its width, and begin with an incision from the left temple to the right temple: and let the incision go up to the bone: and keep your hand away from the jaw temples, which move during mastication: until when the bone is exposed: and dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the wound with an old catgut, or with linen threads. Then bind it with compresses: and soak the compresses with wine and oil, so that a hot swelling does not occur.
And when you loosen it, and see that the hot swelling has already diminished: then you must rub the area, until new flesh begins to grow.
Then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes flesh growth: such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony: and prepare an ointment from them, to be administered for the generation of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter Six.
Concerning the treatment of that which falls into the ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is of one of four types: either a mineral stone, or similar to stone, such as iron and glass: or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans: or it is a fluid substance, such as water, vinegar, and things like them: or some animal.
When a stone or stone-like substance that does not add to or grow in the ear falls into it, expose the ear to the sun: if you see the stone, then drip something from violet oil or hyacinth into the ear. Then administer its extraction and make the person sneeze with condysis, and plug the nostrils as the sneeze comes, after you place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and pull the ear upward.
For often it happens with this care.
If it does not come out, then administer its extraction with tweezers, that is, with fine pincers: whose form is this.
If it comes out with tweezers, it is good.
And if not, then administer its extraction with a fine, few-fold blind hook.
If it does not come out with that, then make a tube of metal, and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole deeply, and pack what is around the tube with wax softened with oil, so that there is no way for air except through the tube: then extract with your strong inhalation through the tube.
For often it comes out with what we have mentioned. If it does not come out this way, then take a small amount of birdlime or glue, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are caught, and place it on the end of a rod after you wrap a cloth properly around it; then insert it into the ear hole easily after you dry the ear from moisture.
If it does not come out with all that we have mentioned, then hurry to incise before a warm abscess or spasms occur.
And the method of the incision is to bleed the patient first in the cephalic vein: and let blood from him according to the measure of his strength. Then have the patient sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear near its fat in a depressed area: and let the incision be of a crescent shape until you reach the stone; then remove it with whatever instrument is possible for you.
Then sew the wound by your hour with speed, and care for it until it heals.
If a thing falling into the ear is of the grains that grow and swell, then administer its removal.
If however it does not obey you to come out, then take a thin, subtle spatula, according to this shape.
And administer with it the cutting of that kind from the grains that fall into the ear, and do not do this when you think that grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you place it in many pieces: then extract them with hooks, or with a fine thread, or with suction, as we have said, for its extraction is alleviated.
In water that enters the ear, the patient must use sneezing with condysi at first: and already fill his ear with some old cooked substance: and he lies on that ear in which there is water. If it exits through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, thin, soft, and heat them with fire for a moment, and let the patient insert one of them into the opening of his ear: and jump on one foot from that side, and strike with another stone on the stone which is in the ear. Therefore, he should not stop doing this with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now the water exits so that you take one from a parpyro or from a reed, and insert one end of it into the ear: and light the other end with fire until most of it is burned. Then insert another rush tube, and do this many times until all the water comes out: and draw it out with the cannula as was mentioned previously in the stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering it, if it is of a small body, like a flea, and similar, care for it as I said in the division.
But if it is of a large body, which appears to the senses: then administer its extraction with hooks and forceps: and its removal is easier than all those held in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division, and in the treatment of distillations, and your treatment does not help: then you must look at the ear in the sun. If therefore something of the worms appears there, then extract it with hooks or with subtle forceps.
If however nothing appears there, then take a cannula, which has this form, narrow below, wide above: and insert the slender end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate it: then suck with a strong suction. Do this many times until all the worms come out.
If however they do not obey you to come out, then seal around the cannula with wax, as I said in the stone.
If they do not come out with what we have said: then administer the distillations which the ancients have already used to destroy worms: and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And let your pouring with which you pour oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it of silver or bronze, narrow below, in which there is a small hole, wide above.
Let it be such that the plunger which is in the concavity of the tube is properly made of bronze. And if you wish, take a rod, and wrap cotton at its end with a proper wrapping; then pour oil, or juice, or what you wish of these medicines into the tube: and let it be in the ear; then insert the rod with the cotton above, and press it with your hand in a moderate compression until the oil is pushed into the auditory cavity, and the patient feels it internally; and what is infused into the ear should already be warmed slightly with fire: and beware that what is distilled into it is not very cold; for the medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter Seven.
Regarding the treatment of ailments affecting the ear.
Sometimes infants come out of their mothers' wombs unperforated.
And it has also happened to some people that their ear canal has become obstructed due to an injury or flesh grown in it.
And this obstruction sometimes occurs in the deep part of the ear canal, which is not visible: and it sometimes affects the outer part of the canal slightly, which is visible.
Therefore, that which occurs in the deep part of the ear and which is not visible, is in most cases difficult to heal.
And in that which follows the sight, you must place the ear of the patient in the sun, and look at it: then if you see an apparent obstruction, open it with a subtle spatula, whose form is as follows, its end should have some small width, part of which should be sharp: and the rest of the spatula should be of two smooth sides: so that it does not hurt the ear.
If therefore the obstruction is flesh grown in the ear canal: then hold it with a subtle hook, and cut it with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
If the obstruction is in the depth of the ear: then take a slender, smooth probe, and heat it slightly with fire: then insert it into the ear canal.
If therefore you feel the obstruction with it, which the patient finds with heaviness of hearing, attempt to open it with ease: and beware lest you wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place in the ear a lint according to the size of the opening which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment: do this for several days until you are sure of the wound's healing.
Or take lint, and soak it in rose water, and sprinkle ground zedoary on it, and use it.
If you see the ear already forming an abscess: then you must remove the lint, and allow it to be with another piece of lint which you wrap in cerote made with rose oil until the warm abscess settles: then care for it until it heals.
If however a flow of blood occurs then submerge a sponge or cloths in cold water and place them on the ear and use the remaining treatment which stops the aforementioned flow of blood in the chapter on distillations.
On the treatment of eyelid inflammation.
Chapter VIII.
These eyelid inflammations that occur in the eyelids are sometimes moist and are sometimes dry.
Therefore, you must hold them with forceps or with a hook, and cut them out with a spatula from their roots. Then place ground zegi on the affected areas.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lentil-shaped cautery.
And to cauterize them is better after the incision. For they often return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
On the treatment of eyelid tumors.
Chapter IX.
Often something occurs in the eyelids that resembles granulomas in their strength and hardness, and because of this it is called Granum: and it is an aggregation of coarse humidity in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid.
The operation therefore is to consider then if there is a stone coming out of it, which appears from the eyelid, and they move to all parts, and its treatment is easy.
Find therefore on it a fissure across the width. Then remove the outer layer from all sides with ease until it comes out. Then suspend it with a hook, and cut it off.
If however the cutting off of it is not prepared for you unless after you penetrate the eyelid with a slight incision, then it harms the patient somewhat.
If the fissure is large, then join it with stitching and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. For the ointment restores it and causes flesh to grow over it.
And if the stone is inclined towards the inside of the ear towards the inner surface, then turn the eyelid inside out, and suspend the stone with a hook; besides which you may need an incision, and press it from all sides.
If the eyelid is extended by an incision, it does not harm in any way.
Then wash the eye after the stone is cut out with salty water: and treat the area with something that causes flesh to grow over it until the patient heals.
Regarding the treatment of AXIRNATH of the eyelids.
Chapter X.
Axirnath is the fat that forms in the lining of the upper eyelids: and this happens most often to children; and it weighs down their eyes, and they get catarrhs in the mornings, and they cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to them, and you see them always lying on their faces and sleeping on them, and their eyelids under the eyebrows are moist, which inflation has now covered: and indeed the prominence of Axirnath is visible to the eye, and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of the operation is that the patient should place his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth, and prepare some wax on it, and make a circle out of that wax according to the size that contains Axirnath on all sides. Then place it on it, and press with your fingers on all sides so that Axirnath gathers in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a scalpel making incisions through its width, and let not the incision be deeper than that which is made in bloodletting.
Or it is necessary to cut through the entire skin until you reach Axirnath, for in many cases Axirnath protrudes from the incision in the shape of a piece of white fat.
Extract it with a cloth that you have inserted between your fingers to the outside: and you turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed: and be careful not to insert anything into the incision so that you do not reach the eye with the scalpel and injure it.
If Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, you should add a little more easily into the fissure until Axirnath proceeds. Then extract it, as we have said.
Then soak the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the area, and bind it with bandages.
And there are men who rub salt and place it in the concavity of the fissure, so that what remains of the moisture may melt.
Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, a warm abscess occurs in the place, then treat it with soothing plasters until it heals.
Regarding the conditions of Ataxmir of the eye, that is, when the eyelid softens, causing it to droop more than it should.
Chapter XI.
When additional hairs grow on the eyelids beyond the natural course and become old: then they harm the eye and cause various illnesses to occur, such as continuous tearing, softening of the eyelids, and opacification, until it becomes a cause for the destruction of the eye.
And indeed, Ataxmir of the eye is treated in four ways. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization. It is treated by cutting and stitching. Or with tubes, as I say.
You must place the head of the patient in your lap. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is turned, it is good. And if not: insert the needle into it, where there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread from above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with the probe.
Then find on the inner part of the eyelid beneath the added hairs with the spatula applied from the larger tear duct to the smaller one.
Then remove the thread, and place a small piece of cloth or linen under the eyelid: then mark on the eyelid with wax, which should be like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, it must be done according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: for it now varies among people.
For there are those who need a large portion to be cut from the eyelid, according to the amount that is relaxed from the eyelid.
Then with the spatula find above the two lines you marked, and begin from the larger tear duct to the smaller one, and let the incision be near the natural hairs, as thick as the probe.
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape the entire area. Then sew together the two lips with a fine thread of wool using a needle: and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what remains of the threads above the two eyebrows, with some adhesive substances, if you wish to do so: and if not, do not worry.
Then leave the suture and threads for three days, or four: afterwards care for it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without suture, and care for it with that which dries and constricts. For the eyelid is raised at the sealing of the wound and its joining: but it will be better in the future.
The ancients taught this method of treatment.
However, there is careful attention to the patient, and it is from good practice, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is also in Ataxmir: and it is to mark on the eyelid a figure that resembles the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have mentioned.
Then raise the eyelid with three separate or joined hooks, according to this following shape, then cut away what is excess with small scissors, according to this shape, with equal cuts.
If it is not possible for you to hold the hook and it does not align: then take a needle with thread, and insert it in the middle of the figure: and insert one thread near the larger tear duct, and a second thread near the smaller tear duct: and bring the threads together between your fingers with equality.
Then lift your hand with equal elevation: and lift the skin over which the marked seam is, as we have narrated.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture: and care for it until it heals.
If it happens that a swelling occurs near your incision or your cut: relieve that swelling with cerote and similar substances from soothing ointments.
And it sometimes happens to the eyelids that their hairs turn inward.
Therefore, you should use what we have said about the incision on it: but suturing both is more skilled. Regarding the treatment of ataxmia with reed tubes.
And it is such that you turn the eyelid and split the fissure which is inside, according to what I have narrated. Then skillfully make two reed tubes or two fine sticks: the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width should be less than the width of a spatula: and you will now incise at the ends of each from both sides where you hold the threads.
Then carefully bring each one over the excess of the eyelid, and tightly bind the two reed tubes on both sides with a strong tie, and leave it for several days. For skin that is tightly bound will die, and turn black, and become putrid, until it falls off by itself.
If it is delayed, then cut it with scissors. Then care for it until it heals.
When therefore it solidifies, lift the eyelid: and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the form of two cans, which you will make according to this figure, and the quantity in length and width.
Chapter Twelve.
On the removal of pricking hairs in the eye with a needle.
The operation is such that you take a fine needle and insert into it a thread made of fine, soft silk. Then bring together the ends of it and tie each end with a very fine knot: and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then arrange another fine thread under it briefly, and knot the ends of it if you wish.
Then let the patient place his head in your lap, and be near the sun so that the operation may be clearly seen: for it is a fine or minute operation.
Then insert the needle with Alinxotati into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you draw it out above the natural hair.
Then pull the hair up to above the Alinxotati: and insert into the Alinxotati that hair: whether it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the Alinxotati from the eyelid along with the natural hair.
If the eyelash is pulled and the hair does not come out with it: pull the eyelash downward, using the thread you made for it, until the eyelash comes out from the upper opening, and you can see it with your eye: then pull the eyelash and the thread: extract both, and close the eye: leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then either attach a long hair from natural hairs to it, and lift with it: or leave it until it grows longer over time, and then lift it.
Chapter XIII.
When this Alxatrati occurs in the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Alxatrati is either natural or accidental.
Accidental Alxatrati occurs from the healing of wounds, or cuts, or cauterizations, and similar procedures.
And the method of treatment is to split that healing, and to separate its edges, and place a strip of linen between them, and bind it until it heals.
And you should not use drying and constricting substances in its treatment: for if you do that, the Alxatrati returns worse than it was: rather use things that soften it, such as Greek hay: and foment with water in which marshmallow and flaxseed have been cooked: and anoint with liquid dyaquilon mixed with some oil: and wrap it with a linen cloth, and treat it thus.
And the treasure of your care is that you endeavor with all your ingenuity that it not become consolidated, according to the form which was at first.
And this operation which we have mentioned is merely a correction of Alxatrati, so that the form of the place does not return entirely to what it was.
Regarding the treatment of Alxatrati which is performed on the lower eyelid, and it is a wrinkling or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This condition which occurs below is truly called Alxatrati. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental one occurs from a wound, or a tear, or a cautery, and similar things.
And the method of the operation is to take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upward with the needle, and cut it with a broad spatula. If the shape of the eyelid returns as it should, it is good.
And if not, take the awl, and place it in the tear, and turn the eyelid with it: and make two tears on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two tears be from the two angles of the incision, until they meet and form an angle: until when brought together they form this shape, which is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh by the amount which is its sharp lower side, from what follows the eyelid. Then join the separated parts: sew it with wool thread.
Then treat them with what we have said about the softening medicines and plasters until they heal.
And if an Alxatrati occurs due to a cut, suture, or cautery: then it is necessary to make a flat incision under the eyelash hairs, according to what preceded. Then separate between the two lips with a plaster as we have said.
And the sum of the discourse on the treatment of Alxatrati, whether it is above or below, is that the operation should proceed accordingly as it is prepared according to the form of Alxatrati.
For it is indeed of many diversities in form: and the prudent artisan prepares with whatever manner is possible to him until he restores the figure to its natural form or near it, and the patient himself according to what is suitable to him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Regarding the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation occurs in many people so that the upper eyelid becomes consolidated with the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, you must introduce the tip of a probe under the eyelid and lift it up; or extend it with a hook; then cut the adherence with a delicate spatula that is not sharp like a cutting spatula, but rather slightly blunt: so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatula does not harm the eye with its sharpness; and let your incision be such that you pare away that adherence easily until when the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adherence heals.
Then pour salty water into the eye, wash it with water: or distill onto it from a sieve made from dissolved zinc and water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with flax oil: and place wool soaked in egg white over the eye: and after the third day use a sieve, and with plasters, until it heals.
Regarding the incision of the eyelid and the protruding flesh of the tears.
Chapter Sixteen.
You should know that the eyelid can be cut in two ways. Or it is nervous: and it is similar to a hard, delicate sieve. Or it is not nervous, similar to frozen white moisture: which when touched with a iron, or you try to take it with a hook, breaks apart, and the hook does not hold onto it.
And both types do not begin unless from the larger tear duct, extending gradually until it covers the sight and obstructs the light and movement of the eye.
And the method of operating in its incision is: that the patient places his head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and lift the eyelid with your hand. Then gather the eyelid with a hook of few twists, and extend it upwards. Then take a needle, and insert into it a hair from the horse, ox, or cow: and let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle for a moment, and fix it in the middle of the eyelid: and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the eyelid with the thread, and extend it upwards: and scrape with the hair the side of the eyelid that follows the pupil, as if you were sewing it with the hair to its end.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula, or with small scissors: and leave the natural flesh of the tear duct, so that the continuous flow of tears is not impeded by its incision.
And sometimes the claw is extended with a hook alone: or with a thread, as we have said. Then it should be scraped with a gentle spatula, whose form is as follows.
And beware that the spatula does not touch the horny membrane, and that no rupture occurs in it, and the pupil be perforated.
Then after the incision, throw some ground salt into the eye, or something made from ziniar, and leave it until the next day. Then care for it with what is necessary until it heals.
If the claw is not nervous, and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor can a hook be fixed in it, then this kind of claw is often treated with medications and healed as I have described in the division.
If you wish to cut it, then open the patient's eye, and take a fine, gentle spatula of mild sharpness, according to this form. And scrape the claw gently from above with subtlety. If you see that it becomesziniar
Then again on the same operation, until the whole of it is removed. Unless there is a warm aposteme contrary to you in the eye: then let it be, and treat the aposteme until it heals.
Then perform the operation on it reasonably, until it heals.
However, if the prominence of the lacrimal flesh harms the eye greatly, it should be suspended with a hook, and a part of it should be cut off: and do not make the incision too deep, so that the course of tears is not affected.
Then apply a red salve to the lacrimal area, or one made from zinc, until it heals.
Regarding the incision of Alguardenic, and the flesh grown in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
Sometimes in the eyes of some people, red flesh is formed or positioned over them until it covers the pupil, or approaches it, or presses on the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward: and it resembles a damask rose.
And the operation on it is such that the patient should place their head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and gather all that flesh with suitable hooks: and hold it with one forceps or tweezers.
Then cut the flesh initially with a scalpel until the entire removal is completed. And be careful with the eye, so that you do not harm it during the operation: and let your cut with which you cut it be, either with a spatula, which we mentioned in the cutting of the hoof: or with small scissors, with which basil is gathered, according to how its form will come after this chapter.
When therefore your cut is completed and all thealguardenici is removed, then fill the eye with ground salt: or sprinkle on it red powder and similar things from corrosive medicines: and place over the eye outside a cloth with egg white: so that it is secured from a warm abscess.
If any of the alguardenici remains and hot blood dominates you, and you fear a warm abscess: then abandon the eye and treat it with that which soothes the abscess.
Then repeat the procedure on it until it heals.
And similarly treat the added flesh that occurs in the eye of this kind.
However, it is necessary to avoid the treatment of any weak eye by natural means or by accidental means, using iron: and do not involve your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can tolerate that operation.
Regarding the removal of sebel from the eye.
Chapter Eighteen.
Sebel are red veins that form over the eye and prevent it from functioning properly: and they weaken the eye over time.
Therefore, it is necessary for you first to consider whether the eye in which there is sebel is strong and has no other illness besides the sebel: then remove the sebel.
And it is that you instruct the patient to place his head in your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one hook, or two according to your discretion: and let the hook be of subtle double bend, according to this form, or let there be two hooks set stepwise in one body, according to this form.
Then collect with fine forceps those veins with subtlety, and cleanse the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins removed from the eye, and they dissolve: and beware lest you injure the eye with the ends of the spatula.
And let your operation be at noon in the presence of the sun, and be firm in your operation very much: so that you cut only those veins.
And when you have completed, then distill into the eye green sap or red: so that by its sharpness it corrodes what remains of the sebel.
If however it is not possible for you to collect it all in that hour, then apply a plaster to the eye with something that alleviates the pain of the eye: and leave it for several days, until its pain subsides: and it shall be secured from a warm abscess: then proceed on it according to the same method, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
Regarding the restoration of Arissati to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
Physicians name Arissati the Fistula, which you treat with a cautery or with an acute burning medicine, according to what was previously described.
And if it is not healed, then there is no skill in it: unless you incise above the abscess at its origin, and extract all the moisture and pus within it until the bone is exposed.
When therefore the bone is exposed, and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument whose form is this.
And it is named Asperi capitis.
Let it be made of Indian iron, and let its head be round like an awl, which should be pointed with the fineness of a file or with a subtle prick of an aliskilfer: and place it on the corrupted part of the bone.
Then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand for a moment until you know that the corruption has been scraped away: and do this several times.
Then restore the area with drying and astringent medicines.
If therefore the area is consolidated and new flesh grows there, and the course of pus is stopped: and it remains for forty days without returning, without abscessing, and no accident occurs in it: then you know that it is now healed.
And if not, then there is no skill in it, unless you redirect the fistula to the nasal aperture according to this form.
And it is such that you expose the second bone with iron or a sharp medicine: and when the bone is exposed, then take a drill according to this form, let the iron end be triangular: and its wood should be a tapered pyramid down to the tip, as you see.
Then place it over the mouth itself: and let it be near the tear duct: and move your hand a little away from the eye. Then rotate your hand with the drill until it penetrates the bone, and let the patient feel it; by which he finds air coming out of it when he holds his hand over his nose.
Therefore then restore the place with astringent drying medicines, as I taught you.
When therefore flesh is born, and the place hardens: then the material which was flowing outward returns to the nose: thus it is a milder condition for the patient.
Regarding the reduction of a protrusion of the eye.
Chapter Twenty.
When the eye protrudes entirely, and no harm or reduction occurs in vision: then you must comfort the patient: then bleed him: afterwards place cupping on the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then place on the eye an ointment made from acacia, aloe, frankincense, and gum Arabic. Then bind the eye over the poultice with many bandages.
And the method of the bandages is: take soft cloths, many of them, and fold each cloth into four: make many of them: then place them one on top of another according to the amount needed by the eye: then bind them tightly with a strong binding using a hard cloth.
And again with suction without scarification.
Then remove the suction, and leave the eye bandaged day and night.
If however the bandage softens again, then it must be tightened greatly: then remove the bandage after a day and a night, as we said.
If therefore you see the eye has returned to the grape skin, it is good: and if not, then again apply the plaster, the powder, the bandage, and the suction, until it heals.
Concerning the incision of the grape skin.
Chapter Twenty-One.
When a rupture occurs in the grape skin, then it protrudes and extends beyond the eyelids like a grape seed, and the appearance of the person is marred because of this, and you wish to cut it: then the procedure for it is, as I narrate: and it is to insert a needle at the root of the grape from the lower to the upper part.
Then insert another needle with double thread from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate: and leave the first needle in its position.
Then cut the double thread, and tie it to the grape part around the needle: and tighten it greatly.
Then remove the needle, and place wool soaked in egg white on the eye: and leave it until the thread falls off with the grape.
Then treat the eye with what strengthens it until the wound heals.
And sometimes the eye is bound all around with a circle of cloth until it gains great prominence.
Then pierce it with a fine spatula that reaches the depth of the eye, and let the whitish moisture flow out, and the eye descends, and immediately proceed: then bind it until it heals.
Regarding the treatment of Alcomnati.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
This illness which is called Alcomnati is not anything but a pus that gathers in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not itself.
And the method of operating on it is to have the patient sit on a prepared seat or stand straight.
Then take his head in your hands from two sides and move it until you see the pus come to the lower parts of your eyes. Then it should be fixed, and not allowed to descend, and the light should be restored: and the patient should see things as he saw before: and if it does not go down further, you know that it is water.
If the pus does not prepare to descend with what we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands. Then take a fine spatula and use it to pierce slightly above the corneal membrane at the junction of the conjunctiva with the corneal layer in the crown, until the pus comes out.
When it comes out, then drip warm water into the eye in which you have mixed honey: or water in which you have already boiled Greek hay and honey: then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
On the treatment of water descending into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
We have already spoken about the types of water in the division and what is suitable for piercing, declaring and explaining it, then take that same thing according to health.
Then it is necessary to have the patient sit between your hands, facing the light, near the sun: and bind his healthy eye tightly, and press it strongly: then with your right hand if the eye containing water is the left eye, or with your left hand if it is the right eye, hold his eyelid.
Then take with your right hand the probe if the eye is the left: or with your left hand if the eye is the right.
Then place the tip of the probe near the cornea at the thickness of the radius where the white of the eye is visible near the smaller lacrimal: then push the probe with force: and you turn your hand with it until it penetrates into the sclera of the eye: and you will feel that the probe has now reached an empty space.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the probe's journey to the depth be the distance from the pupil to the end of the black part: and this is the cornea of the eye. For you will see it in the pupil of the eye itself due to the clarity of the corneal membrane.
Then place the probe until it reaches the location where the water is. Then press it below once after another.
If therefore water descends immediately, then the patient sees what he opens his vision to immediately, and the eyelid in his eye.
Then rest for a while. If therefore water descends, then remove it secondly, except for the eyelid to exit.
When therefore it is fixed, and does not rise: then remove the eyelid with ease: and you turn your hand gradually.
Then dissolve something from clear gem salt in water: and wash the eye inside with it. Then place outside the eye the entire piece of cotton, or wool soaked in rose oil, and goose grease: and bandage the healthy eye with it.
We, and those of our time, place ground cinnamon with egg white on it.
If the eyelid does not obey you for entering into the eye because of its hardness, since it is from a person whose eye is very hard: then you must take a spatula, which is called Alberid, whose form is this.
Therefore, insert with it only the connector, and do not put your hand deeply into the hole: and you do this only to make a way to the subtle place of the eyelid.
Then insert the eyelid as we have said.
And at the completion of your work, let a properly made sleeping place be prepared for the patient, in which he may sleep on his back in a dark room: and let him be prohibited from all movements, and from coughing: and give him food that suits his nature: and let him not move his head to the right, nor to the left at all.
And let the binding be according to its arrangement up to the third day.
Then unbind him in that dark room, and test his vision: and make him see things. Then bind it again until the seventh day.
And it should not be done during the time of healing, or immediately after the incision: rather, it should be avoided because water ascends quickly through a strong gaze.
If a warm abscess occurs, then it is necessary to unbind the eye before the seventh day: and treat it with what calms the abscess until it is calmed: then restore its sight, and place over his face a covering to regulate his vision under it for several days, while he remains in that dark room.
Then let him gradually come out of the house and move about in his own chambers.
And know that in zaltea the student is not excused from seeing several times: then he may dare to perform the operation.
And indeed it has come to our attention from some who are from Alayrach, who said that in Alayrach a pipe was made through which water is drawn.
Therefore I have not seen anyone in your land who has done that: nor have I read it in any of the books of the ancients: and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of species from wax, so that one who is ignorant may stand over them.
Let them be made from proper bronze: and let their ends be shaped with the same fineness into triangles, and let the end be sharp.
Chapter XXIV.
On the care of flesh growing in the nose.
Sometimes diverse kinds of flesh grow in the nose, some of which resemble multi-footed scorpions: and from these is a cancerous, stony, brownish flesh: and there is also one which is soft flesh, not brownish in color.
In those among these flesh growths that are soft, not deceptive, nor cancerous, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun, and open his nostrils, and cast a hook into those flesh growths: then pull them outwards, and cut what you grasp of them with a thin sharp spatula from one side, until you know that all the flesh is now removed.
If any part remains that cannot be cut off: then scrape it with one of the fine instruments easily, until nothing of it remains. If blood dominates you, or a hot abscess occurs: then apply what is appropriate to it: or if it is one of the malignant abscesses, then quickly cauterize it until the blood is severed and all the flesh is removed.
Then after the cut vinegar, and water, or wine is thrown into the nose. If the nose is open and moisture proceeds from it to the palate, then you know that he is already healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that flesh has grown within the upper nasal bones to which the instrument does not reach with the incision.
Then it is necessary to introduce a linen thread which has some thickness and many knots in it: place between each knot the length of a finger, or less: the patient should be instructed to insert one end of the thread into his nose with a tube, or whatever is possible for him after he makes it similar to azer: and he should draw it inward until it reaches the cavity, and exit above his throat.
And indeed, boys in schools often do something similar to this: and it is easy for one who wishes to do so.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one end which comes out above the nose, and the other which remains in the nose. Then the flesh with the knots on the thread should be carefully cut. Do this until you know that the flesh is now with the knots of the thread.
Then withdraw the thread: and place in the nose after wiping away the blood a licinium that you have soaked in Egyptian ointment: do this for three days, or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
Then place at the end of the thing in the nose a tube of lead for several days until it heals.
If however it requires treatment which dries, use that.
To make a head purgation device, with which oils and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it out of silver or bronze: so that it is similar to a small lamp, open like a seashell: and its spout similarly.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, like a cane.
And the shell of the instrument for making head purgation should be full, open: to which there is a handle at the end of it, with which you hold it when you heat oil or what you wish from juices and liquid substances in it.
Chapter XXV.
Often a polyp grows at the end of the nose, and it enlarges and increases with days until its appearance becomes ugly.
And because of this, it is necessary to cut it down at the beginning of its appearance and root out all of it. Then place on the area either a cautery or a burning medicine that serves in its place.
If therefore the cutting is delayed until it enlarges, then consider if it is stony, hard, of a dark color, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron: for it is a cancerous growth.
For I have often seen that when an abscess is cut open in a person, great harm results from it for the one who had it.
And if the abscess has a soft touch, is not of a dark color, and you see that it can be completely incised, then evacuate the diseased matter, and cut it without fear, without dread: and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
About sewing the nose, the lip, and the ear.
Know that when there is a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, the operation is of little benefit, except in certain individuals.
Therefore, when something like that happens to someone, you should consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood: then bring together the edges of the wound with sutures: then care for it until it heals.
And if the edges of the disrupted continuity are already separated and each part has become healed: then you must remove all the skin from its visible surface until it bleeds. Then bring together the two edges with sutures and bind them tightly, and dust over it dragon's blood and powdered frankincense: and place a piece of diaphoretic plaster over the powders, and another consolidating plaster: and leave it bound for two or three days. Then loosen it, and change the medicine: and leave it until the threads fall off by themselves. Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
The method of sewing is to join the separation of continuity, either with needles, as we have mentioned in the stitching of the abdomen; or join the separation with thread, as I have made you know.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On the removal of lip knots.
Many people suffer from hard swellings similar to grains of a herb, mostly on the inner parts of their lips: some of them are smaller, and others are larger.
Therefore, you must turn the lip inside out and cut above the entire knot, and suspend it with a hook, and cut it from all sides.
Then fill the area after the incision with ground zegi until the bleeding stops.
Then it should be treated with vinegar, and the area where there is astringency should be cared for until the wounds heal.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
On the incision of the flesh growth above the gum.
Often, additional flesh grows above the gum, which the ancients call abuluss.
Therefore, you must suspend it with a hook: or hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and allow the pus to flow, or the blood.
Then place ground zegi or other astringent, drying powders on the area.
If that flesh returns after treatment, for it often does return, then cut it a second time and cauterize it; for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter XXIX.
About the reason for teeth with iron.
Sometimes on the surfaces of teeth, from the inner and outer part, and between the gums, rough, ugly crusts gather, and they sometimes blacken and turn yellow and green until corruption from that reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul because of it.
Therefore, you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head in your lap, and scrape the mill and the tooth where the crusts appear, until nothing of them remains, and do likewise with the blackness, greenness, and yellowness, and others until they are cleaned.
If what is in them from the beginning of the scraping is removed, it is good: and if not, then repeat the scraping on them another day, a second, and a third, until finally your effort achieves what you wish.
And you should know that a tooth requires scrapers of various forms and many shapes: according to how they are prepared for your operation: therefore, the scraper with which the tooth is scraped from the lower part is different from the scraper with which it is scraped between the teeth, according to other forms.
And these forms of scrapers should be prepared and available to you, as you see.
Chapter XXX.
About the extraction of tooth pain.
You must cure the tooth of its pain with all ingenuity and delay in its extraction. For there is nothing to replace it when it is extracted, since it is a substance of high value. Therefore, when there is no excuse for its extraction, then it must be extracted when the patient is compelled, so that it may be stabilized and you may be certain about the painful tooth.
For often the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in a sound tooth and extract it; then the pain does not subside until the diseased tooth is extracted.
For we have already seen this from the practice of bloodletters.
When therefore the painful tooth is confirmed to you, then you must scarify around the tooth with a spatula that has some efficacy until the gum is loosened on all sides; then move it with your fingers or with delicate forceps at first gradually, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps firmly on it, and hold the head of the patient between your knees; once you have a good grip so that it does not move, then pull the tooth straight out so that you do not break it.
If it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under the tooth on all sides with ease, and attempt to move it as you did at first.
If the tooth is perforated or corroded, then you must fill that hole with cloth and grasp it with the tip of a slender probe so that it does not break when you clamp it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you perform the scarification around the gum meticulously from all sides greatly.
And guard your strength so that you do not break it, and let part of it remain, and let it return upon the sick from thatwhich is greater than his first pain.
And beware lest you do what ignorant bloodletters do in their haste and boldness regarding the removal of it, besides administering what we have narrated.
For they often cause great illnesses to occur in people, the healing of which is more difficult, and all its roots remain or some of them; or they extract it along with some bones of the jaw: as we have testified many times.
Then it should be treated after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If a flow of blood occurs from the places (for it often happens), then grind something from spurge, and fill the area with it: and if not, cauterize it if spurge is not available to you.
The forms of delicate forceps with which the tooth is moved should have long ends, a short handle, and be thick so that they do not double when pressed against the tooth: the handles should be thick as you see, so that when you grip them, they do not slip or bend: the ends should be short, and made of Indian iron or well-made steel, with straight ends: and at their ends there should be teeth, some of which enter and grip firmly with a proper constriction.
And sometimes the ends are made in the shape of the mouth of a bird called a stork, and they have a strong grip.
Chapter Thirty-One.
Regarding the removal of teeth and the extraction of fractured jawbones.
When something remains attached to the tooth that is being extracted, then it is necessary to place goat's hair with butter on the area for one day or two days until the area softens; then insert algasti or forceps, whose ends resemble the mouth of a bird called stork. This is the form of the forceps.
Let their ends be made like a file inside: or like aliskilfegi.
If it does not obey and come out with these forceps, then you must make a cavity above the root, and expose all the flesh, and insert an instrument called a small lever, whose form is this.
Let the end be short and somewhat thick: and let it not be hollow, so that it does not break.
If the root comes out with this, it is good: and if not, assistance must be given with these other instruments whose forms are these.
The form of the first triangular end, which has some thickness.
The form of the slender triangular end.
And with other instruments and tools which have been mentioned previously in the discussion of teeth.
Assistance is also given with this instrument which resembles a large hook, of this form, with a twisted triangular end, which has some thickness so that it does not break: and let it not be hollow.
And you shall know that the instruments of teeth are many: and likewise the other instruments are not counted, and the wise craftsman, subtle in his art, finds the instrument by himself according to what the operation and the illnesses themselves signify.
For there are bitternesses to which the ancients did not speak of an instrument because of the diversity of their kinds.
If however the bone is fractured from the jaw, or from other bones of the mouth, or it putrefies: then examine it in its place with what is suitable to it from the instruments and forceps which I have mentioned in the extraction of roots, and assist with a lever, whose form is this.
Let there be in it something of gradually increasing thickness, so that the bone may be grasped or held firmly, and not slip away, until the bone comes out: and restore the place with medicines appropriate for it.
If however there is a small putrefaction in the bone, then scrape it from its putrefaction, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter XXXII.
On the filing of prominent teeth above others.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural course, the appearance is marred by this: and especially when this happens in women and girls, that is, in public women.
Therefore, you should consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth and does not fit, or its filing or smoothing is not possible: then extract it. And if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose form is this.
It is similar to a small beak and is made of hardened iron with a very sharp end.
And let your cut be where you cut it over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that another of the teeth is not moved.
If it is prominent and requires filing: then file it with an iron file, whose form is this.
Let it be entirely of iron, and its handle of strong small points, like the file with which needles are made: with which the tooth is filed gradually over many days with ease, so that the tooth is not moved and falls out: then smooth it, at the end scrape it with some razors.
If there is a tooth from which a part is broken and it injures the tongue: then it must be filed until the roughness of that break is removed, and it is leveled: and flattened, so that it does not injure the tongue or impair speech.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
Regarding the rotation of teeth with gold threads.
When the front teeth are shaken and jarred by a blow or fall: and the patient cannot bite down on what he eats so it does not fall out: and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but the treatment was ineffective: then the method is to bind them with gold thread: for silver turns green and rots after some days: but gold never changes.
And let the thread be of medium thickness according to the size that fits between the teeth.
And indeed the form of rotation is that you take a thread and insert its double between two healthy teeth: then weave with the two ends of the thread between the moved teeth, whether one or more, until you reach with the needle all the way to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the weaving all the way back to the part from which you started: and hold your hand with subtlety and wisdom until it is not removed entirely: and let your constriction as you pull the thread be at the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
Then cut the excess ends of the thread with scissors: and bring together both ends, and tie them tightly: and hide them between a healthy tooth and a loose tooth, so that they do not hurt the tongue: then leave it thus tight as long as it remains.
If it loosens or breaks, tie them with another thread, and it will stay that way for the entire time.
And this is the form of teeth and the figure of rotation of two healthy teeth and two loose teeth, as you see.
And it sometimes happens that one or two teeth return to their places after falling out and are retained as we have described and remain: and none but a wise and experienced artisan can do this.
And sometimes a piece of cow's bone is adapted: and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in position, whereby the tooth is secured and tightened as we have said: and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Sometimes this ligament which occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which a person is born, or accidental, from an injury that has already solidified.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient in your hand, and lift his tongue: then cut that nervous ligament across until the tongue is freed from its restraint.
If there is something hard and knotted, and it is due to the consolidation of an injury: then apply a hook to it, and cut it across until you sever the ligament and loosen the knot.
And beware that the cut does not go deep into the flesh and sever an artery there, causing a flow of blood.
Then sew up the trace of the incision with rose water, or with vinegar, or cold water.
Then place under the tongue a strip of linen, which the patient should hold throughout the night: so that it does not solidify again.
If a flow of blood occurs, then place ground zeggium on the site. If the blood overcomes you, then cauterize the area with a mottled cautery that suits it: then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter XXXV.
Sometimes an abscess occurs under the tongue which resembles a small frog, preventing the tongue from its natural function: and it may grow so large until it fills the mouth.
And the operation is to open the patient's mouth towards the sun: and examine the abscess.
If then you see it is of a brown or black color, hard, to which the patient does not feel sensation: then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it inclines to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then apply a hook to it, and cut it with a fine scalpel, and free it from all sides. If the blood overpowers you during your operation, then apply ground zegi until the blood coagulates: then return to your operation, until you extract it with its entirety.
Then it should be treated with vinegar and salt: and care for it with the appropriate further treatment until it heals.
Concerning the treatment of abscesses of the two tonsils.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
Sometimes there occur between the throat glands, which resemble almonds that occur externally: and they are called the two tonsils: which when you treat with what we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then examine.
If then it is a hard abscess, of a brown color, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color, and its root is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing the flow of blood, but rather leave it alone until it ripens. And then either you will pierce it, or it will break open by itself.
And if it is of white color, round, and its root is slender: then it must be cut open.
And the procedure is such that before performing the operation, you should consider whether the warm abscess has completely subsided or decreased somewhat: then have the patient sit facing the sun, and let his head be in your lap: open his mouth, and let the servant take between his hands, and press his tongue below with an instrument, which has this form.
Let it be made of silver or bronze, which is fine like a knife.
When therefore you press the tongue with it and the abscess is revealed to you, and your sight falls upon it: then take a hook, and fix it in the tonsil, and pull it outwards as much as you can, along with some of the tissue.
Then cut it with an instrument, which has the following form. It resembles scissors: however, its ends should be curved so that the opening of each is directly opposite the other's point: hence, make sure it is made of hardened iron or steel.
If this instrument is not available, then cut it with a spatula, which has this form. Let it be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you cut one tonsil, cut the other according to this same type of incision.
Then after the incision, the patient should gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If bleeding occurs, gargle with water in which pomegranate bark has been boiled: or myrtle leaves, and similar astringents, until the bleeding is stopped: then care for it until it heals.
And at times, abscesses other than the two tonsils develop in the throat. Cut them accordingly as I have said in the incision of the two tonsils equally.
And I have indeed treated a woman with an abscess that had developed in her throat, which was drawing her to darkness, loss of senses, and nearly closed her throat: and the woman was breathing through a narrow passage, and it had already prevented her from eating and drinking water: and she had almost reached death, if it had lasted for one day or two days.
And the abscess had risen so much that it had sent out two branches, extending over the two nasal openings.
I hurried quickly and attached a hook to one of them. Then I pulled it, and a large portion was drawn out from it.
Then I cut it where it protruded from the nasal opening.
Then I did that which protruded from the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue. Then I inserted a hook into the abscess. Then I cut off part of it, and only a little blood flowed out. Therefore, the woman's throat was healed, and she began to drink water immediately, then took some food.
Therefore, I did not cease to cut from that abscess many times over a long period of time: and the abscess succeeded in place of what I was cutting, until it was extended too much and with it that condition.
I therefore devised and cauterized the abscess in the throat.
It therefore stood from the addition: then I walked away, and I did not know what God did with her after me.
Regarding the incision of an abscess on the uvula.
Chapter XXXVII.
When the catarrh descends to the uvula and it becomes abscessed and is long: then it is called perpendicular. And if it is thick and round in the lower part, then it is called a grape.
When it is treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment does not succeed: and you see that the warm abscess has subsided from it and is thin: then it is necessary to cut it open.
And if what is aggregated from it is round and does not have length, and is of a bloody or brown or black color, and does not have sensation: then it is necessary to avoid cutting it. For in it there is fear over the sick.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described by its whiteness and length, make the sick person sit before the sun: and press his tongue with the instrument of which I previously spoke: then insert the hook in the fold, and pull it down: and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for incising both tonsils.
And you must not cut from it except that which is added beyond the natural limit without addition.
For if you cut more from it, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use what we have mentioned in the incision of both tonsils: and care for it until it heals.
If the sick person is terrified of the incision: then you must use ingenuity in cauterizing it without fear and worry.
And the method of cauterization for it is not without sharp water: and it is to place the sick person's head in your lap. Then press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned. Then take of the water that I told you about in the chapter on cauterizing, and mix it with unextinguished charcoal, and make it not too thick nor too thin, and fill with it the concavity of this instrument, which has this form.
Let the end of it where the medicine is placed be concave, like the cavity of a spoon's bowl.
And place the instrument with medicine on the ulcer itself: and let the patient lie on his side, so that saliva may run from his mouth due to internal medicine, so that nothing of it descends to his throat and injures him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you should apply it to the ulcer for half an hour, until you see it already blackened, and the irritation of the medicine calmed.
And if you want to take a quill, and wrap it around the end of the rod, and pour the medicine into the quill, and insert the rod with the quill into the tube above, until the quill adheres to the ulcer.
Do this many times until you achieve what you wish from the cauterization of the ulcer. Then leave it: for it dried up and fell off after three days, or four.
If you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it: and after cauterization, clean around the ulcer with a quill soaked in butter, and cleanse with it what is around it from the medicine: and mix it with cold water.
And it should be treated externally with embrocations, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
Therefore, this method of treatment is more beneficial than incision and farther from fear.
And sometimes the ulcer is treated with something finer than cauterization and incision: it is treated with fumigation, according to this method. Take a reed, and hyssop, and origanum, and rue, and sesame, and chamomile, and southernwood, and similar ones among herbs: and gather all of them, or some of them in a pot, and let them be submerged with vinegar, and boiled: and the pot should be plastered with clay decently: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot on which a concave instrument is set according to this manner.
Let it be made of silver or bronze: and insert the end with the ball into the mouth of the sick person until the vapor rises to the throat above the tube, until the throat is greatly obscured.
Then apply it repeatedly on it until it dries.
And beware, do not perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of the abscess. For it usually increases the abscess: and you should not do this unless at the stage when the abscess is declining and becoming cooler.
If this instrument is not available to you, then take a cane, and attach a piece of ox horn to its end so that the mouth of the sick person is not burned: for the ox horn prevents the vapor from burning the mouth: and this is a good treatment that ensures safety.
Regarding the extraction of spines and bones from the throat.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
Often a fish bone or spine, or something else, adheres to the throat.
Therefore, you must extract what is apparent from them where the sight falls, after pressing the tongue with an instrument near the light, and it becomes clear to you what is in the throat.
And what is not apparent to you and hidden in the throat, you must make the sick person vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. For perhaps the attached matter will be expelled by vomiting.
Let the sick person swallow a piece of ginger, or the root of lettuce, or let them swallow a piece of dry bread: or take a piece of soft dried sea sponge: tie it to a string, then swallow it. When it reaches the place where the spines are, or the bone, and is pulled out, then it comes out.
If it does not come out with what we have said, then use an instrument made of lead according to this shape.
Let it be thicker than the radius for a moment, and at its end let there be a curvature, which he can introduce into his throat with ease: and let him hold his head raised upwards.
And let him be careful not to touch his epiglottis, so that he does not cause a cough, and push the bone or spine with it, or let the physician insert it with his own hand.
But what the sick person inserts is better: because of his knowledge of the location of the attached object: and push it downwards, or pull his hand upwards with the instrument, doing all this according to the amount prepared for him, until it comes out.
Regarding the removal of leeches.
Chapter XXXIX.
When the leech is treated with what I said in the division concerning treatment with medicines, and it does not help, then examine the patient's throat in front of the sun, or near the sun after you press his tongue with the instrument which I described to you.
If your sight falls upon a leech, remove it with a small hook, or with fine tweezers properly.
If it is not possible with them: then take a concave tube, and insert it into the patient's throat up to near the throat; then introduce a heated iron into the concavity of the tube. Do that many times: and let the patient abstain from water for the whole day.
Then let him take a vessel full of cold water, and open his mouth over it: and bring his mouth close to it, and let him not swallow anything from it: and move the water with his hand once an hour. For the leech immediately falls when it feels the water.
If it does not come out with what we have mentioned, then fumigate the patient with bugs, or with ashes using the instrument I described for fumigating the throat.
Do that many times, for it will fall.
And the method of operation in fumigation is to take a pot in which there are burning coals with fire: and the pot should be covered with a cover, in the middle of which there is a hole: and the end of the instrument should be placed in that hole.
Then throw the fumigation, and let the sick person put his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape, until you know that the fumigation has already reached the leech. For the leech will fall immediately.
If it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the sick person endure thirst, and eat salty foods, and garlic, and not drink water.
Therefore, it is necessary to proceed with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is extracted from the throat when it falls upon it by sight.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which is inserted into the throat. And the end of it is similar to the mouth of a bird which is called a stork, in which there is the roughness of a file: when it grasps something, it does not release it at all.
Regarding the opening of abscesses, their incision, and general care.
Chapter XL.
There are many kinds of abscesses, of various types, according to the recollection of them, that is, one and another in this book: and they are diverse in their puncturing and incision by two methods.
One is of the kind of abscess in itself and that which it encompasses from humidities.
And the second mode is due to the places where it occurs in the body.
For an aposteme occurring on the head is different from an aposteme occurring on the anus: and an aposteme occurring in a fleshy part is different from an aposteme occurring in joints: and each of them has its own judgment from the operation.
And among the apostems are those which should not be lanced until the pus in them is matured and complete: and among them are those which should be lanced while they are raw and do not mature according to completion.
Like the apostemes which are near the joints.
For when an aposteme occurs near a joint and extends to be part of it until what is around it putrefies, the ligaments or nerves of that joint may be corrupted: hence it is a cause nearer to the contraction of that member.
Or it is an aposteme near a principal member: for if you delay piercing it until it matures, it will harm either that member or the principal member through it.
Or it is near the anus, pierce it therefore while immature: and you should not lance an aposteme that is raw and undigested, unless it is near the anus, so that it does not putrefy deeply and extend to the interior of the anus, and become a fistula, or result in something at its end that cannot be healed.
You must know the time for lancing an aposteme that has matured according to completion: and this is when there is a subsiding of pain, recession of fever, and reduction in redness, and pulsation, and sharpness at the head of the aposteme: and other signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower part of the abscess, and of more prominent elevation: and let the perforation go along the length of the body, if the abscesses are in parts of hands and feet, and areas of tendons, and cords, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflection.
In those that are reflected, proceed with the perforation according to that member.
When the abscess is in fleshy areas: then it is better to leave the perforation until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to the completion.
For if you pierce it before that, the course of the pus is prolonged, and there is much filth and dirtiness, and perhaps its lips and depth may harden.
And some abscesses are pierced according to the width of the body in necessity: or according to what the member needs.
And it is necessary that you administer a small perforation in small abscesses, and a large perforation in large abscesses: or many incisions according to the similarity of the size of the abscess.
And there are abscesses in which it is necessary that the skin be scooped out: and cut when it has become like cloth, and reached the point where it is already dead: such as those that occur in many, like dubet and buboes.
And there are some that are cut with a three-angled incision. And from them is one by which it is cut like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Like the abscess of the groin.
And from them are those in which round incision and crescent-shaped incision are made: and similar to these from the incisions.
That which does not have a head, like mild superficial abscesses, should be pierced with a superficial puncture, or only flat.
And it is necessary, when the abscess is large, and has already collected much pus, and you pierce it, that you not hurry and extract all the pus at that hour: rather extract a part of it. Then cleanse the abscess until the next day. Then extract some of the pus again.
Do this repeatedly according to the progression, until it is expelled: especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an aged invalid: for the animal spirit is often resolved from the body with the discharge of pus: and perhaps the patient dies, and you do not perceive it.
Therefore, be cautious with this chapter with great care.
And after your piercing with which you pierce these abscesses, it is necessary to clean the wound: and observe. If the wound of the abscess is small, or it is a flat incision, then apply lint from linen, or old cloth. And if there is a large abscess, and many perforating cracks are present, then you must insert lint into every crack until they reach each other.
And if you have cut away part of the skin in an abscess, or scraped around it: then it is necessary to fill it with old felt, or as when a cloth is stitched, or shaved with linen down without moisture: and bind it until the third day.
Then discard it, and treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals.
If a flow of blood occurs during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after the cloth has been soaked in them: and place it on the site of the bleeding multiple times.
If the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary to administer treatment, and care, and powders, which I have described in many places in this book, and by division.
If it is during the winter season, and the site of the abscess is near many nerves: then it is necessary to pour powder with warm wine and oil: and place them on the areas.
And if it is during the summer, and the areas are fleshy: then it is necessary to place powders soaked in water and oil, or with wine and oil, and all of it should be cold. Until the third day arrives, as we have said, then it is necessary to open the abscess, and clean it, and administer what is appropriate for its treatment until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of the treatment of swellings universally.
According to the path of distinction, I have already spoken about every swelling, how the way to its cure is treated separately in chapters.
Chapter XLI.
On the incision of swellings that occur on the skin of the head.
Small swellings occur on the skin of the head, and they are of the kinds of Knots, which are contained in the membranes that serve as their sacks: they are like the fat of a hen.
And their kinds are many.
Some are fatty: some contain moisture similar to mud: some contain moisture similar to boiled dishes and poultices: and others similar to these, and some are hard like stone.
And in the incision of all of them and their removal, there is no fear, as long as an artery does not oppose at the site of their incision.
And the procedure in their incision is to examine them with an instrument whose form comes after this, which is called the Introducer, until you know what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then cut it with a longitudinal superficial incision: according to this form.
And begin the incision from line b to line g. When the moisture is evacuated, then scrape the cyst that contains the moisture, and do not leave anything of it entirely.
For it often returns if something of it remains.
Then submerge the cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is available: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day. For it will corrode what remains from the cyst.
Then repeat over the cloth with the second Egyptian method, and the third, and if you need it, until you are confident that nothing remains from the cyst, then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
If the abscess contains a fatty knot: then cut it according to this shape, with the incision having the form of a cross: and place hooks between the two lips of the incision, and scrape it from all sides: and attempt your skill in extracting the tissue that contains it.
If however the artery opposes you, then do what I will tell you next.
And similarly do for the abscess, if it is stony, by the same incision and treatment as we have said.
And the incision on a stony abscess is easier: because it contains little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are some of these abscesses that are on the head in certain individuals, which contain no moisture at all.
This is because I cut into an abscess on the head of an old woman, and found the abscess to be like a solid, hard, rough, white stone that could not be broken: and if anyone struck it, it would wound them.
In other swellings occurring on the head, besides these swellings which occur on the heads of children, and near the roots of the ears, the incision of all of them should be superficial.
Or make the puncture always from the lower part of them, so that the course of pus may be alleviated towards the lower parts.
Then care for it with what is appropriate for its treatment.
Regarding the incision of strophulas on the neck.
Chapter XLII.
These swellings often occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur on the rest of the body.
And regarding those that occur on the neck, there can be one or many: and they are generated from each other: and every strophula among them is within its own proper covering, just as it is with the knots and swellings of the head, as we have narrated.
And the types of these strophulas are many. And among them are stone-like ones: and there are those that contain moistures: and there are malignant ones that do not obey treatment.
In that one which you see among them of good disposition to the touch, whose color is clearly near the skin's color, and which moves to every part, and is not attached to the neck's nerves, nor to the vertebrae, nor to the artery, and is not deep: it is necessary to incise it superficially from the upper part to the lower part of the body along line b. to line g., and scrape it from all sides: and extend the two skin lips with a hook, or with multiple hooks if you need them, as we have said in the swellings of the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is for caution, so that a vein or nerve is not cut.
And let the scalpel not be very sharp: so that it does not add to your hand with the incision, or disturb the patient, and you cut what is not necessary.
If you cut a vein or artery and it prevents you from the operation, then apply ground zegi or certain powders that stop the flow of blood to the wound, and bind the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the inflammation subsides and the wound softens: or it begins to turn and wants to become putrefied.
For the blood is stopped with a bandage. Return to your operation until you complete it.
Then probe with your index finger if anything of the small Strophulus remains; then cut them and clean them.
If there is a large vein at the root of the Strophulus: then you must not cut that Strophulus from its root: rather, you must tie it with a strong double thread and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cataplasm that you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then care for it.
If the entire Strophulus is cut, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound: and sew it immediately, as soon as you see that there is no excess remaining.
If you see that there is excess remaining because of the size of the Strophulus, then you must proceed to cut its root and remove it: and apply the suture as we have said.
And which contains moistures from sties, pierce it with a superficial puncture: so that the site of its maturity may be apparent to you: and place the puncture from what follows next below in the body, as we said.
Then apply after the puncture a licinia with ointment, and similar things to it, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption, until when you see the wound already cleansed: then treat it with a flesh-generating ointment until it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
On the incision of the epiglottis caused by an abscess occurring inside the throat.
The ancients said this incision in the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it: and this is the writing of their words.
In those suffering from synanche, however, it is necessary to avoid incising the epiglottis: for no benefit is gained by that: therefore, because all the veins and lungs are weakened.
In those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no illness in the canal, it is necessary to use incision of the epiglottis, to avoid destruction which results from obstruction.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we should cut the epiglottis below three or four rings of the epiglottis, with a small incision in width, in what is between two rings by the amount that the section is in soft tissue, not in cartilage: and this place is suitable for incision because it is devoid of flesh, and blood vessels are distant from it.
If the surgeon is timid, then he must extend the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he should incise the skin until he reaches the canal: he should avoid the blood vessels, if he sees any of them.
Then he should cut the sifac that we mentioned: it is indicated by the discharge of phlegm from the canal when it is severed, and by the cutting off of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the time of suffocation is past, bring together the two edges of the skin wound, and suture only the skin itself without the cartilage.
Then apply medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Says Albucasis. The summary of this discourse that we have mentioned is not applicable unless they see that one of these abscesses has swollen the patient's throat: and the patient is raised above death, and wants his breathing to be cut off: they go to cut the Epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the wound site in some manner and be saved from death: and for this reason, they ordered to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed, and it lasts for three days or nearly so: then they order to suture the wound and treat it until it heals.
And what I have seen myself is that one servant took a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting with it a part of the windpipe.
And I was called for her treatment, and I found her groaning, as it is the groan of a dead person.
I uncovered the wound, and I found that the blood that had come out of the wound was little. I was relieved that she had not cut the vein, nor the gut; and wind was coming out of the wound.
I hurried and treated the wound, and cared for it until it was healed: and nothing happened to the maid except a hoarseness in her voice: and she returned after days to a better state of health.
Therefore, I say that there is no fear in the incision of the epiglottis.
Concerning the incision of the throat hernia.
Chapter XLIV.
This swelling named throat hernia is a large swelling according to the color of the body: and it is very common in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either it is natural, or it is accidental.
In the natural case, there is certainly no danger.
The accidental case occurs in two ways: one of which is similar to fatty knots. And the other way is similar to the swelling that occurs from the And there is fear in it, and one should not presume to approach it with iron unless it is small: and you should examine it and investigate it with the probe. If you find it similar to a fatty knot, and it is not hanging with any veins: then cut it like knots are cut: and extract it with what it contains from the cyst, if it is in a cyst: and if not, then examine all of it. Then care for the area with what is necessary for the treatment, until it heals.
Chapter XLV.
Regarding the incision on types of knots.
There are many types of knots, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division: and it is necessary that I explain here the difference between a knot and an excrescence: as it may cause confusion.
I say, therefore, that with an excrescence there is heat, and fever, and severe pains, until the effervescence of superfluities is calmed, and putrefaction is complete: for then the fever and heat subside.
With a knot, there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and they are contained in cysts called sifachin, which are their own sacs, and they are according to the color of the body: and their beginning is like a chickpea, and they grow like a batecha, being larger or smaller.
And they are of two types: either fatty: or containing moisture. And the colors of the moisture are many, according to what I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a knot, you should examine it and inquire about it first with an instrument called Intromissum, according to how its form will be presented in the chapter that follows this.
And the method of investigation of abscesses and all nodes is to take this instrument and insert it into the moister place that you find in the abscess: and you rotate your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has now penetrated the skin. Then move your hand according to the measurement of the size of the abscess.
Then withdraw what was inserted, and examine what comes out in its wake.
If then a flowing moisture comes out, whatever the color may be: then cut it with a superficial incision, as I have said in the case of other abscesses.
And if no moisture comes out in the wake of what was inserted, then you know that it is thick: therefore cut over it with a cross-shaped incision, according to this form, as I have taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and remove the skin from all sides easily: and keep the fistula, if you can, over it, so that you extract it along with the node.
If, however, the cyst bursts during the operation, and it is not possible to extract it whole, for this often happens, then remove it in pieces until nothing of it remains.
For if any part of it, small or large, remains, the node will return in full measure.
If it overpowers you and a small part remains: then fill the wound at the completion with certain sharp corrosive powders: bind the wound, and place over it something warm where the abscess sits, and care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If there is a large knot, then sew its two lips, and treat it with what causes flesh to grow.
If however there is a pulsating vein opposite you, or non-pulsating: then hurry, and fill the place with ground zegi, and leave it tight for two days, or three, until the wound putrefies, and the blood boiling ceases: then return to cut what remains of the Knot.
Chapter XLVI.
Regarding the outer instruments for cutting and piercing.
From these are the forms of introducers, and they are of three kinds.
From these, there is the large one, and from these is the medium one, and from these is the small one.
Let them be made from square-ended alfulud iron, appropriately, so that they may quickly enter into the abscess.
And these are the forms of the experiencers, and no, that is, the perforators: and one of them is named beris, that is, perforating: and they are of three kinds.
From these, there is the large one, the medium one, and the small one.
They are used to investigate abscesses, sinuses, fistulas, and buboes from what is between them of bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and blunt, like large needles with which chairs are sewn, from citrine, or from bronze, or iron, or silver.
And the better ones are those made from lemon.
And there is also an experience with black lead, which is used to test fistulas, whose concavities have reflections, so that they are reflected with their softness with those reflections.
And there are again three species. For from them there are long ones, from them medium ones, and from them short ones, according to the quantity of the amplitude of the fistula and its constriction.
The form of hooks, and they are of many species.
For there are simple ones among them, that is, those which have a single curvature: and they are of three species as you see, Large, Medium, and Small.
And there are blind hooks among them: and they are of three species.
And there are hooks having two curvatures among them, and they are of three species: and there are hooks having three curvatures among them, and they are of three species: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels, with which knots and abscesses are cut and skinned: and they are of three species: for there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
The ends of them with which the cutting is done are sharp, the other ends are not sharp: and they are not used in this manner unless to provide assistance in skinning knots near the fear of cutting a vein or nerve: and that through them the patient may be healed and find temporary relief from burning which is found in skinning abscesses.
They are made of copper, and they resemble a still with which alcohol is made: and at the wide end there are hidden points of spatulas: and through it runs to the inside, and to the outside when you wish, as you see.
The form of the spatulas which are hidden between the fingers for puncturing abscesses: and the patient does not feel them: and they are of three varieties, large, medium, and small.
Forms of lancets with which the flow of blood is cut off: and they are of three varieties, large, medium, and small.
They shall be made of copper or brass, round, to a moderate length, as you see: and they should be slender.
And it is necessary that you have these varieties of lancets, large and small: to cut off the blood quickly in an emergency, and then when medicine is not present for you.
However, do not use them to cut off blood from every part of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas: such as the thighs, hips, arms, nipples, abdomen, groin, and similar fleshy, moist parts.
And sometimes small instruments similar to the blades of knives are made from them according to their shape: with which blood is cut off when it flows from the place of bloodletting or from a vein or artery incision: and sometimes they are made round according to this form.
Chapter Forty-Seven.
The treatment of men's nipples which are similar to women's nipples.
Sometimes the nipples of some men swell at the completion of sleep (that is, when they begin to be polluted in sleep) until they resemble women's nipples: and they remain foully abscessed.
Therefore, whoever wishes to avoid this, should cut above the nipples in a crescent shape, according to this form from line b to line g. Then remove all the fat. Then fill the wound with a flesh-forming medicine. Then sew together the two edges of the wound, and care for it until it heals.
If the nipple inclines downward and softens due to its size, as happens with women: then it must be cut on both of its upper sides with two similar crescent-shaped incisions, each of which is connected to the other at the ends of each, until there is a larger line containing a smaller one, according to this form from line b to line g. Then remove the skin that is between the two edges, and take away the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders, which is necessary for the cure, until it heals.
If you cannot complete the incision that you need to make due to the restlessness of the patient or due to blood flow: then you must fill the wound with a sponge soaked in a corrosive ointment, and leave it until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then care for it until it heals.
On the puncturing of an abscess, which occurs under the armpit.
Chapter XLVIII.
These abscesses which occur under the armpit are of the hard species of Strophularia, which contains cysts, and from them come those that contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut with a crescent-shaped incision, according to this form, from line b to line g. When all the pus in the abscess has been evacuated, then fill it with old lint and leave it until the next day.
Then remove the lint and treat it with a suitable ointment until it heals.
If the abscess is of the hard knot species of Strophularia, then incise it as we have said in the section on incising Strophularia equally.
If the wound extends to discharge pus, then apply a cautery to it as we have said in what has been previously stated.
Chapter XLIX.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs due to an Artery and Vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes hardened, an abscess often results from this. Similarly, it happens with veins, resulting in an abscess and swelling.
And the signs by which it is known that the swelling and inflammation are due to the Artery and Vein are: for when the swelling is due to the artery, it is long, gathered in the depths of the body: and when you press the swelling with your fingers, you feel as if it were making a hissing sound.
And that which is due to the Vein, is round on the surface of the body.
And to cut on this swelling is an error, and especially so when it is under the armpits, and groins, and neck, and in many parts of the body: and it is very large. Therefore, the care of it should be avoided with iron, and what is also in the extremities or in the head should be avoided.
Therefore, for that which comes from the swelling of the arterial opening, find a cut in the skin in length. Then open the cut with hooks, then the artery; and free it from the tunics until it is uncovered.
Then insert a needle under it, and make it penetrate all the way to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, according to which I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples.
Then pierce the area between the two ligatures with a scalpel until all the blood within it comes out and the swelling is resolved.
Then apply treatment that generates pus until the ligatures fall off: afterwards treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to the cutting of a vein, then you must hold with your hand as much of the abscess with the skin as you can. Then insert the needle under the place you are holding with your hand, and make it penetrate: and let there be double thread in it until you draw it out from the other side. Then tie it with the abscess with a good binding: according to what I told you about binding a grape, from two sides with the two ends of the thread.
If you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert another needle with another thread under the entire abscess at the needle's incision: press and hold your threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in its middle until what is inside comes out: then cut off the excess skin, and release what was tied from it.
Then place on it the poultice which you have submerged in wine and oil. Then administer the treatment which is done with plasters and ointments until it heals.
Chapter L.
Regarding the abscess that occurs from the twisting of nerves.
As an abscess occurs in arteries and veins, so does an abscess occur in nerves: which happens to them through percussion or excessive labor and similar causes: and it most often occurs in places like the helper joints or heels, and in any place where joints are moved: and it is a severe abscess.
Its color resembles the rest of the body, and it is in most conditions without pain: and when it is squeezed with vehemence, the patient feels a sensation similar to stupor.
And it is not a deep-seated abscess in the body, but rather it is under the skin, and it can be moved in all directions, nor does it move forward or backward to the rear.
Therefore, what is present at the joints should not be penetrated with iron. For perhaps a contraction may occur.
In those cases where it is on the head or on the forehead, incise the skin with a scalpel. If it is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and scrape it: then remove it, and close the wound with stitches: and care for it until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-One.
Concerning the incision of an abscess that occurs in the abdomen.
Sometimes, many people experience growths in their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, called Fungalia, named by similarity to fungi.
Their root is subtle, and their head is large, and their lips are turned outward. And some of them are small: and some of them become greatly enlarged.
And indeed I have seen a man, and in his abdomen were two tumors, which were more like mushrooms than other things: there was no difference between them, white, small roots, and their lips were inverted, and ended, and moisture always flowed from them.
So I cut them, and found one to weigh nearly ten and eight ounces and the other nearly six ounces. And the operation in cutting them is such that you should then consider if the patient is moist, and the color of the tumors is white, moist, with fine roots: then cut it with a broad spatula, and have cautery irons ready in the fire.
For often much blood is expelled at the cutting of it: therefore hurry if the blood overcomes you, then cauterize it.
If you see the patient fearful and timid about being cut with the iron, then take a properly made lead wire, and tie it around the tumor: its size is as we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then add to the lead binding. Therefore, do not stop binding with lead whenever it presses on the tumor, until it is severed and falls off by itself without effort.
If the tumor has a thick root, then there is something to fear and be anxious about in its cutting, especially if it is in the abdomen.
However, it is possible to cut through half of it. Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then care for it until the wound heals.
And beware lest you presume to incise the tumor which is of a dark color, has little sensation, and an ugly appearance: for it is indeed a cancerous abscess; and I will come with a reminder of Cancer after this.
Chapter LII.
On the treatment of the navel prominence.
The navel prominence occurs for many reasons. Or from fissures of the sifac, which is above the belly: and althub or intestine protrudes from it, according to what happens in other hernias. Or from the blood that flows from a vein or an artery, according to what has been mentioned. Or from wind confined in it.
If it is due to a fissure of the sifac and the protrusion of thirbi: then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body: and it is soft, without pain: and its position varies. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its position is much more diverse than what we have mentioned. When you press it with your fingers, it disappears: then it returns, and there may be a sound with it: and it swells greatly at the entrance of the bath, causing much labor.
If it is due to moisture, then it is soft and does not disappear when you press it with your hand, nor does it retract or increase.
And if it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess appears black on the slope.
And if it is due to flesh generated: then the abscess is heavy, thick, hard, and fixed according to a single quantity.
And if it is due to flatulence, then its touch is gentle.
And the procedure is such that you should then consider if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of Arteries, or Veins, or flatulence: then you must refrain from its treatment. For there is fear and dread, as I have taught you in the chapter where I said about abscesses due to artery and vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the colon: then you must advise the patient to hold their breath and stand stretched out. Then mark with cautery around the entire navel. Then advise him to lie supine in your hands on his back. Then circle with a broad spatula around the navel over the place you marked with cautery. Then extend the center of the abscess upward with a large hook. Then bind him tightly around the circumference with thread or with silk cord firmly: and let the knot of the binding be strong.
Then open the center of the extended abscess above the binding. If you find it already caught by a ligament: then extract the hernia, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the abdomen: and if you find a polyp, then take hold of it with a hook, and cut off its excess.
If however the artery or vein is opposite you: then tie it tightly around. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and insert two strong threads into them: and insert the two needles around the area you made around the abscess in the form of a cross, which you make to penetrate.
Then bind the abscess at four points above the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the area until the extended flesh putrefies: and falls off by itself: or cut it when it becomes thin and putrefied.
Then treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to hard flesh in it or moisture: then it is necessary to hollow out the abscess as we have said. And extract the blood or moisture that you find in it.
Then treat it with what consolidates the area.
Chapter LIII.
Regarding the treatment of CANCER.
We have already spoken about the classification of types of cancer and how to approach its treatment with medicines: and we must be cautious when treating it with surgery so that it does not become ulcerated: and we have discussed cancer generated in the uterus and precautions for its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes the Cancer is in a place where its removal is possible: such as Cancer which is in the breasts, or in the thigh, and those similar, from parts located for extracting all of it: especially when it is beginning small.
When however it becomes old, and is large, you should not approach it.
For I could not heal anyone from it: nor have I seen anyone before me who has reached that.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we have said, is to proceed and release the patient from black bile several times. Then bleed it if you find it with obvious fullness.
Then prepare the patient for the preparation in which he is placed for the operation.
Then throw into the Cancer hooks that are suitable for it. Then scoop it from all sides with the skin, according to the exploration, until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, but press the areas, and wipe all the thick blood with your hand, or with whatever is possible there from the instruments.
If, however, the thick blood flow from the incision of an artery or vein opposes you, then cauterize the vein until the blood is stopped. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
Regarding the treatment of dropsy.
Chapter LIIII. We have already narrated in the division of the types of Hydropisis, and how the aggregation of water occurs: and the signs of every type, and its cure with medicines.
And that which is treated with iron is only the asclitis type alone: and it is not approached with iron in the timpanitis type: nor thoroughly in the hyposarcae type: for that is mortal.
When you have already treated this type of Hydropisis timpanitis with medicines, and your treatment has not helped: then consider. For if the patient has already acquired weakness, or there is another illness with him besides Hydropisis: such as if he has cough, or diarrhea, and similar to these: then beware of treating him with iron: for there is fear in that.
But if you see a patient of abundant strength, and there is no illness with him besides Hydropisis alone: and he is neither a child nor an old person: then the method of operation is as follows, that you lift the patient standing between your hands, and a helper behind him should press his belly with his hand to drive the water to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a spine-like spatula according to this shape. Let it have two sharp ends, long, with an acute tip like a spatula. However, let there be some gradual shortening in it, so that you do not penetrate with it during the operation all the way to the intestine and damage it.
Then consider. For if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, then it is necessary to extend with a cut from the navel by the length of three fingers, towards the lower area directly above the pubic bone.
If however the generation of dropsy is due to illness of the liver: then let your cut be to the left from the navel by three fingers.
And if its generation is due to the spleen, then the cut should be on the right side: and it is also not appropriate for there to be a cut on the side on which the patient wishes to lie, so that the excess fluids do not flow to that weak spot.
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument. Then insert into that incision, and lift your hand with the spatula between the skin and the sifac, as if you are flaying it: and let the amount that is flayed be the size of a nail, or about that.
Then pierce the sifac until the spatula reaches the empty space: and that is the location of the water. Then extract it, and insert into the opening an instrument, which has this form. And it is similar to a cannula: made of silver, or brass, or bronze, smooth, polished: which has at its lower part a small opening, and on its sides are three openings, two from one side, and one from the other side: and the face is its cut end, according to the manner of cutting a reed, as you see: at its upper end is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it descends immediately upon the instrument, therefore evacuate from water in an hour a medium quantity.
For if you evacuate more than is proper from it, perhaps the patient may die in an hour by the dissolution of his animal spirit; or he may suffer a syncope that approaches death.
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what the dispositions of the patient signify to you from the strength of his pulse, and from its goodness.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water.
Which is because it is retained immediately due to the skin which holds the hole that is on the syringe; of which I have spoken, so as to pierce it according to that method.
Then repeat the procedure the next day, if you see the patient tolerate it: and also evacuate a small quantity from the water.
Do this for several days without fear, and guard against error: until there is only a little of the water left.
But if you fear for the patient and leave much of the water: then care for him with burial in warm sand, and much sweating in a bath and sun, and let him thirst: and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed: and cauterize over the stomach, the liver, and the spleen, after the extraction of water: as I have spoken in what precedes.
Regarding the care of infants who are born with their urinary passages not perforated.
Chapter LV.
When one of the infants exits the womb of his mother, and his meatus urinis is not perforated, or there is a narrow opening, or it is not in its proper place.
Therefore, it is necessary to intervene with the piercing of it immediately upon birth with a very fine spatula, according to this form.
Then place a thin pin made of lead in the opening and tie it: and keep it there for three days, or four.
When he wants to urinate, it should be removed, and he will urinate. Then replace it.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area may prevent it from closing.
He whose opening is narrow is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it is enlarged.
Those in whom the opening is not in its proper place are injured. This is because, in those who are born with it, the opening is at the end of the head of the penis: therefore, he cannot urinate forward until he lifts the penis upward with his hand. He cannot procreate because the sperm cannot reach the matrix properly: and it is a very foul disease.
And the method of the operation is to have the patient lie on his back. Then extend the head of the rod with your left hand strongly, and cut the head of the rod from the priapi place, with a sharp point or an acute scalpel: like the cutting of a reed, or as you root something, so that its middle comes similar to the head of the rod: and so that a hole falls in the middle according to what is necessary.
And be careful during your operation from blood flow. For it often happens that. Therefore, apply to it what stops the blood, and treat the wound until it heals.
Regarding Albather, which occurs in the foreskin and head of the penis, and corruption, blackening, and adhering.
Chapter LVI.
These Albathers often occur on the penis, and they are protrusions of ugly flesh.
And from them, some are malignant, and some are not malignant.
Therefore, if it is not malignant, you should suspend it with a fine hook and cut it off until you cleanse it entirely. Then place upon it a poultice soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then treat it after that with diaphrynion ointment until it heals.
If the Albather is malignant and of ugly color, then you should apply a cautery to it after its incision and treatment.
If however Albather is on the foreskin of a captive, not circumcised, and there is part of Albather within the foreskin, and part of it outside: then you must remove the Albather which is inside first, until when it consolidates, then care for the outer part: because when you care for both at once, the foreskin does not heal without being pushed forward.
And it also happens that in the testicles and foreskin there is blackening and corruption. Therefore, you must scoop out all that is already blackened, and what is about to be corrupted, or is already corrupted.
Then apply on it after that honey which has been mixed with the flour of pomegranate rind and crushed sieve herbs.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
If however a blood flow occurs, then apply the cautery with a crescent-shaped cautery, according to this form.
For cautery is beneficial for two conditions simultaneously, namely for blood flow and a wound when it becomes corrupted.
If the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour: then you must insert a lead tube into the urethra so that the patient may urinate over it.
In cases where the foreskin adheres to the head of the penis, and this adherence does not occur unless in one whose foreskin is healthy and does not require circumcision: and sometimes it happens due to a wound or an abscess: therefore you must scrape it with a blunt spatula until the bond is loosened and the head of the penis is freed on all sides.
And if it is difficult to distinguish them precisely, then it is necessary to remove something from the head of the rod, and from the foreskin. Which is because the foreskin when it is thin, perhaps is pierced quickly because of its thinness.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the rod with a fine linen cloth that has already been moistened in cold water, so that they do not stick together again.
Then it should be treated with astringent wine until it is healed.
Chapter LVII.
Regarding the cleansing of infants and the treatment of errors that befall them.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other wounds; however, since it is by our operation, by our will, and its use is properly for children, it is necessary that we mark in it a better operation and a lighter way leading to healing.
I say, therefore, that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
Which is because I have found the majority of surgeons and phlebotomists to use cleansing by circumcision with a lancet and scissors: and they use cauterization, binding with thread, and incision with a scalpel.
And indeed, I have already tested all these methods and have not found a better one than cleansing with scissors and binding with thread.
For in the cleansing with the knife, the skin often escapes. For the skin of the foreskin has two layers: therefore perhaps the upper skin is cut, and the lower layer remains: thus it is necessary to make another incision to cut the other, causing future pain. And with the cleansing which is done by alfecti, that is, awls, which tailors use, the end of the male member is not cut: because it might enter its opening.
In cleansing with the hoof, perhaps the iron slips and ruins your operation: and the skin of a boy is short by nature, and often they are born in such a way that they do not require cleansing: and I have already seen this.
However, the cleansing with scissors and tying with thread has proven to be a good experiment for me: because the scissors are proportionate to the incision: therefore, the sharpness which is above is like the sharpness which is below. When you press your hand, the two sharp edges are aligned, and they cut according to a single operation at one time: and a compression of similar shape is made, holding the skin of the rod from all sides, with which there is no error at all.
And the method of the operation is to make the boy understand, especially if he is one of those who comprehend quickly, that you do nothing but tie a thread on his rod: and leave him until the next day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every way possible for you, according to what his understanding receives. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and let him not be seated: and conceal the scissors in your sleeve, or under your foot, so that the boy does not see them at all, nor any of the instruments.
Then insert your hand to his rod, and blow on the skin, and pull it up until the head of the rod comes out. Then clean it from the filth that collects on it.
Then bind the marked area with double thread. Then tie below it temporarily with a second bandage. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower bandage firmly, and cut between the two bandages. Then lift the skin up quickly, and extract the head of the rod. Then let the blood flow gradually (for it is better) and put powder on top: and above the powder a cloth in which is spread the yolk of an egg boiled in rose water, mixed with good fresh rose oil: and leave it on until the next day: and care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
The form of the scissors for cleaning is this.
Let the two ends be blunt and inclined: so that the branch of the nail does not protrude: and let the length of the two sharp edges be equal to the length of the two handles.
The error occurring in cleaning is: because the inner skin may entirely or partially escape at the incision.
Therefore you must extend it with your fingernail from the area before the formation of an abscess: and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract it with a hook, and cut it.
If three days have passed and what is under the nail remains swollen, having formed an abscess: then leave it until the hot abscess settles, and remove the scab with ease, and cut it according to how it is prepared for you: and beware of the tip of the nail. For it will not harm it.
Treat it with what consolidates the wound from the powders, which we have discussed in the chapter on powders: and if it is cut beyond measure through the skin and extends to deeper areas, it will not harm it either.
Treat it with what we have said until it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
Regarding the extraction of retained urethral fluid in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to obstruction caused by a stone, or coagulated blood, or pus, or generated flesh, and similar things from those methods of treatment we mentioned in the division.
And if the urine does not resolve and you see that its retention is due to a stone already present in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over on his knees. Then let his feet be placed upon his back, and let him stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back, and let the sick person hold his breath as much as possible for him. Therefore, it is drawn with the neck of the bladder for the expulsion of the stone to the rear: hence the urine is discharged.
If it is not resolved by what we have said and the condition is severely affecting the sick person: then you must administer its extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver, and be fine, smooth, hollow like the tube of a bird's feather in fineness comparable to a ray, long to the length of one and a half palms: it should have a fine tube at its head.
And the method of urine exiting through it is to take a doubled thread, and tie wool or cotton at its end with a good knot: and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and cut with scissors if there is any excess wool, but insert it into the tube forcibly, like an alzer.
Then anoint the syringe with oil or butter, and egg white: and have the sick person sit on a seat, and inject the bladder, and its rod with moist oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the rod easily until it reaches the root of the rod.
Then double it above the part of the navel.
Then push the syringe inside until it reaches the bladder, and let the sick person feel that it has already reached the empty space: and this is not done according to this order unless because the passage through which it goes is twisted.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. For Vrina will follow the wool.
Then withdraw it, and make Vrina run through the urine passage: and repeat the syringe, and do not cease to do this until the bladder is evacuated, and the patient finds relief.
Regarding the quality of bladder irrigation with a clepsydra.
Chapter LIX.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or blood congeals in it, or pus is compressed within it, and you wish to distill water and medicines into it: then it should be done with an instrument called a clepsydra, and this is its form.
For it is closed, that is, sealed. And in it there are three holes, two on one side, and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave area, in which is placed that which pushes, should be according to the size that fits it without addition, until when something is drawn with it, moisture is attracted: and when it is pushed, it is expelled far away: as a clepsydra does, from which naphta, that is, Greek fire, is projected in battles.
When you wish to project moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clepsydra into the moisture, and draw with it that which pushes upward, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clepsydra.
Then insert its extremity into a rod, according to what we have narrated in the syringe. Then push the moisture with that which pushes it, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, so that the patient feels it.
The form of a subtle clyster with which the bladder is cleansed.
Let it be made of silver or brass, whose head should be higher and similar to a small alcamah, and below it there should be a groove in which the ligament falls.
Then take the bladder of a ram and put the moisture in it with which you want to cleanse the bladder. Then tie it between two grooves with a strong ligature and double thread: and warm that moisture slightly over the fire.
Then insert the extremity of the clyster into a tube, then press your hand over the bladder with a proper tightness along with the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder available, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle out of it, and pierce it all around its circumference. Then insert a strong thread into those holes as they turn. Then assemble the circle as you would assemble a sibling: after you place in it what you wish from moistures, oils, and waters.
Then tie it to the instrument: and do with it as you did with the bladder by pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
On the extraction of Stone.
We have already discussed the classification of stone types and its treatment with medicines: and I have mentioned the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and the bladder, and the signs of it all: and I have spoken of the stone on which manual operation and incision is performed: and this is the stone properly generated in the bladder: and that which is embedded in the penis: and I am narrating this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
I say therefore, that the stone generated in the bladder most often affects children.
And from its signs is that urine exits the bladder similar to water in its fineness: and white sand appears in it, and the patient rubs his penis, and labors with it, and hangs down frequently. Then it rises, and the anus protrudes with it in many of them.
And the healing is easy for children up until they reach fourteen years. And it is difficult in the elderly. In young adults it is moderate, being between the two extremes: and the larger the stone, the easier the treatment: and if small, the treatment is conversely more difficult.
Therefore, when we arrive at the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with aclyster that will expel all the feces in their intestines: for it sometimes prevents the discovery of the stone during the examination.
Then the patient should be taken with his feet and shaken, and moved downward: so that the Stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder, or jump from a height several times.
Then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be under his hips, so that the bladder may be entirely inclined downward.
Then examine him, and touch him externally.
If therefore you feel the Stone in the space, then immediately proceed with the incision over it.
If it does not fall under your touch at all, then you must clean the index finger with the oil of your left hand if the patient is a boy: or the middle finger if he is a full adult: and insert it into his anus, and search for the Stone until it stands under your finger: and gradually turn it toward the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger, and push it outward toward the location where you wish to make the incision: and command one attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and command another attendant to lift the testicles upward with his right hand: and with the other hand, to move away the skin that is under the testicles from the site of the incision.
Then insert the sharp spatula, whose shape is as follows. And find the area between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, but to the left side of the buttocks: and make the incision over the stone, with your finger in the anus: and let the incision be transverse, so that the outer part of the incision is wider and the inner part narrower, according to the amount that the exit of the Stone from it should not be larger.
For perhaps the finger compresses the stone at the site of the cut, and it exits without difficulty.
And know that from the stone which has angles and edges, its exit is made difficult because of that.
And from it is smooth, similar to a gland, and round: and its exit is made easy.
Therefore, for the one that has angles and edges, add to the fissure.
If it does not exit thus, then you must be ingenious with it: either grasp it with forceps properly, the end of which is like a crescent, which grasps over the stone and does not slip away from it; or insert under it a delicate instrument with a curved end.
If, however, you cannot grasp it thus, then enlarge the opening slightly. If anything from the blood overpowers you, cut it with a scalpel.
If however there is more than one stone, then first push the larger one towards the bladder opening. Then incise over it. Then push the smaller one after that; and similarly do if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then it is unskilled to cut it with a large incision. For it happens to the patient one of two things, either that he dies, or there is a continuous dripping of urine; because the place does not heal entirely.
But administer the expulsion of it until it comes out: or extract pieces of it from the fracture with scissors until you have removed it bit by bit.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with frankincense, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it, and place upon it cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: so that the hot pus may be set.
Then lay the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. When therefore you loosen it, moisten the area with water and much oil.
Then treat it with dyafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals.
If however a hot pus and corroded substances and things like them happen in the wound: such as if blood congeals in the bladder and urine is prohibited by it: and it is known from the discharge of blood with urine. Insert therefore your finger into the wound and draw out that blood. For if it remains, it causes the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt: and treat it with whatever is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And it is necessary during the entire course of treatment to bind the two thighs together for the purpose of the medicines that are placed on the area.
If the stone is small and is in the channel of the penis, and it is fixed there, and the passage of urine is prevented: then treat it as I describe before you reach the stage of cutting. For often you will be spared from cutting through this treatment, for I have already proven it.
And it is that you take the perforator from alum iron, whose form is this, with a triangular end, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a string and tie it to the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the perforating iron into the penis with ease until the perforator reaches the stone itself: and rotate the perforator with your hand on the stone gradually: and try to penetrate it until you make it go through the other side.
For the urine is discharged immediately.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outer part of the penis. For it breaks apart and exits with the urine, and the patient is healed.
If this treatment is not prepared for you, due to something that prevents it: then tie a string below the stone and another string above the stone. Then cut above the stone on the penis between the two strings. Then extract it. Then untie the ligature and clean the clotted blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone, unless so that it does not return to the bladder: and another binding above, unless when the thread is loosened after the exit of the stone, the skin returns to its place, and covers the wound: and for this reason you must do this when you tie the upper thread, so that you raise the skin upwards, so that it returns at the completion of your work, and covers the wound, as we said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of stones in women.
A stone is rarely generated in women.
If however a stone should occur in any of them, then the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited due to many methods.
One of them is: that the woman may be a virgin.
And the second is, that you do not find a woman who will expose herself to a physician, when she is chaste, or among those who have husbands.
The third is that you do not find a woman well skilled in this art, especially the manual procedure.
And the fourth is the distance from the location of the stone: therefore it requires deep incision, and there is fear in that.
If necessity provokes to do that, then it is necessary to take a woman physician, well skilled: and she is rarely found.
If you are deprived of that, then seek a chaste and subtle physician, and present a well-educated midwife in women's matters, or a woman who understands part of this art: therefore make her present, and especially entrust to her to do everything you instruct regarding the examination for the stone.
First of all, he should see if the woman is a virgin: then he must insert his finger into her anus and seek the stone.
If he finds it, he should press it with his finger, and then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and search for the stone, after placing her left hand on the bladder and compressing it firmly.
If he finds the stone, then he must gradually move it from the opening of the bladder downward with all his strength until he reaches the root of the hip with it.
Then he should incise above it at the midpoint of the vagina near the root of the hip, on whichever side the stone is felt: and his finger should not be removed from the stone, pressing under it; and let the incision be small at first. Then he should insert a probe above that incision.
Then he should insert a probe above that incision. If he feels the stone, then he should increase the incision according to the amount proportional to how the stone exits from it.
And you should know that there are many types of stones. Among these, there is a small one and a large one, a smooth one and a rough one, a long one, and a round one with branches.
Know therefore its types, so that it may be indicated to you by this regarding what you desire.
If the blood overcomes you, then apply ground zegi to the area and keep it for one hour until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out: and do so that you prepare with you of the instruments which I said in the extraction of the stone in men, to help you through them in your operation.
If the flow of blood overcomes you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery which has been cut: then place powder on the place, and bind it with linen in a suitable binding: and do not change it: and leave the stone, and do not extract it. For perhaps the weak woman will die. Then care for the wound.
Therefore, when the sharpness of the blood is calmed after days, and the place becomes putrid, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter LXII.
Regarding the incision of a watery hernia.
Watery ramex is not present unless there is an aggregation of moisture in the sifac album, which is under the skin of the testicle containing the egg: and it is named sifac.
And sometimes it is in its own little pouch, which nature has prepared for it in the part of the egg until it is rotten: which is another egg, and it is the skin of the testicle between the sifac album, which we mentioned: and that does not occur except rarely.
And the generation of this ramix is from the weakness that befalls the testicles: therefore this material is poured out to them. And sometimes it happens from a blow on the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. For its color either tends towards yellow, or it is blood red, or foul black, or it is water white, and that which is more.
And the signs by which it is known where the collection of water is, are these. For if there is in the white scrotum that we mentioned, then the abscess is round in length somewhat like the figure of an egg: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in its own small pouch, then the abscess is round like a part of an egg, and because of this, a person thinks that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white scrotum, then it becomes noticeable.
When therefore you wish to know the color of the moisture, then test the color of the moisture in the abscess with a square probe, whose form has been mentioned previously. According to what appears after the insertion of the probe, judge about what is inside it.
When therefore we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to advise the patient to be bled if it is possible for him, and you see his body full.
Then he should lie on his back on something slightly elevated, and place many cloths under him.
Then sit you on his left, and command the servant to sit at his right, who extends the rod to one of the two sides of the scrotal skin, and to the mirach part of the belly.
Then take the broad lancet and cut the scrotal skin lengthwise through the middle, nearly to the pecten: and let the incision be made according to a straight equidistant line which divides the scrotal skin until it reaches the white sifac covering: and peel it away, and beware from this so that you do not cut it: and let your peeling be on the part which hangs more with the egg: and carefully examine with the peeling as much as is possible for you.
Then pierce the water-filled sifac with a wide puncture, and draw out all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the sifac upwards, and do not touch the scrotal skin that encloses: and cut the sifac however it is possible for you to cut it, either in its entirety or piece by piece, especially the thin side of it. For if you do not examine it carefully, safety is not achieved in its incision, lest the water returns.
If the egg protrudes outside its skin during your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the sifac, reduce it. Then bring together the two lips of the scrotal skin with suture.
Then care for it like other wounds until it heals.
If you find an egg corrupted by other blackness, then it is necessary to tie the vessels which are the suspenders, fearing the flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with the suspender, and extract the egg: then care for it as we have said.
If water has gathered in two parts, then know that there are two branches: cut the other part accordingly as you did in the other equally.
And if it appears to you that the operation is one, then do as follows: afterwards clean the blood. And introduce into the incisions wool soaked in oil, or in rose oil: and place outside another wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles, and the abdomen: and put on top doubled cloths, and they are poultices: and bind them with a bandage that has six according to this form.
Then let two cloths be taken, and sweated, and filled with crushed la na according to this likeness: and the ends by which it is pressed should be made of chamois or wet wool: and they should be gathered together with a binder at the waistband of the breeches: and one end should cover from the anus up to the back, and the second end should cover towards the hip area: and the two ends above on both thighs below, and the other two ends over the two groins, and the whole binder should be gathered together at the waistband of the breeches.
And sometimes this ramex is treated artificially with a cautery instead of incision with an iron: and it is as follows, take a delicate knife-like cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles with it: and it is ignited, as we have described: until when the white membrane containing water is revealed: then take the cautery according to this form.
It is assimilated to the Greek letter.
Then pierce it with that knife, and ignite it until all the moisture escapes.
Then extend the knife with hooks, and scar it with a fine ignited cautery, and cut it as much as you can until you root out all of it.
And be careful with the egg, lest the fire touch it.
And you should know that this operation is safer, farther from blood flow, and better than the operation with incision.
If however something opposes you at the time of incision, or at the time of cauterization, such as a warm aposteme, or blood flow, or something else: then you must treat what opposes you from that with a cure suitable to it, according to what has been stated.
If however the patient is timid and does not endure this operation due to its horror: then administer the piercing as I describe it, and proceed.
When it is confirmed to you by what we have said about the significations that the flux is watery: then it is necessary to make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then pierce the aposteme on its lower part with a broad spatula: and make the piercing according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until all the water flows out.
Then place a poultice on the area, and bind it, and leave it so that the remaining water may flow out: then treat it until the wound heals.
If however the obstruction is to the flow of water at the time when you pierce it: and this is not due to anything other than that the white membrane causes an obstruction at the opening of the wound, and prevents the exit of the water: then it is necessary to insert a quill into the wound, or an instrument with which the water of dropsy patients is extracted, whose form has been mentioned previously: or add in the operation of the wound temporarily.
And you should know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, or around that time. When it therefore accumulates, then it should be pierced in the same manner, and the patient will spend his days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the treatment of fleshy ramus.
Know that in the cutting of this ramus, there is great fear leading to peril in many conditions. Therefore, it seems to me that its dismissal is salvaging from it.
And I remember the procedure on it and the appearance of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses occur in the body parts from which the testicles are composed: and this happens for many reasons, namely.
Or from acute or sharp excess that is discharged toward the testicles. Or from percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found in it: and it is a heavy abscess.
And perhaps it is a stony abscess, whose color is dark, and it has no feeling.
And sometimes it occurs from the knotting of the arteries and their swelling: as has already been mentioned: or from the swelling of the veins.
That which is among them from the swelling of the arteries is recognized by the condition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers. And you should not touch it at all.
That which occurs from the swelling of the veins does not disperse anything when compressed with fingers.
And now it is possible that a section may be made on this type and on the other flesh: and it is as if you were to cut the skin of the testicles. Then extend the egg upward, and extract it with a white suture: and free the suspensory ligament from the vessels, and tie the vessels: and cut the suspensory ligament after you free it from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is consolidated with those flesh parts that have grown, then you must pull the egg and cut it.
And if there is adhesion between something of the suture, or in what is between the vessels: then you must free that entire adhesion and cut it with a circular incision.
If there is flesh growth in the area of adhesion which is behind: then you must cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said.
When therefore your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine: then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter LXIIII.
On the care of shoots, which is done with vines.
Witis is a hidden swelling wrapped in a certain folding, similar to a botr, with a softening of the testicles: and it makes movement and exercise difficult for the patient, as well as walking.
And in the treatment of this illness, there is fear, because of that which preceded and was remembered.
However, we must say the treatment for it according to what the first practitioners did.
I say, therefore, that you should have the patient sit on an elevated seat. Then push the suspensory of the testicles downward. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, near the vessels that are close to the stem: and another assistant should hold them and stretch them forcefully.
Then make a transverse cut with a broad and sharp spatula directly across the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
Then remove the outer layer from all sides, as we have told you in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert a needle with double thread into them, and tie it at the first location where Witis occurs: and tie it again at the last location. Then cut it in a straight middle section according to the length of the body, and extract what gathers from corrupted feculent humidities.
Then treat the wound with the treatment of other wounds, in which pus is generated, so that the vessels nourishing one of the testicles fall. For it is not evil through that.
If the Vine affects all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove the testicles with the vessels: so that the egg is not deprived of nourishment due to the incision, and does not waste away or dry out, and is not rendered useless by them.
Chapter LXV.
Regarding the treatment of intestinal branches.
The outcome of this branching is from the incision that occurs in the extended sifach over the belly in the groin area from the mirach of the belly.
Therefore, the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture is either from the sifach or its extension.
And these two types occur from many causes: either from a blow, or jumping, or shouting, or lifting a heavy object, and similar actions.
And the sign is when it is from the extension of the sifach. It occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly: and it is an equal swelling towards the depths: therefore, because the sifach compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it when it is from the cutting of the intestine, because it causes a sudden and intense pain at the beginning: and it is a different swelling appearing near under the skin: and that is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and its course to the exterior intestine.
And sometimes it comes out with the intestine twisted: and this is called Intestinal Ramex, and twisting: and sometimes it happens with flatulence.
And sometimes the feces enter the intestine and are retained there: and it is harmful to the patient: because it causes severe pain, especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this kind of illness with iron there is fear: therefore one must be careful of accidents in it.
And the method of the procedure is to instruct the patient to return the intestine with his hand to the inner cavity, if it obeys the return. Then lie him down on his back between your hands: and raise his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin upwards, and cut the entire skin of the testicles along its length. Then insert hooks into the two lips of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with them: and the incision should be of such quantity that it is possible for the egg to come out of it.
Then remove the outer layer of the sifak and what is under the skin of the testicles until the white, hard sifak is revealed on all sides: then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, between the white sifak that is under the egg's skin, and between the second sifak, and loosen with it the adhesion that is at the back part of the egg.
Then move with the right hand the skin of the testicles towards the inside: and with this extend the white saph with the left hand upwards: and raise the egg with the saph to the part of the incision: and command the assistant to extend the egg upwards: and you release the adhesion, which is at the back after complete separation.
And seek with your fingers that there is nothing there of the intestine wrapped in the hard white saph. If however you find anything of it: then push it downwards towards the abdomen.
Then take a needle with thick thread, made linen from ten threads: and insert it at the last saph, that is, of the tunic, which is under the skin of the testicles following the incision: then cut the ends which protrude from the thread until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them over some in the shape of a cross: and tie with them the white saph, of which we spoke, because it is under the skin of the testicles tied very strongly, until none of the vessels that nourish them can send anything to them: so that a hot aposteme does not result from it. And place another ligature outside the first ligature, less than two fingers away from it. And after these two ligatures, release from the saph that is under the skin of the testicles a quantity equal to the size of a finger: and cut the rest entirely according to its roundness, and remove the egg from it.
Then cut in the lower part of the skin of the testicles where blood and pus flow: as we have described in what has been mentioned before.
Then apply wool soaked in oil, and place on the wound: and apply the bandage which we mentioned. And sometimes the white swelling which we mentioned is cauterized after its incision, fearing the flow of blood. For it often happens. And remove the bandage, until it falls off by itself.
If however its falling off is delayed, then bathe it with warm water: and apply to it what we mentioned, until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with the rest of the treatment for wounds, until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
Regarding the windy ramus.
In this windy ramus, I have not seen anyone who has dared to attempt its treatment with iron.
And at first, they said that it happens as we have mentioned in the ramus that is with the vine. Which is to bind the vessels after cutting and easily apply something over them: then cut in the middle, and finally treat it with what opens it, until the vessels fall off: and treat the wound as we have said, until it heals.
Chapter LXVII.
Regarding the rupture that occurs in the groin.
When rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and the area protrudes, and nothing of the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, it is only a little, and it returns at all times: but if time is prolonged with it, a fissure is added to the swelling, until the intestines descend into the swelling.
And it happens from the stretching of the sifach, which is in the groin, as we said. Which is because the sifach is stretched: then it is softened, and the area becomes apstedematous and prominent.
And its treatment is with a cautery, as was previously narrated.
And sometimes it is treated with an iron, according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on their back under your hands. Then cut the swollen and prominent area of the rupture with a horizontal incision, according to the length of three fingers.
Then grasp the alsifak and what is under the skin until the white sifach is revealed, which is under the skin that follows it.
Then take the probe and place it on the prominent area of the sifach, and press it deeply into the abdomen.
Then sew the two prominent areas above the end of the probe from the sifach together with a suture; then remove the end of the probe.
And do not cut the alsifach at all, nor stretch the egg, nor anything else, as I made you know in the treatment of intestinal rami.
Then treat it with the treatment for wounds. When you cut the stitches, clean it, and dress the wound until it is healed.
For the sifach contracts, and does not add to the prominence of the rupture.
And the cautery is better in this place: because it is closer to healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in some men, because of which the flesh between them is also softened, and its appearance is marred.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat it to make the patient lie on his back and cut away all the softened skin down to the natural skin.
Then bring together the two lips with a suture: and if you wish, first remove the excess of the softened skin with three or four sutures, and secure the suture firmly.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then treat it as you would other wounds until it heals, and the threads fall out.
Chapter LXIX.
On castration.
Know that castration is excommunicated in our law: and because of this, it would be permissible for me not to mention it in my book: and there is no need to mention it, except for two methods.
One of which is that it should be known by the doctor when asked about it: and so that he may know its treatment if it happens to someone.
The other reason is that we often need the castration of certain animals for our benefit through them, such as rams, goats, and cats, and similar animals.
I say therefore, that castration is performed in two ways. Or by rubbing. Or by making an incision and cutting.
In that which is done by rubbing, the way of the operation is: that we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and relax and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and do not appear under touch.
In castration by incision and cutting, it is necessary to hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then ligate the suspensorium, and cut above all the egg with one cut, until when two eggs come out: then incise them after you have skinned each one, and do not leave anything on them except a fine suture over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than the one done by rubbing: because rubbing may leave some part of the testicles, whereby the animal lacks desire for intercourse.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy.
Regarding the treatment of hermaphrodites in two methods.
A hermaphrodite is of the male according to two methods. One of them is that there appears between the testicles, on the skin of the testicles, a figure resembling a female vulva, with hair: and sometimes urine flows from that part on the skin of the testicles.
In women, however, there is one type, and it is the woman's womb above the comb like a man's small testicles entirely, protruding to the outside: of which one is like a man's penis, and two like two testicles.
And the treatment for the three types, two from men, and one type from women, is: because it is necessary to cut the excess flesh until the impression of them disappears. Then treat them with the treatment of other wounds.
In the second type of men, from which urine exits, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment for it at all.
Chapter LXXI.
Regarding the incision of tentigines, and protruding flesh in women's wounds.
Tentigo perhaps adds itself above the natural part, until it becomes disfigured and its appearance is
Therefore, you must hold the excess of the flap with your hand or with a hook, and cut; and do not delay in cutting, especially at the deep root: so that blood flow does not occur.
Then care for the wound itself until it heals.
The flesh arising is the flesh that grows at the opening of the womb until it fills it; and it may extend outward in the likeness of a tail; and because of this, some first call the ailment tailed. Therefore, we must cut it as we cut the flap, and care for it until it heals.
On the treatment of alraatica, which is an unperforated female ulcer.
Chapter LXXII.
Alraatica is an unperforated female ulcer, or a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental alraatica results from a preceding ailment: it may occur due to added flesh growth, or if fine or thick; and it can form either in the depth of the womb, on its sides, on its upper part, or lower part: it prevents intercourse and conception, childbirth, and may also prevent menstruation.
And its diagnosis is made by the obstetrician's observation if the obstruction is clearly apparent.
If it is not apparent, then seek it with your fingers or with a probe.
If, however, the swelling is from a fine boil and it is close to the two lips: then hurry and break it open.
And it is that you place small particles on the two lips.
Then place your fingers of both hands simultaneously, and the woman should be on her back with her legs spread apart. Then extend the two lips with force until the fine boil is broken and the swelling is opened.
Then take wool, and soak it in oil, and place it on the area: and the woman should apply it every day so that the area does not heal in another way.
If, however, the boil is large and thick: then it is necessary to cut it with a broad spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
If, however, the swelling is from flesh grown, then suspend it with hooks, and cut it: and let there be with you medicines that stop the flow of blood without mordication, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and frankincense compounded with egg white.
Then apply a large lead cannula so that the wound does not heal quickly, keep it for several days: and apply lint from dry linen, then treat with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
And sometimes other flesh growths arise in the matrix: therefore, they must be cut according to this method: for it is not a cancerous abscess; no opposition should be made with iron at all for a cancerous abscess that is in the matrix.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and red botches in the pudenda of women.
Hemorrhoids are the opening of vein orifices, from which much blood flows continuously.
When hemorrhoids become old, they turn into tumors: and I have already spoken about their types and signs: and here I will say which of them can be cured, and which cannot.
I say that hemorrhoids which are at the opening of the womb and are not apparent to the senses: then there is no cure for them with iron.
Those among them that are at the opening of the womb and which can be sensed are those that can be cured.
Therefore, it is necessary to put the woman in a cold room. Then extend the hemorrhoids with scissors, or with a coarse cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then powder over them at the flow of blood from one of the powders of caustics without biting: such as acacia, dragon's blood, frankincense, and similar substances.
Then press her feet against the wall for one hour. Then place her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists, then have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate rind, oak galls, and similar substances.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice with it on his back.
If therefore the blood is cut with it, it is good: and if not, make suction blisters adhere to his back without scarification.
Then take wool, and soak it in the juice of tarathit, or the juice of arnoglossae, or the juice of alaulat branches, that is, agaricus, Pontic wine, and make it adhere to the place.
When therefore the abscess rests, then treat the area with ointments until it heals.
Albarth red is similar to the heads of alhaasse, and it has a rough appearance.
Therefore, you must cut what appears from it, according to what I said in thethlil equally: and treat it until it heals.
Chapter LXXIV.
Regarding the perforation of the uterus that occurs in the matrix.
Many types of abscesses occur in the matrix, such as cancer, stone abscess, ulcers, adubelati, alekilati, that is, herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and ragadiae, and thelil, and hot abscess.
And indeed I have already spoken of all these illnesses and their types, and their signs, and their treatments in the division: it is necessary that I speak in this treatise about the hot abscess that occurs in the matrix, when it is among those abscesses that collect pus, and you wish to know how its opening is made with an iron.
Therefore, you must consider. Then if the pain of the abscess at the beginning is sharp with its percussion, and flame, and fever: and you see it reddening: if sensation falls upon it, then do not hurry with its puncture: and treat it with what aids maturity, until when the sharpness of the symptoms subsides.
Then it is necessary to have the woman sit on a seat that slopes down two seats, and recline, or lie on her back, and bring her feet together towards the lower part of her abdomen: and let her thighs be spread apart, and place her arms under her knees, and bind each with a suitable ligature.
Then let the midwife sit on the right side and administer the instrument with which the womb's opening is dilated.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument, that you insert with the sound the depth of the woman's womb: so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the womb, and injures the patient.
If the instrument is longer than the depth, then it is necessary to place small pieces on the covering of the womb's depth: so that the entire entry of the instrument is prevented from entering into the depth of the womb: and it is necessary to set the spiral that runs in the instrument, from the upper side: and to hold the instrument, and for the assistant to turn the spiral until the depth of the womb is opened.
Therefore, when the exit is apparent and is touched by hand and is soft and tender: then it is necessary to cut it at its head with a broad spatula.
Therefore, when the pus is drained, then you must place on the wound a linen soaked in rose oil: or green oil, which has some astringency: and place the linen, and remove the incision deeply in the matrix.
And place externally on the matrix, and on the comb clean wool soaked in water, in which sloes have been boiled.
Then it should be treated after two days with an ointment that is suitable for it, until it heals.
And sometimes the matrix and the wound are cleansed by being irrigated with water and honey: then with water in which the root of lily or long aristolochia has been boiled: then return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden inside the matrix, then you must refrain from treating it with iron, but rather treat it with what we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXIV.
Teaching on Obstetrics, how live embryos should be treated that have been expelled in an unnatural form.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know first the natural form of childbirth.
From its signs, therefore, it is that when you see a woman compressed in the lower parts, and she desires to breathe in air, and is relieved by what is on her from the labor, and the exit of the embryo is hastened: then you know that this birth is according to the natural form, and its exit is head first, with the afterbirth following it: or hanging, or dangling from the navel.
When therefore you see these signs, then it is necessary that his belly be compressed so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when it descends over its head, the afterbirth descends with it, and it is cleansed of those excesses by a good cleansing.
Whoever is beyond this birth is unnatural, unpraiseworthy.
For sometimes the fetus exits on its feet, and its body comes out before its head, and one of its feet or hand; or its head and hand come out; or the umbilical region comes out: and it may turn around its neck, and similar unpraiseworthy configurations.
It is therefore necessary for the obstetrician to be wise and subtle in all these matters, and to beware of error and deception: and I am showing every configuration among them, and how the method is in it, and what it signifies, and to stand by it.
When the fetus exits on its head by its natural exit, and it becomes violent for the woman, and the birth becomes difficult for her, and you see that her strength is now weakened: then make her sit on a seat, or let women hold her: and fumigate her womb with boiled fenugreek and with moist oils.
Then the obstetrician should insert a small spatula between her fingers, and open the afterbirth with it, and cut it with her nail until what is inside in moisture comes out: and press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then the woman must be given an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil.
Then instruct him to be compressed after the enema: and make her sneeze with condisi, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour. For the fetus will come out immediately.
If two hands of the fetus come out first, you must gradually and easily return them. If it does not obey at the entry, then place the woman on a seat and lift her feet up: then shake the seat on the ground: and the woman should be held so that she does not fall during the shaking.
If therefore the hands do not come out and the fetus dies: then cut them and extract the remainder of the fetus: and tie its hand with cloth, and extract it equally: for it will come out.
The embryo exits on its feet. When the fetus exits on its feet, then it is necessary to push them upwards: then gradually turn the fetus: afterwards equalize it.
Then take one of its feet and gradually extend it.
When they come out up to the thighs, then instruct her to be compressed, and make her sneeze with condisi: for it will come out, if God wills.
And if it does not come out with what we have mentioned, then gradually return the fetus until you place it according to its natural form. For it will then come out with an easy exit.
If it is prevented with all that we have mentioned: then take from the mucilage of orache, and oil of sesamin, and gum dissolved: and pound all in a mortar well: then anoint with it the womb of the woman, and below her belly. Then make her sit in warm water until she achieves hypochondria.
Therefore, when you see that her lower parts are already warmed, then make for her a sieve of myrrh: and place it. When she holds the sieve for one hour, then make her sit on a seat. Then make her sneeze: and hold her mouth and nose: and press the lower part of her belly with a gentle pressure. For the fetus will come out immediately.
The exit of the fetus is over the knees and hands. When it exits in this manner, then she will gradually bear the insertion of her hands. Then the woman should lie back on her neck, and let her feet hang down below: and she should be lying on the bed, and clasp her hands. Then press above her belly gradually. Then remove what is under her feet from the pillows until she is prepared on the lower part. If the fetus does not come out, then take her feet, and move them with a vigorous motion. Then press what is above the hypochondrium gradually, until the fetus ascends to the upper regions. Then he should insert his hand and gradually align the fetus: and instruct the woman to compress herself until the fetus exits.
The exit of the fetus hanging transversely from the hands. Skill will be required in the reduction of his hand. If he cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed: and shake her legs with a violent shaking.
Then apply the liniment that you have prepared from mucilages.
If labor begins for her, then make her sit on a seat. Then attend to the reduction of the hand, and align the fetus according to its natural form: and make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to compress herself until it exits.
The exit of the fetus over its neck, with hands spread out, and its face is toward the back of its mother. The midwife must hold the hand of the fetus, then gradually revolve it and align it with ease.
When it is aligned, then place on its mouth what we have mentioned made from oil and mucilages.
Then instruct her to move gradually. Therefore, when you have done that, then make her sit on a seat, and command her to lean to the right side. Then command her to hold it in: and make her sneeze when you apply it.
The exit of the fetus prepared on the side. When it descends to the opening of the matrix in this manner with the afterbirth, then tear the afterbirth with your nail until it is emptied of moisture.
If it is suspended over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it is not retained, and causes death.
Then push the fetus inside until you place it as is proper: and command the woman to compress herself several times: for it will come out with a slight effort.
The exit of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born: and sometimes three, and four are born. However, that is unusual, and rarely happens.
Five is beyond nature, and they do not live at all: and a single afterbirth contains them, although they multiply, separated by a membrane, distinguishing the tied umbilical cord of each of them.
And sometimes they exit like a single fetus does in a natural, easy birth: and they exit in an unhonorable manner, as we have described.
If some of them are difficult at birth, and they reach what we have said about unnatural forms, then treat them as we narrated: and let it be by a subtle midwife, and she does what is done with ease and slowness, and adapts according to every form with what is prepared for her, guided by skill leading to health.
Remember what is formed in the womb from embryos and is aborted.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb: and it has already been verified by me that a woman aborted seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
That which was done by the measurement of the glorious wise man.
Therefore, all of this must be known by the obstetrician. For perhaps she may encounter something similar to that; therefore, let her oppose it with what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
Regarding the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with what I have said in the division on medication, and it does not exit, and you are compelled to use manual operation, then you must consider.
If therefore the woman is of sound health, and is not affected by any of the conditions from which loss is feared for her: then the woman must be placed on her back on a bed, with her head inclined downwards and her legs raised: and an assistant should hold her on both sides, or she should be tied to the bed, so that her body is not pulled during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the matrix with wet oils mixed with marshmallow, and fenugreek, and flaxseed.
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages; then she should insert it into the matrix with ease. Then she should seek with it the place where she can fix the hooks into the fetus, and the suitable places for that.
Consider then if the fetus is prepared to descend headfirst: then fix the hooks into its eyes, or into its neck, or into its mouth, or into its palate, or under its chin, or into its collarbone, or into places near the ribs, and under the hypochondria.
If, however, the descent is feetfirst, then into its hips and its middle ribs.
And it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand: and place its curvature between the fingers of her left hand: and insert it with ease, and fix the hook in one of those places which we have mentioned, until she reaches the empty space.
Then she should fix another hook opposite it, or a third one if needed: so that the contraction is equal, and does not lean to one side.
Then it should be extended with equal tension, and not only in a straight line, but it should be moved in all directions to ease its exit: as is done with a tooth during its extraction.
And it is necessary that in the area between those parts, the tension be softened. If any part is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint certain fingers with oil and insert them so as to turn with them what is retained.
If therefore a part of the fetus comes out, then change the hooks to a higher place: do this until the entire fetus comes out.
If therefore the hand comes out first and it is not possible to reduce it due to its constriction: then it is necessary for a cloth to be wrapped over it. Then extract it until it comes out entirely, cut it either at the ankle joint or at the elbow: and thus you should do with the other hand and with both feet.
If however the fetus's head is large, or it encounters constriction upon exit, or there is water collected in its head: then it is necessary to insert a spathile with spikes between the fingers, and split open the head with it, and draw out the water: or break it with an instrument called Almisdac: whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
Similarly do if the fetus has a large head, then it is necessary to cut with an algengematu: or extract it with a misdach, as we have said. Then attract the bones with forceps.
If the head comes out and is constricted at the forking point: then it should be split open until the moisture in the chest is released.
If however it does not become unentangled and does not obey the exit: then cut the head piece by piece, according to what is possible for you.
If there are abscesses in the lower part of the belly, or if there is dropsy in it, then you must pierce it until the fluid flows out.
If the fetus is on its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its orientation towards the maternal canal is simple.
If it is constricted at the belly or chest, then you must extract it with a cloth which you wrap over your hand, and cut open the belly or chest until what is inside flows out.
If the other limbs are removed and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the maternal canal is open, then she should insert her hand deeply into the womb and seek with it the head, and pull it with her fingers until the head reaches the opening of the womb: then insert one hook or two hooks into it, and pull it with them.
If the maternal canal is constricted due to a warm abscess that has occurred in it, then one should not labor over it. Instead, one should administer a flow of moist and fatty substances, and apply plasters, and sit in waters that soften and moisturize.
If the fetus is on its side, then it is possible for it to be aligned: then administer what we have said for a living fetus.
If it is not possible to do that, then it should be cut piece by piece and extracted.
And you must not leave any part of the afterbirth inside at all.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then administer what we said about hot abscesses which occur in the wombs.
If a flow of blood should occur, then bathe in astringent waters, and administer the rest of the treatment.
And I indeed have seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus; then she conceived another one over it; afterwards, another fetus also died. Therefore, after a long time, an abscess occurred in his navel, and it swelled until it opened, and began to discharge pus.
I was called therefore for his treatment, and I treated him for a long time: and the wound did not heal.
I therefore applied to it some strongly attracting plasters: and the bone came out from the place. Then after some days had passed, another bone came out. I was therefore amazed at this, since there should not be bone in the belly.
I therefore thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
I therefore examined the wound and extracted many bones, with the woman being in better condition: and she has lived thus for a long time, and discharges only a little pus from the place.
And I did not establish this foreign matter here unless there is knowledge in it, and assistance for what the skilled physician administers by hand in treatment.
Chapter LXXVII.
On the forms of necessary instruments in the extraction of the fetus.
The form of the end by which the matrix is opened.
Here below is the form of the Tightener, with which books are bound, having two equal ends at the extremities of two pieces of wood. However, this end should be finer than the tightener: and it should be made either of ebony or of buxus wood.
And let the width of the entire wood be almost two fingers: and the margin of each of both is almost one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half: and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two additions of the same kind of wood, which are already fixed in both, whose length is a half palm and a little more: and the width of each is almost two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the matrix, so that it may be opened with them when you turn the two ends.
Another form similar to that one, finer and lighter.
Let it be made of ebony wood or buxus wood, according to the likeness of forceps. However, at its end there should be two additions, as you see here above: and the length of each addition is almost a palm: and the width of each is two fingers.
Therefore, when you wish to open the matrix with it, then have the woman sit on the bed, with her feet hanging down, and with what is between her legs exposed. Then introduce these two connected additions into the womb: and you are holding the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with scissors, equally according to the amount you wish from the opening of the womb's mouth, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of another vertigo which the ancients called the form of the impeller, by which the fetus is propelled.
The form of Almisdac, by which the large head is crushed: and it resembles a forceps, which has teeth at the end, as you see.
And sometimes it is made elongated, like forceps in this form, as you see, which has teeth like the teeth of a saw, by which it cuts and crushes.
The form of a hook having one spine.
The form of a hook having two spines.
The form of a spatula having two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two broad spatulas.
All these instruments are used, and the more their types are multiplied, and they are prepared by the artisan, the quicker they are for their operation, and they are more esteemed among people because of their quantity.
Therefore, do not disdain any of them so that an instrument may be prepared for you. For the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Chapter LXXVIII.
Regarding the extraction of the afterbirth.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, then you must instruct the patient to hold her breath. Then make her sneeze with condisi: and place your hand over her mouth and nose. If it exits through this method, it is good.
If not: then take a pot and pierce a hole in the cover. Place herbs that open the matrix os in it, such as reed, rue, dill, chamomile, savine, lign aloes, and centaury. Take all these herbs or some of them, submerge them in water, and place them on fire.
Then place a reed tube over the hole in the pot's cover, and put the other end in the os of the matrix: and hold it until the vapor reaches the cavity of the matrix.
Then make her sneeze, as we have said. For the afterbirth will exit with ease.
If it remains after this treatment and does not exit: then instruct the midwife to dip her hand in sesame oil or marshmallow mucilage. Then insert into the wound, and seek with it the second. When therefore he finds it, then let him take it and stretch it out gradually.
If however it is attached deep in the womb, then let him insert his hand as we have described, until he finds the afterbirth, and extract it gradually in a straight line so that the womb does not fall due to forceful pulling: rather it must be shifted with ease to the right and left sides; then increase the amount of pulling. For it obeys then, and is preserved, and escapes from adhering.
If the mouth of the womb is constricted, as we have already mentioned: treat it with sneezing and with the medication of a pot with herbs.
If however it does not come out with all that we have mentioned, then beware lest you fatigue yourself with repeated attempts at extraction.
But it is necessary that what comes out to the mouth of the womb from it, you tie to the woman's thigh. Then cleanse her with an ointment of tetrapharmacum. For it will(Note: The translation was supposed to be in English, the last part was mistakenly translated into Chinese. Here is the correct English translation.)
However when it becomes putrid, a bad smell rises to the stomach and head, and it harms the weak one. Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be administered for that.
Some of the ancients have already experienced the fumigation of mustard and dried figs.
The form of the instrument used for fumigating a woman in cases of retained afterbirth and menses.
Let it be made from a vessel like alcama, or from horn: and the wider end should be placed over the fire: and the fumigation should be placed on the coals: hold it until that fumigation is consumed: and repeat with another.
Chapter LXXIX.
Regarding the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many children are born with anunas that are not perforated, which can be opened with a fine probe. Therefore, the midwife should perforate it with her finger: and if not, she should pierce it with a sharp spatula: and she should be careful not to touch the nerve.
Then place wool soaked in wine and oil on it. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If you fear it may close again, then place a lead tube in the opening for many days, and remove it when the child needs to defecate.
And it also happens that the anus is blocked due to the healing of a wound or an abscess. Therefore, that consolidation must be cut, then it should be treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
Chapter LXXX.
On the treatment of fistulas which occur in the lower part.
Fistulas which occur in the lower part are Nodulation and Swelling which happen near the anus externally: or in the space of one part: and it is one Fistula or multiple.
When that nodulation becomes old, it opens, and a watery white moisture or thin pus runs out of it.
And sometimes these fistulas are penetrating. Therefore, penetrating ones are recognized by what exits with excrement and flatulence, when the patient has a bowel movement: and perhaps worms may exit from them.
And among these are fistulas when they are in the space penetrating as far as the bladder, and as far as the urethra. And among these are those that penetrate as far as the hip joint, and as far as the coccyx.
From which it is known that a penetrating fistula reaches the anus, and differs from a non-penetrating one, is to insert your index finger into the anus: and to insert a thin probe made of air, or iron, into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
If there is a twist in it, then insert into it a thin thread of lead or a hair from horses' mane until you feel the thread or hair with your finger.
If you do not feel it thoroughly, and nothing comes out of the opening from discharge, nor gas, nor worm as I said: then know that it is not penetrating: therefore hurry to the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates to the bladder or to the urine passage: then its indication is the discharge of urine from it, and the prevention of consolidation of the area with medicines.
If it penetrates to the hip joint or to the hip bone: then the sign of this is that the probe reaches there, if there is no twist up to the bone: and the discovery of pain around the part, and that pus always comes out from it: and that treatment is not effective, nor does it consolidate with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all: and the treatment of them is labor and vanity for him, by foolish doctors, upon whom it is formed.
In that which is not penetrating and not old, healing is hoped for with a scalpel: according to what I narrate to you, and I have already tested: and it is that the patient lies on their back under your hands: and lift their legs up above their hips, and their hips should be inclined towards their abdomen. Then insert a thread of lead or brass if there is a twist in the fistula until you know where the thread reaches.
If however he feels it weak around the anus, then you must insert your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel the thread has already penetrated by itself through the detected area, besides what you feel between your finger and the surface or the flesh: then therefore you know certainly that it is penetrating: do not therefore labor over it, for its healing is not possible, as we said.
They said, however, that the flesh is healed in some men and from the treatment in which hope of help lies is to ignite a fine cauterium according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before, and insert it ignited into the fistula until it reaches around the anus. Then do this again twice or three times until you know that all those additional filtered flesh parts, which are like the hollow tubes of a bird's feather, have been burned away.
Then treat it with lint wrapped in butter until the burned flesh comes out: then treat it with ointments that generate flesh and strengthen.
If therefore it is healed, it is good.
And if not, then it will never be healed with any other treatment.
And if the thread comes out and does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and there is a thick veil of flesh or membrane between it and the thread: and you see the fistula following the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you go cutting with the thread that is in the fistula until the incision reaches where the end of the thread is, and the thread is freed and falls out.
Then clean those filtered flesh pieces which resemble a bird's feather tube so that nothing remains from them.
If the blood overcomes you and separates you from your operation so that you cut those flesh: then it is better and quicker to heal by cauterizing it with fire or with sharp medicine.
For the cautery with fire brings good properties, the burning of those added flesh, and the cutting off of blood, and the drying of moistures.
Then treat it with lint wrapped in butter, or crushed fat, until the place emits pus, and those burned flesh come out with the pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments, producing hard flesh: and there are medicines that have astringency and drying properties.
For when they are restored, then it is already healed: and you do not fear repetition.
If however the fistula has already reached deep into the anus, and extends from the excess of the body: then insert your finger into the anus, and explore with it.
If therefore you feel a tent, and between you and it there is a veil of sinew or flesh, and it is close to penetration: then there is no operation in that place unless according to the way of confidence and hope.
Which means that one of the three methods is applied to it: either you cauterize it as we said: or you cut it until you reach its concavity, so that it is possible for you to insert lint and apply treatment close by. And do not proceed much with the cutting so as not to cut the tendon containing the anus, and involuntary loss of stool occurs in the patient. Then treat it with what we have said.
For it may be healed: or you may remove the covering itself, and clean it after you cut it close to the anus, as we have said, either with a probe, or with another instrument of sharp end. Then clean the filtered flesh that is in the incision as far as you can with probing.
Then attempt the restoration of the entire wound with the incision, and the upper opening where it is consolidated: and the fistula remains open on the inner part of the anus, and it will be milder for the patient.
And sometimes the fistula is sutured in this manner: and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with the skin and margin of the anus: then take a probe with a perforated end, which is like a tanner's needle, that is, of those who prepare hides, in this form. And insert into it a thread wrapped from five threads, and around it. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its concavity.
If it penetrates into the inner margin of the anus nearby, then pull the thread out from that opening: so that you insert your finger into the anus and pull out the end of the thread, and bring both ends together: and hold both tightly, and leave it for one day, or two days: and the more the thread cuts into the flesh, hold it tight until the flesh between the two ends of the thread is cut and falls off: then treat the wound until it consolidates and heals.
If however the opening of the fistula is not penetrating then make it penetrate in whatever way is prepared for you unless it is very deep. For it is not in you to do that because of the flap, so as not to cut it.
Then do with it as we have said until it heals.
The form of the thorny spatula with which the fistula is split, whose curvature is very sharp, and the other part is not sharp, so as not to cut what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter LXXXI.
About the suturing of hemorrhoids, from which blood runs from their incision: and the treatment of fissures.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways. For they are either inside the anus, resembling coal sacs or ember sacs, or they are like individual grape grains. And among them there are small ones and large ones: and blood runs from them always, and there is one, and there are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those which are outside the anus are mostly lacking in moisture, from which yellow water or a little blood runs continuously: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is inside the anus is to instruct the patient to dilate: and to express until the anus protrudes, and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Therefore, hang them with hooks: or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
If however they do not hold the hooks, because of their moisture and softness: then take them with a coarse cloth, or with a mitten made of woolen material, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut them, and sprinkle on them after the cutting certain hot powders, to serve in place of a cautery. Or cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterizing. Then care for them with the rest of the treatment until they heal.
If the anus does not obey evacuation, then administer an enema to the patient that contains a slight irritant, so that it cleanses what is in the anus and obeys evacuation quickly when the patient expels it.
If however the growths are external to the anus, then their treatment is light and easy: it is as you take them with your nail, or you take them with a hook, and cut them. Then care for them with what we have said until they heal.
And for those who shrink from incision with iron, then it is necessary to administer their stitching according to this method. Take the wrapped thread and insert it into the needle. Then pull the growth upward, and make it penetrate with the needle at its root from the other side: and wrap both ends of the thread around the lower part of the needle, and let them be horizontal: and bind the growth with a strong tie. Then tie the thread, and remove the needle.
Do this with all the athelil, and leave one of them untouched: do not heat it, so that the excess blood may flow from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote over the anus, and put it on the anus: and instruct the patient to rest. Then leave it until it falls.
When the athelil fall, care for them with ointments and the rest of the treatment until they heal.
Regarding the treatment of fissures. For they often occur from the dryness of the stool and the constriction of the bowel movement.
When they become old and medicine does not heal them, then it is necessary to scrape with the edge of a scalpel or with your nail until they become moist, and remove the outer layer that prevents them from healing. Then care for them until they heal as necessary.
If they do not heal, then scrape them more vigorously than before until they bleed heavily, and remove the outer layer; then care for them until they heal.
Regarding the treatment of inverted and non-inverted almirmar, and dry athelil, and ants.
Chapter LXXXII.
Know that almirmar is nothing but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a nail: and it occurs throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and toes: and pain occurs from them while walking.
Therefore, what is around the nail should be cut and held with scissors or with a hook and pulled out from its root.
Then care for it: and if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been precedented in its chapter.
From the dry athelil there is a small prominence, rough, filtered, round on the surface of the body. And they often occur in the hands of children.
And the treatment is to stretch the athelil and cut it, or tie it with silk thread, or with hair until it falls. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been mentioned with fire or with sharp medicine: and now the athelil are eradicated, both inverted and not inverted with the instrument that I call.
The formica is also a small, filtered, thick prominence on the surface of the body, going very deep: and when cold encounters it, it feels like an ant bite, and it occurs throughout the whole body: and it mostly happens in the hands.
And the treatment is to take a tube from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather: and place that tube over the formica until the circle of the tube contains parts of it. Then turn your hand with the tube until you cut what is around the formica: and place it deep into the flesh, and pull out the formica from its root.
And if you wish, do it with a tube of brass or iron, according to this form.
Let the upper part of the cannula be drawn up high and wrapped around, so that its grip on the finger may be eased and its rotation.
And if you wish to cauterize the Ant as mentioned in the cauterization of Athelil in the chapter on the cautery.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Regarding the forms of instruments used for enemas in diseases of the anus, and for relief of the bowels, and colic.
Sometimes an enema is made of silver, or brass, or cast metal, or hammered metal.
And sometimes these instruments are made small and large according to those in which they are used.
Therefore, that which is used in the treatment of small children should be small: and for those whose anuses are weak or painful, their enemas should be so as well.
Large enema.
Its tube, that is, the upper head where the bag is tied, should be wide in this manner: and it should have a distinct part where the bag is tied as you see, and its lower end which is inserted into the anus should be closed, that is, not open, very soft, tapering to fineness: and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays and a little thicker, and the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of an animal's bladder: or of sheepskin, which should be in the shape of a small asofrati: whose base is one palm.
And it should be pierced with many holes as it is turned, and let the space that is between every hole be the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a strong thread made of raw silk, which should be composed of ten threads, or about that number, and join it with the skin like asofrati. When the skin is placed on it, it should be tied tightly around the head of the enema between two distinguishing constrictions. Then administer the enema with it.
And this is the form of the circle and the holes depicted here with the skin.
The quality of administering the enema with it is as follows: fill the skin or bladder with medicine that is warmed according to the quantity tolerated by the patient: and beware that it is not too hot or too cold.
Then the patient should lie on their back, and raise their legs upwards: and place under them a mat, that is, skin or cloth on which people lie, or a linen sheet.
Then anoint the end of the enema with oil, or with egg white, or with fenugreek mucilage, or similar substances. Then insert it into the anus easily. Then the administrator should take the skin with both hands simultaneously, and squeeze it vigorously until all that is in the enema is emptied into the intestine.
Then remove the enema, and let the patient raise his legs against the wall.
If medicine drives him to an end, then let it hold as much as it can. And if he sleeps with her the entire night, it is more ultimate in healing.
If you give him an enema for intestinal ailments, and its effect is swift: then repeat the enema until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then let the enema be very fine and gentle, such as those with which children are given enemas.
And this should be the form of a fine enema for which the skin is tight.
Chapter LXXXIV.
I have already said in the division regarding the treatment of wounds what was appropriate for the book, and I will now speak here of their treatment with the hand and with medicines according to completion.
I say, therefore, that wounds differ according to the instrument by which they are inflicted and according to the place where the wound falls.
The things by which wounds are caused are often various, such as being hit by a stone, or cut by a sword or dagger, or struck with a lance, wood, or arrow, and similar objects from many other things.
Wounds that are inflicted according to the parts of the body are, for example, a wound that falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or spleen: and similar ones from other limbs.
And I am telling the treatments of some wounds, so that I may set forth that reasoning and rule on other wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds: because the mention of compound wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say. When a simple wound occurs on the head, and there is no fracture of the bone: then consider if it is from the throw of a stone or similar objects, and has only broken the skin: and the wound is large, and you fear an unfavorable outcome of hot abscess: then hurry and immediately perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein: and do not delay this: and withdraw blood according to the strength of the patient: if there is nothing prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if little blood is coming out from the wound. And let the phlebotomy be performed on the opposite side of the wounded area.
And let the phlebotomy be performed on the opposite side of the wounded area. And let the patient beware of excess, and wine, and heavy foods.
If however something prohibits bloodletting, then let the diet be reduced, and let no meat or wine be approached.
And apply to the wound, if a hot abscess occurs, lint infused in rose oil alone, or with wine that has astringent properties.
If however you are certain there will be no hot abscess, then apply to the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood and has not been altered by air, the powder which I will describe shortly: and if it has already been altered by air, then apply some ointments until it heals.
If the wound is large, or from a sword cut, and the like: and its edges do not come together with small pins, then bring them together with stitches, as I will narrate concerning wounds of the belly regarding their stitching.
If the wound is already separated from the bone, and hangs loose, and there is no retention of it except with a small sling: then cut it off. Then treat the wound with medicines, and restore hard flesh instead of skin, and advise the patient to nourish themselves with foods that are thickening, such as heads, and cooked wheat until it is like porridge: and things similar to these.
If you find putrefaction in the skin, and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut out all the putrefied part and discard it: then treat it.
If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows: and it is not stopped by medications, then apply pressure on the artery. If you find it uncut, then cut it with a scalpel, or tie it off. If necessity demands that what we have said cannot be accomplished, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped.
If these wounds are small and simple, then their treatment is easy and light: so that you may sprinkle this powder on them: for it consolidates them before the air alters them.
Method of the Flesh-forming Powder. Take one part of oil, and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unslaked lime: grind the whole much, and sieve it: and fill the wound with it, and bind it well, until it adheres to it well, and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it with bandages from above, and leave it, and do not loosen it as long as it remains, so that it does not become swollen. For the medicine is not removed from it until it is healed.
And sometimes the lime alone does it, when you do not have oil and dragon's blood at hand; and dragon's blood also performs the same operation on many large wounds, when it is appropriate to put it on them and bind them, and the wounds are fresh with their own blood which has not been altered by air.
If the air has already altered them in some way, especially when it is summer, then this powder's intention is not effective: so care for it with what we have said, placing some digestive ointments on them; or put on them poultices made from barley flour mixed with water and honey, until they discharge pus. Then care for it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
If a fracture in the bone occurs with the wound and it is small, then extract it with a probe: and I will now speak of the treatment for fractures of the head in what is to come.
Regarding wounds of the neck.
If a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in its treatment, and for a simple head wound.
If the nerve or artery of the neck has already been cut: then if it is a nerve, there is no skill in it except to treat it with something that causes strong styptic effect, such as ziniar, and zegi, and things similar to these. For they harm the nerves and contract them.
And you shall not apply anything cold at all to the wound: for the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the noblest part of the members: and let that with which it is cured be mild from medicines, such as lime washed several times with sweet water mixed with oil, or with rose oil, and turpeth mineral, when it is also washed with sweet water: and the other mineral stones in this manner, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, then apply sutures: or bind its edges with compresses. Then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has depth, or a sinus has formed in its lower part where pus has already collected, then puncture it at the most depressed place in it.
If an artery has already been cut in the wound and its flow of blood has started: then separate or cut it and ligate it: or cauterize it if the necessity calls for it.
If the windpipe or its entirety has been cut, but the alae nasi are saved: then approximate the skin edges with sutures over the windpipe, and do not touch the windpipe, rather level it and reduce it to its natural form. Then bind it with a proper bandage, and leave it for several days. Then treat it with ointments that have astringent and drying properties until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it: then if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all of them, or as many as you can: and what does not prepare, leave it until the wound putrefies, and it separates and its discharge is alleviated.
If the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on it the powder I mentioned. If bone appears in the wound and a fistula forms, then treat it with the method mentioned in its respective chapter.
Regarding the wound on spatulas.
If there is a stab from a lance or a knife, and you see its depth, then examine it. If wind or gas exits the wound when the patient breathes on it, then you know that the wound is mortal.
If it does not have depth and is fresh with its blood, then do not apply powder to it right away or bind it, so that blood does not remain in its depth and return to the heart, killing the patient: instead, apply a drawing ointment to it and unbind it twice a day.
If ointment is not available, then place an old piece of wool on the wound's opening to absorb what comes out from its moisture: and have the patient lie down on the wound so that what accumulates in it can flow out.
If however three days have passed since the wound, or more, and spasms do not occur to the patient, nor bad palpitations of the heart, nor constriction in breathing, and you see his other conditions good: then know that the wound is safe. Treat it therefore with rue and other treatments until it is healed.
If however its healing is hindered, and it is now always open, then know that it has become a fistula. Treat it therefore according to its chapter.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat it with what precedes regarding suturing, if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
And if it has already made an impression on the bone and fragments have broken off: then examine the wound and quickly remove those fragments, if they are separated. If however they are not separated, then leave them until the wound becomes putrid, for their extraction is eased then.
The judgment in the treatment of other wounds occurring in other limbs is the same as what we have said.
About wounds of the abdomen, and the protrusion of the intestines, and their treatment.
The disruption that occurs in the abdomen is major, medium, and minor.
Sometimes therefore the intestine or a number of intestines protrudes from the large one.
Therefore, their insertion and their suture are more forceful and difficult.
And even a small rupture becomes difficult in another way. Therefore, it follows that their reduction is more difficult if you do not promptly return them to their place immediately: because they inflate, open up, and swell: hence their entry becomes difficult.
Therefore, the moderate rupture is better: because with it, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in those two types.
Know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four methods.
Two common sutures are used for the suture of the abdomen and for the suture of other wounds of the body: and two other sutures are specifically used for the other wounds. However, they are more specific for the suture of the abdomen: and I will tell you each one with an explanation and description.
I say therefore, that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine protrudes from it, and it becomes difficult to reduce it: then this is because of one of two methods. Either because of the smallness of the rupture, as we said: or because there is swelling in the intestine due to the cold air.
Therefore, when it is thus, then you must warm it, so that you soak a sponge or a wet cloth in warm water alone. Or boil in water squills, and cyperus, and spike, and bind with it the intestine until the swelling dissolves.
Sometimes he makes it with wine in which there is astringency: and it is better than water alone in resolving the swelling.
When you see that the swelling has already dissolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which althea or mallows have been boiled. For by that means its entrance is alleviated with a small object.
If, however, the return of it occurs after this treatment, then find and cut slightly in the area of disruption with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when prepared than cutting; and there should be no compulsion to cut after necessity and lack of instruments.
Let one part of it be twisted, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the end should be fine but not as delicate as a spatula, rather somewhat blunt: and it is that which resembles a probe, as you see.
When the wound enlarges and enters the intestine, then it is necessary to reduce it according to its natural form in its proper place if possible: for that is better.
When the disruption is wide in the lower part of the abdomen: then it is necessary to have the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then place your attention and your consideration always on this, that the part in which there is a wound be higher than the other part.
And thus you should apply it to large wounds and medium wounds.
In small wounds, apply it according to how it is prepared for you.
Then make sure that a faithful attendant is present at your side, who will hold the entire disruption with his hand: and bring together its lips. Then uncover it for the one who follows the suture, piece by piece: and this is the method of a common suture.
And it is such that you take a needle, or a number of needles according to the quantity of the wound's size. Then leave a quantity of one finger's width from the end of the disruption, that is, the doctor's: and insert one needle with thread at both ends of the skin, passing through the sifac which is under the skin from the inside, until it penetrates from the other side, and you have now brought together two ends of the skin, and two ends of the sifac: and there are four layers.
Then tighten with double thread around the needle several times from both sides simultaneously, until the two lips of the wound are brought together with a proper approximation.
Then leave the thickness of another finger, and insert another needle into it: then tie it with thread as you did with the first needle. Therefore do not cease to do that with what you need from the linen until you complete the constriction of the whole wound.
And let the needles be of medium thickness between thick and thin: for very thin needles cut the flesh quickly: and thick ones have difficulty entering the skin: therefore they must be of medium thinness and thickness.
And it is not appropriate for the needle to be fixed at both ends of the skin that are very close: so that the flesh is not cut quickly, and the wound is opened before its consolidation, and they are not stretched even with the suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
Then cut the tips of the needles so they do not harm the patient during their sleep: and place small pieces of cloth from clothes on all sides to hold the tips of the needles: and leave them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this type of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds. For one needle, or two, or about that number is sufficient for their suture.
The second common suture is to join the four ends together: two ends of the skin and two ends of the sifac alternately, with a needle on which is wound thread equal in thinness and thickness.
Then when you have penetrated these four ends with the needle, withdraw the needle from the side where you started, so that the thread falls back from the upper part of the wound: so that the suture is like the suture of cloth by which cloths are drawn together, and place between each suture the thickness of a little finger.
Men know this suture.
And with this suture I treated the wound that had occurred to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and the tear of the wound was more than one palm: and about two palms had come out from the middle intestine, and there was a tear in the middle of the belly.
I therefore replaced it after his intestine had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound thus healed within about fifteen days: and I treated him, and he was healed: and he lived for many years afterward, in his usual condition.
And the doctors had judged that he would not be healed.
And it was a miracle that I did not treat it with an ointment. For I was in a place where no ointment could be found, nor any other medicine. I therefore placed old dung on the wound twice a day, and continually washed it with honey water until it was healed.
I will now speak of two types of sutures according to the account of the discussion.
And it is to begin with a sharp suture: and insert the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When the needle penetrates the skin, and goes into the flesh according to the length and breadth of the whole body: leave one end as you inserted the needle on the side where you introduced it, and make it penetrate to the other end from the inner part to the outer part on the opposite side.
When therefore you make it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this at the same end of mirach from the outer part to the inner: and leave the end of sifac which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate to the other end from the inner part to the outer: and make it penetrate with your penetration by which you make it penetrate in the end of sifac at the mirach which is on its part, until it penetrates into the whole of it.
Then begin again from this same side, and sew it with the end which is from sifac on the other side, and pull the needle out from the skin which it penetrated.
Then bring it back to that skin, and sew the end of sifac which is on the other side with this end of mirach: and pull it out from the skin which is on its part, and do this alternately, one after another: and do this turn by turn until you sew all around according to this example.
And the aim of this stitching is to sew the sutures of the skin flaps in such a way that you sew sifac alternately from one side of the skin end: and leave it alternately from the other side until you complete it.
The second type of proper suture, which Galen mentioned.
This his method is described so that you sew it according to the manner in which some of the physicians sew them, aggregating each part to its corresponding matching part by nature: and they apply one end of sifac to its other end, and one end of mirach to the other end of it. And it is done according to what I tell you.
You must fix the needle at the end of the bandage nearest to you from the outer side, and make it penetrate to the inner side at that point only: and leave two ends of the suture. Then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outer side to the inner side at two ends of the suture, that is, on both sides.
Then turn both, also make both penetrate from the inner to the outer side, at two ends of the bandage which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is better than the common easy suturing, and it is the suturing that has been previously mentioned.
This is therefore the teaching of Galen as well.
And some have said. The abdominal suture is corrected with two needles. Which means you insert one thread into both: and begin with the insertion of the needle, from the part that is nearest to you, and make it penetrate all the way to the other side, according to the suturing of those who sew the skins evenly.
And you should know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen: then its suturing is more difficult than that of other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the treatment of a wound is the judgment of other wounds.
Which means that when you encounter a fresh wound with its blood before the air alters it: and you reduce the intestine, and return it to its place, and adjust it: then apply pulverized incarnative over it.
If the air has already altered the wound: then apply some ointments that are available to you until they cause pus to form: and let the threads fall out, and the sinews consolidate and heal. Then care for it as you would treat other wounds until it is healed.
If the medicines are not available to you, then apply old dung immediately when it starts to emit pus: and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it is healed.
For you do not need other medications in most cases when the wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound may spread to the principal members in the injury, then it is necessary to soak a soft wool in oil of moderate heat, or in rose oil: and apply it around the areas between the groin, and under the armpits.
If he feels pain, or pricks, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens), then cleanse him with a styptic, black, warm wine enema: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and caused a discharge penetrating to its concavity.
And know that what comes from the large intestine is easier to heal: and what comes from the small intestine is harder to heal.
However, the intestine known as the Jejunum does not accept healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is due to the abundance of its veins, and their size, and because of the fineness of its body, and its closeness to the nature of nerves.
If however that which comes out from the wound is flesh, and you catch it fresh: reduce it according to your reduction, by which you equally reduce the intestines.
If however the time has passed, and it has already turned green or black: then it is necessary to tie it with a thread above the place which has been darkened by it, so that blood flow does not occur. For in flesh there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that the pulling of it is eased for you, and its extraction in case of flesh detachment and pus discharge from the wound.
Reminder of the wound that occurs in the intestine.
When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small: then it is possible for it to be restored in some people: therefore, because I have seen someone who was wounded in his belly with a lance strike, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old: and it became a fistula, and excretions and flatulence came out from it.
I therefore applied treatment until I was no longer confident in his healing: nor did I cease to care for him carefully until he was healed and the area was strengthened.
After I saw the area already strengthened, I was concerned about the patient, that a bad accident might occur in his belly: and no such bad accident happened to him. And he remained in better dispositions, eating and drinking, and having intercourse, and entered the bath, and exercised in his diets.
And some of the experimenters have said that when a small wound occurs in the intestine, then it must be tied according to this method. And it is that you take ants with large heads. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, and place one of the ants which have an open mouth over the two lips of the wound. When therefore it bites on them and closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and does not loosen.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease to do this with each ant after the other according to the extent of the entire wound.
Then reduce it, and sew the wound. For those heads remain attached to the intestine until the intestine is nourished and healed, and no harm befalls the patient thoroughly.
And now it is possible to suture the intestine even with a fine thread: which is cleaned from the intestine of an animal, attached to the needle after it is inserted.
And it is that you take the end of this thread from the intestine, and clean it thoroughly. Then tie a fine linen thread at its end tightly. Then insert that thread into the needle, and sew the intestine with it. Then replace it in the wound.
And this method of sewing with ants and intestine is only according to the way of confidence and hope.
Know, a wound that is large, wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines: then there is no remedy except for narrowing, and there is no healing of it at all.
On the treatment of Zuchemen and Fistulas.
Know, that every wound or abscess when it becomes old and aged, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal, and constantly emits pus, and does not cease: then it is universally called a Fistula wherever it may be in the body, and we name it Zuchemen.
And the Fistula indeed is according to truth a hardened, white, filtered knot: with which there is no pain, and it has the concavity of a bird's feather: and because of this some name it Risati, that is, feather.
And at certain times it is moist, emitting pus. And perhaps the moisture splits at certain times. And sometimes this moisture is abundant, and at other times it is scarce: and it is thick, and it is thin.
And I have already mentioned in the division when I said wounds, that every ulcer that does not heal, and in which flesh does not grow, is not so except for one of nine causes.
One of them is either due to the scarcity of blood in the body; or due to the bad quality of it; or because there is hard flesh between it and its lips, preventing the birth of flesh; or because it is full of dirt and filth; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the material discharged from it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used for its cure is unsuitable; or because the corruption falling in the region is a type of pestilence, or due to the characteristic of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta: where the digestion of diseases becomes difficult, and the healing of abscesses by nature is delayed there; or because it has one bone or a number of bones.
And I have already shown all these causes and their signs, and their cures with medicines in the division: and it is necessary here that I make you know the cure of Fistula and Zukens, which is done by the way of surgery with the hand.
Know therefore, that Fistula occurs in all the members of the body. For from these are the Fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or spine: or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs: or to any of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the compound joints: such as the hand, and foot: and from these are those that go to the proximity of the principal member, and similars.
Therefore, among these Fistulas, those that occur in this manner are of difficult healing and do not accept treatment, and dealing with them is labor and ignorance.
If there is any Fistula whose depth does not reach the places I mentioned: and you hope and have confidence in its cure, and wish to understand it, then take a probe of metal or iron, if the Fistula extends in a straight line, and examine it with it.
If however there is a winding in the fistula, then investigate it with a thin lead probe. Because lead, with the softness of its body, is lightened and curved around the winding.
If the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate on it with a probe. Therefore, choose one opening from its openings for enema.
For the moisture with which you perform the enema goes towards the other openings and runs out from them.
Then carefully investigate in whatever way is possible for you: to know whether there is an opening or a nerve, and whether the Fistula's cavity is far or near: or whether it is one Fistula with many openings, and stand over all of this with the utmost strength of your inquiry, with your questioning of the patient, and by finding pain upon pressing with your hand on the area, and similar indications and causes leading to the formation of an abscess.
Therefore, when you have stood at all those true stations, then proceed to the cure with confidence: and this is to consider whether the Fistula is a near one that appears, or in a safe place far from the joint, or from the nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places I told you about: then cut the Fistula as mentioned in my narrative, and remove what is in it from filtration, and corrupted flesh, which grows at its opening from the flesh, or thelul, and similar things: and care for it until it heals.
If however the Fistula is of deep length and is straight: then it is necessary to cut it deeply as much as possible for you. Then cleanse it from all its corrupted flesh.
Then apply licinia wrapped in sharp medicines: and insert it until the concavity of the fistula you grasped with iron: do this several times with it, until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the concavity of the fistula from the corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If however it does not heal through that, then cauterize it according to what we have mentioned.
If therefore the cause of the fistula is bone, and it is confirmed to you: then seek it out, and cut it according to what I have told you: unless something prevents you from doing so by a vein, or nerve, or principal member, as we have said.
If therefore the bone is revealed to you, and there is something of corruption and blackness in it: then scrape it until all its corruption is removed. Then treat it with what causes flesh to grow on it until it is healed.
If it does not heal and discharges pus as it did before: then you know that you have not achieved the complete eradication of the corruption.
Reveal it again, and carefully examine it and cleanse it with all your strength.
Then restore it. If it heals, that is good: and if not, then you know that the corruption is in a deep part of the body, which you have not reached. Therefore, there is no ingenuity for you in it, except to leave it to nature.
If a small bone is corrupted, and it is possible for you, pull it out with subtle scissors that are suitable for it.
If there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any of them with your strength.
If something from the humors opposes you, and there is no fear or mistake in cutting them: then cut those humors and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, then apply something to the wound that will cause it to rot: and leave it until what surrounds those bones from flesh and humors putrefies.
And guard the wound so that it does not heal. And let the incision which you made in your operation be constricted. Rather, apply to it, if you fear, tow soaked in ground sulfur with oil: or tow soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some green ointment.
For when those humors putrefy and the bones separate from them, the removal of them is alleviated, and their extraction.
If there is one large bone, such as the bone of the leg, or the bone of the hip, and similar to these, and what is corrupted in it is a large part: then scrape it with the finest scraper until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
If however what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw through it, and cut it entirely until the place where the corruption reaches: then treat it until it consolidates.
And I tell you a story that happened to a man in his leg: that you may set it as an example and aid for your operation.
There was a man of about thirty years of age, to whom pain occurred in his leg, caused by something moving within his body, that is, from the interior, until the matter reached the leg and formed a large abscess: and he did not have an external cause.
Therefore, time was wasted with the error of the physicians until the abscess was opened, and a great deal of matter came out with it. And his treatment was delayed until the leg became fistulated, and many openings were formed in it: all of which discharged pus and bodily fluids.
Therefore, he was treated by a multitude of physicians for about two years, and there was no skilled hand in the art until I was called, and I saw his leg, and the matter flowing from those openings in great abundance: moreover, the whole body of the man had already wasted away, and his color was yellow.
I therefore inserted a probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached the bone.
Then I examined all the openings: and I found them to connect with each other from all parts of the leg.
I hurried therefore, and cut above one of those orifices, until I exposed part of the bone: and I found it corrupted: which was already corroded, and blackened, and had putrefied, and was perforated, until it had penetrated as far as the marrow.
I sawed therefore what was revealed to me and prepared from the corrupted bone.
And I cut away so that there would be nothing in the bone except that corruption which I severed and sawed. And I had already eradicated it.
Then I placed the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicines for a long period. And it was not consolidated.
Then I tried and exposed above the second bone beyond the first exposure: and I found continuous corruption with the bone: and I sawed what appeared to me also from that corruption.
Then I attempted its restoration. And it was not restored.
I exposed it again and did not cease to cut the bone bit by bit, and attempted its restoration: and it was not restored, until I cut about one palm from the bone, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated quickly, and healed: and this repetition in its operation and section was not necessary, except due to the disposition of the patient's weakness, and the lack of his tolerance, and my fear for him of death: for he was fainting at all times from an excess of evacuation.
He was therefore healed completely: and hard flesh formed in place of the bone, and his condition improved within himself, and his strength returned: and he moved about freely in his movements: and walking did not cause him any harm at all.
If however a protruding bone in an already fractured part of the body: then it is necessary to sew it up according to this method: and it is as follows: take a bandage, and tie it at the end of the protruding bone: and command someone to pull it upwards: and place another thicker woolen bandage over the first one. Then bind it over the flesh that is under the bone: and extend its end so as to pull the flesh downwards: and you cover the flesh over the place you wish to saw, so that the saw does not harm the flesh.
Place wood or a board under the lower bone appropriately: for when you do this, it does not prevent cutting the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary for the sawing to be on the corrupted area temporarily, so that there is no corruption in the concavity of the bone: and it should not appear in its appearance to the senses, and compel another to take its place ining.
If the bone is corrupted, and it is not prominent, but rather its part is continuous with another part: and the corruption is in its middle, or in a part of it: then uncover the flesh from all parts entirely. Then place the wood below.
Then saw it from the first side where there is corruption, until the sawing continues to the other side: and let the sawing be according to the length from the corruption for a while, as we have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, cut the corrupted joint itself, and saw the bone where it continues to the other side.
If however the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no method but scraping.
If the corruption is in the carpal bones of the hand or in the tarsal bones of the foot: then the case is very difficult. But it is necessary that you inquire how the corruption appears to you. And scrape it, and clean it according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and with whatever method seems right to you: when the Vein or Nerve does not contradict you.
And know that the knives and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their fineness, and their size, and their smallness, and their hardness, and their rarity. Therefore, it is necessary that you prepare every kind of instrument suitable for that operation.
And you shall know that these operations signify to you regarding the type of instrument you need when you have a long study with you. And the knowledge of the methods of this art is a testimony of the methods of illnesses: then you will find by yourself that which is suitable for it from the instruments for every sickness.
And I am confirming for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use as examples on which you will cut, and the test by which you will experiment on others.
Form of another Saw.
Form of the Joint Scraper. Let the head of this Scraper be according to the form of a star-nail head: and its points should be according to the form of the points of elischetfegi.
And it is not suitable unless the heads of the joints are scraped with it when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is wide and large.
Form of the Larger Scraper.
The method of shaving the side.
The method of shaving where there is a concavity.
The method of another subtle shaving.
The method of shaving the curved extremity.
The method of shaving a small, subtle tendon.
This is similar to a file, and the end is like a saw: it is used in many places according to the reason of the bones.
The method of shaving that is suitable for the reason of what is perforated in the bones.
Its end is triangular, with sharp ends.
It is made from ivory. And similarly, all the things we have mentioned should be made from razors, and cutters, and saws.
Regarding the cutting of extremities, andSerratura ossiumsawing of bonesRegarding the cutting of extremities, and sawing of bones.
The extremities putrefy, either from an external cause or an internal cause.
Therefore, when you have treated that corruption with medical treatment and the treatment does not help: and you see the corruption spreading to the limb, which nothing repels: then it is necessary to cut off that limb until where the corruption follows, so that the patient may be saved from death or from a worse evil than the loss of the limb.
And the sign of one who suffers from this is that the limb turns black until it rots: as if fire has burned it, or it becomes rotten after turning black: until that rot spreads to the adjacent part of the limb and creeps throughout the body.
Hasten therefore with the incision, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of some venomous creatures: such as the sea scorpion, and viper, and centipede, and similar ones.
Therefore, if the corruption or sting is at the tip of a finger, then cut off the finger, and do not give space to the corruption to spread further to the rest of the hand.
And similarly, if it occurs in the hand, then cut it off at the root of the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold of the arm.
And if it invades further, then cut the arm at the elbow joint.
But if the corruption spreads and you see it around the elbow: then the patient is near death. And to administer beyond this in treatment is an excess of power.
And similarly do for the foot, when the corruption invades a toe, then cut it off at one of the joints: and if it takes hold of the instep, then amputate the entire foot. If it ascends to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
If the corruption has already come above the knee, then there is no skill in it, unless by amputation, and to leave the patient to death.
And the method of cutting off or sawing the limb is to tie a bandage below where you wish to cut: and bind another bandage above the place. And let the assistant stretch one bandage towards the lower parts: and let the assistant stretch another bandage upwards above. And you separate the flesh which is between the two bandages with a broad spatula until all the flesh is exposed. Then it should be cut or sawed.
And it is necessary to place linen cloth on all sides, and the saw should not touch the healthy area: and that the patient does not suffer additional injury and a hot abscess.
If there is an internal flow of blood while you are operating, then cauterize the area quickly: or apply some powders that stop the blood. Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man in his foot, the same accident that I am telling you about.
What happened is that a blackening occurred on his foot, with a burning
Therefore the man cut himself, after he saw corruption occurring in his member with its swelling, which he found due to pain and burning; and he cut it at the joint, and was healed.
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption occurred in his index finger.
He came to me, and I tried to recover that excess by applying medicines to his hand after cleansing his body: but the excess did not subside, and it began to spread to another finger; until the corruption began in the hand.
He called upon me to amputate his hand: and I refused, hoping to succeed in reducing that excess: and I also feared his death from the incision of his hand. For the man's strength was at stake.
After he despaired of me, he returned to his own land: and I heard from him that he quickly cut off his entire hand: and was healed.
And I have not brought this account except to be of help regarding what falls under this kind of illness: and to provide guidance by which it may be understood, and according to which action should be taken.
Regarding the treatment of sinuses, and the nature of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy limbs, and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus: then it bursts or is perforated, and what is inside comes out as pus, and a vacant place remains like a vessel: and the skin that is over it is like a cloth that has become thin: and it does not reach its final stage of corruption, nor does it affect the mouth, nor the nerve, nor the ligament: it deserves to be called a Sinus: and it is not named a Fistula: however, if its space is prolonged until the corruption affects any of these members, then it is named a Fistula or zuken.
And the care is to cut all that skin as it turns: and especially when it becomes thin, and made like cloth: and you trust that it does not adhere to the place, because of its corruption.
And if you hope that the skin adheres, and does not result from that final corruption: and if there is thickness in the skin from flesh, then care for it with aclyster: and it is to consider towards the sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus emitted from it is of foul odor: then cleanse it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and ziniar, equal parts received, gathered in a vessel: and decocted over fire, until the medicine turns red: and comes to the thickness of honey.
Then take what you need from it: and dissolve it with water and honey, and cleanse the sinus with it: and tie its opening, and leave the medicine in it for the duration of two hours.
Then extract it with pressing: do this for as many days until the sinus is cleansed and the odor is removed.
And sometimes it is cleansed with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you: and it is to take the ash of vine wood, or ash from oak wood: and pour water over it. Then boil it, and cleanse with it until you trust that the sinus is already cleansed.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine, nor ashes water, then cleanse it with water and honey, to which some crushed ziniar is already mixed. Or cleanse it with honey and wine mixed together, for it is the property of honey to purify and wash clean: and wine makes the sin adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you do this several times and are confident that the sinus corruption has been removed: then cleanse it with something that promotes flesh growth.
And it is such that you take from the plaster dyafinicon: and dissolve it with rose oil, and astringent wine: or cleanse it with certain medicines, and other ointments, whose properties I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
If the sinus orifice is narrow, through which a clyster tube cannot fit: then widen it with an iron temporarily: or place lint wrapped in Egyptian ointment, or in basilicon ointment on it until it widens.
And similarly, if the orifice is also wide, then bring the edges together with a suture: and leave enough space for the clyster to enter without adding more.
And similarly, if the orifice from which pus runs is elevated towards the upper part: then cut it at a lower place within it, so that the pus runs down from it: for when pus is confined at the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from
If it is not possible for you to cut the sinus around below it as you wish: then try to prepare the limb with a preparation by which pus may flow from it easily as it is prepared for you. Try to ensure that no pus at all is retained in it: and take consolidating medicines which are applied to the sign, suitable for what you desire. And spread them over a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that it covers the entire sinus. Then cut with the scissors directly at the opening of the sinus hole, enlarging the sinus opening slightly. Then spread a mild ointment over another cloth according to the size of the hole: and place it on it away from the sinus opening, so that the discharge of pus from it is alleviated: and do not remove the large cloth unless after several days at once.
The one who is over the sinus opening is the one whom you remove every hour, so that what accumulates in it from pus may come out: and to know whether what runs out of it is a lot or little: or digested, or undigested.
And with this, again examine the site of the sinus itself, whether its owner feels pain in it or there is no pain in it, and whether there is a pus pocket in it or not.
When therefore your treatment is extended thus, and you see the material that comes out over the sinus opening, then you know that the sinus has adhered or is approaching adhesion: then dissolve it in the morning or on the third day: and when you dissolve the wound, then change to another cloth and renew the ointment.
If, however, a fine virus exits from the sinus after a long interval, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, because there are those among people who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and among them are those who act contrary to this.
If, however, an undigested pus exits from the sinus after many days, then you know that the sinus is not adhering.
If, therefore, the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its condition is prolonged, then add to the drying of medicines, but let the doctors make the medications moist in their substance and dry in their effect: such as diaphrynicon ointment, when an excess of addition from zegi is added to it.
And from the latest method of treatment, it is to take diaphrynicon ointment, and dissolve it with rose oil, and spray old wine equal in its substance over it.
Then bind it with it, and use it.
And now it does a similar action to this when you do not have diaphrynicon ointment, honey, when you boil it until it thickens, and use it. Or take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense: grind all of it, and powder it over honey while it is over the fire. Then spread it over the cloth, and bind it over the sinus: and spread with honey which you boiled until it thickened: and powder over it the spices, and place over it the cloth, and bind it.
And sometimes long birthwort is administered in it, and roots of the celestial lily, and it is a lily: and flour of the herb, and centaury. Use these simples, or compounded, grind them, and sieve them: and powder over the honey which I mentioned, and use it.
If the condition of the Sinus is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment: then you know that there is corruption in its depth: or it has already made an impression on the bones, or on other hard members, or ligaments: then treat it with the treatment for Fistulas, according to what has been stated.
Regarding the treatment of panaritium and worn nails, and the incision added to the finger, and the cutting.
Panaritium is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand or foot: and it may also arise in the other fingers.
When therefore the condition is prolonged and neglected by its healer, and it becomes abscessed with a hot abscess: or it corrupts and emits pus until it erodes the root of the nail: and it may corrupt it entirely, and the corruption may reach the bone, until there is a foul odor: and the tip of the finger becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.
When therefore you treat it with what we have said in the division, and your treatment does not succeed: then you must cut with iron all the excess that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For cauterization is very helpful.
If the tooth is healthy, and the nail is also healthy, and the growths of the nail already press on the flesh towards the inside, and begin to pierce it, and harm it: then you must place a fine silver wire under the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut it with ease, and apply over what remains of the flesh from burning and corrosive medicines until all of it is removed. Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
If corruption has already set into the tooth, then you must cut out that tooth and extract it: for it will never heal as long as the corrupted tooth remains in place.
If you see corrosion and corruption advancing into the finger, then cut it at one of the joints, according to what has been previously mentioned. Then care for it until it heals.
If the nail is injured by friction or impact, and severe pain follows, then you must bleed the patient first. Then cut the nail with a sharp spatumilus using a horizontal section from top to view.
And be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for you will cause severe pain to the patient through this, and it will result in additional flesh growing in that place.
Then treat the area with something that relieves pain.
The finger added which is born in some men's hands, perhaps is all fleshy: and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail in it: and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or its birth is in some knots of the finger. Therefore, that which is born in some knots of the finger does not move: and that which is born near the joint of the finger, perhaps moves.
Therefore, the section of that which is fleshy among them is easy. Which means you should cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
The treatment of that which is born at the root of the joint is difficult. Therefore, abstain from cutting it.
In that which is born on the finger near the last knot, then you must cut through its flesh first with a circular incision down to the bone. Then file the bone with one of those files suitable for it. Then care for it until it heals.
The consolidation that occurs in the fingers excessively often happens either from the birth of the person, that is, it is born with them, or from the consolidation of a wound, or from burning by fire, and similar causes.
Therefore, you must cut away that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form. Then place between them lint, or cloths soaked in rose oil: so that they do not consolidate quickly, and separate between them: or place between them a thin lead plate until the site consolidates as is necessary.
And similarly if consolidation occurs between certain fingers and the palm, then cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
Regarding the incision of Vitium.
Warts are twisted veins, thick, filled with melancholic humors which occur in many parts of the body: and they most frequently appear on the legs, especially on the legs of those who travel and labor, and bear burdens.
Therefore, you should administer a shaking of the body from black bile several times with a strong shaking.
Then bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
The treatment of them with iron is according to two methods. One of them is to cut them and draw out the black blood. And the other method is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
The incision of it is according to this method. Bathe the leg first with hot water extensively until the thick, fecal-like blood is dissolved. Then bind the leg of the patient from the upper part of the thigh down to the lower part of the knee with a strap. Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with a broad incision.
Then draw, that is, extract the blood in your hand from the lower part of the leg up to the top, and it is necessary for the phlebotomist to bleed the patient from the top first. Then cut the nail all the way down: until the amount of blood you see is sufficient and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
Then bandage it: and instruct him to avoid foods that produce black bile: and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and if it harms the patient.
The extraction of it is according to this method. Shave the leg of the patient if there are many hairs on it. Then introduce him to the bath: or foment his leg with warm water until it turns red and the veins swell: or exercise him vigorously if a bath is not available, until the limb becomes warm.
Then cut the skin directly along the vein's length: either at its end near the knee, or at its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks, and scrape the vein on all sides until it appears to the sense: and it is at its appearance that you see it turn from red to a bluish color. When it comes out of the skin, you will see it white like a string.
Then insert under it a probe, until when it is raised and comes out from the skin: lift it with a blunt hook, gently.
Then make another cut near that cut with three fingers. Then remove the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then raise it with probes as you did, and lift it with another hook as you did at first.
Then make another cut, or multiple cuts, if you need them. Then raise it, and cut it with the final cut near the heel.
Then draw it to the cut which is above it.
And do this until you draw it out from the upper cut, or higher than all the cuts, until when it comes out entirely: then cut it.
If it does not obey you for drawing out and raising: then insert a needle with a strong double thread, and tie it, and draw it out: or insert under it a probe: and turn your hand to all parts until it comes out. And be careful not to cut it. For if it is cut, it becomes very difficult for you to raise it, and great harm comes to the patient from it.
Therefore, when you have drawn it out entirely: then place on the wound site wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil: and care for it until it heals.
If the vein is contracted, having a twisting which turns to the sides, and it is not straight as we said: then you must incise over it throughout all of its twisting, and the places of its turning.
Then suspend it with hooks until you raise it entirely: and be careful at your cut over it that you do not cut the vein or injure it: for it will be difficult for you to raise or extract it. Therefore, keep your caution.
The Method of Treating a Vein Injury.
Method of the Blind Hook.
It does not have a curve like other hooks, nor does it have a sharp end to avoid injuring the vein: and it is of thick flexibility, gentle: because if it were thin, it would cut the vein with its thinness: rather, let it have excessive thickness, as we said.
On the Extraction of a Vein from the Leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in warm lands, such as Al-Andalus and the land of Arabs, and in dry, warm lands, lacking moisture, that is, where no herb or tree grows.
And it may also be generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from the putrefaction which occurs under the skin, like the occurrence of snakes and worms within the body, and worms generated between the skin and the flesh.
And the sign of the onset of this vein's event is that violent inflammation occurs in the leg. Then make the place suppurate. Then the vein begins to emerge from that place of suppuration, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When therefore its end appears from it, then you must wrap a piece of lead over it, whose weight is from one-eighth of a drachm up to two drachms, and the knot itself; and leave the lead hanging from the leg.
Whenever anything emerges from it to the outside, wrap that in lead, and knot it. If it extends too much, then cut part of it and wrap the remainder. And do not cut it at the root before it has fully exited. For if you cut it, it contracts and withdraws into the flesh, causing an abscess and putrefaction in the area, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it must be handled gently and extracted gradually until it comes out completely from its end, and nothing of it remains in the body: and from this vein, in some people, something comes out that is five palms and ten long. And it has come to my attention that it emerged from a man who was twenty palms long.
If it is cut during your treatment, then insert a rod into its opening and pierce it with a long hole, along with the body, until all the material inside is evacuated: and treat the putrefaction of the area with medicines for several days. Then treat it with the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the ankle joint, or on the foot itself: and it has many openings, and a branch emerges from every opening.
Treat it therefore as we have said in the division, and with what has been mentioned.
Regarding the incision for worms generated under the skin, and it is called Bouina disease.
This disease is called in some places among us Bouina disease: because it often occurs in cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and the flesh.
And it moves throughout the whole body, ascending and descending: and it is perceived during its movement from one limb to another, until it breaks through the skin wherever it breaks through, and emerges.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. Just as worms and serpents, that is, earthworms, and roundworms occur in the stomach.
And it is feared because of its maliciousness. Because when it moves through the body and rises to the head and reaches a place: then it may open up in that place and emerge, and destroy the eye: and this happens often.
Therefore, when you wish to treat it and extract it, then it is only done during its movement and when it becomes apparent to the senses.
Therefore, it is necessary to bind what is above him and what is below him with a strong binding ligature. Then cut above it, and remove it.
If it is deep in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a heated cautery over the area until it dies.
And what is more feared is its corruption, by which it corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If you see that it has already reached the head near the eye, then bind below it the eyebrow with a good constriction. Then cut above it, and remove it.
And it is necessary for the patient to purify their body with medicines that dissolve bad putrid humors.
And let him beware of foods that cause putrefaction.
Regarding the section on the illness Nakir.
This illness is called Nakir in our land: and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs: then it changes from one limb to another.
And I have indeed seen it myself, as I tell you. I was called to a sick woman in certain villas. And she exposed her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the rope-like vein of the arm.
And after I remained for one hour, I saw one inflation proceed with a bladder, like a worm proceeds, ascending to his shoulder faster than it can be: so that it is like quicksilver when it runs from place to place.
Therefore, the pain departed from that place and fixed itself in the shoulder.
Then I sat for one hour, and it ran through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
Then he told me that it revolved throughout his whole body, as I saw.
Therefore, I marveled at the speed of its transformation from one member to another. And indeed, before that, I had not seen this disease with my own eyes in such a manner according to this way. However, I have seen many who find the pain change from one member to another; and I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think it to be anything other than that the woman was one of those who have a dry body with exposed veins; hence, this wind changing appears to the senses.
And it is necessary that they do not appear in this manner in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
Therefore, when you wish to treat it and the patient feels that pain: then if it is apparent to your eye as we said, then bind above it and below it quickly: and cut above it until the compressed wind exits: and cauterize the area.
If however you do not see it with your own eyes: then treat it with shaking of the body, and with what expels wind, and relieves it with foul pills, and pills of serpentaria, and similars.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows differ according to their types, and according to the places into which they fall from the body.
Their diversity is as follows: some have large points, and small ones: and concave, and deaf. And among them are those which have three angles. And among them are those which have tongues. And among them are those which have barbs.
Those, however, which fall according to the limbs into which they fall, are according to two methods. For either the limbs are from the principal concave limbs, such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and those similar to them. When therefore it falls into any of these limbs, and the signs of death that I tell you about later become apparent to you, then you must avoid extracting the arrow from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in most conditions. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the limb, then extract it, and treat the wound.
For the signs of the brain when an arrow falls into it and penetrates the bone and exits through the siphac which is above the brain are: for there occur from that violent sweating, and blindness, and dizziness, and redness in the eyes, and swelling, and redness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile. And perhaps blood comes out from the nose or the ears. And perhaps speech is impaired, and voice is destroyed. And there comes out from the place of the wound a white moisture similar to pus. And there exits from it something resembling a watery substance of flesh.
If these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not exit on its own.
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left nipple: and one feels with it as if it were fixed in something hard, not in an empty space. And perhaps the arrow has a movement similar to the movement of the pulse: and black blood runs from the wound. And following that is the coldness of the extremities, and cold sweat, and syncope. Know therefore that death surely follows.
And the sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung is the discharge of frothy blood from the wound: and the vessels that follow the neck swell, and the color of the patient changes. And he exhales a great, deep breath: and seeks the drawing in of cold air.
If the arrow falls into the membrane that is in the chest: then it is near the ribs: and a great breath with intense pain, with a sigh, occurs: and all the shoulder limbs are moved.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested from the food exits from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly and is fixed in it: something of feces exits from the wound, or pus, or intestine which is already torn. Therefore, there is no hope for his cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder and urine exits: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger on the patient: then you know that it is mortal.
The other members, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and shoulder blade, and forearm, and vertebrae of the back, and collarbone, and thigh, and leg, and similar parts of the limbs are treated according to various methods: when the arrow does not find an artery or nerve: and the arrow is not venomous.
And I tell you what I have seen regarding these arrows, so that you may use it for your treatment.
Which is that an arrow fell into a man's lacrimal of his eye, at the root of his nose. I extracted it from her other side, beneath the fat of her ear: and she was healed, and no harm came to her eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which fell into the fat of his eye beneath the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I could only reach a small part of its end, with which it adheres to its wood: and it was a large arrow among the arrows of Turkish bows, with soft iron, in which there are no ears.
The Jew was healed, and no harmful accident happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one that has barbs. I sewed over it between two fingers: and it was already submerged in his throat. I carefully handled it until I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his abdomen: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed and nothing had changed in his condition, I sewed over the arrow: and I worked on it, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no harmful accident happened to him.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound had healed over it. After seven years then it came out from the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow fell into her belly, and the wound healed over it, and the arrow remained within her; and none of its positions changed, and the woman did not find any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow fell into his face: and the wound healed, and it remained, not finding much pain: and many similar to these.
And I extracted an arrow from a man who was one of the princes of the King, which had fallen into the middle of his nose, and it had already turned slightly to the right side: and the arrow was entirely hidden.
I was called therefore for his treatment after the arrow fell for up to three days. I found therefore the arrow wound very tight.
I examined it therefore with a fine probe, and did not feel it: and he indeed found a puncture and pain under his right ear. I hoped therefore that it was that puncture from the tip of the arrow.
I treated the area with a plaster that had attracting and digesting properties, confident that the area would suppurate, and a sign of the arrow would appear to me so I could cut above it: and nothing happened in the area indicating that the arrow had reached its location.
I remained with the plaster on him for many days: and no incident occurred, and the wound healed in the meantime: and he remained weak from its extraction for a space of days, until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I therefore applied a sharp, corrosive medicine to that wound for many days until it opened: and when I probed it, I felt the fine tip of the arrowhead adhering to the wood.
Then I applied that sharp medicine to the wound opening until the tip of the arrow became visibly apparent: and it took me with it a period of time about four months.
Then after the wound had enlarged, and it became possible for me to insert forceps into it and move it, and it did not obey to come out: then I did not cease to refine and devise upon it with methods of ingenuity, until one day I began on it with properly made forceps, according to how their form will come at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose does not restore itself. I therefore restored it, and the wound was healed, and the sick person was made whole in health: and nothing at all harmed him.
And I tell you the nature of extracting certain arrows: so that you may set it as a rule and meaning on that which was not said.
Because the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended in the narration: nor does the book comprehend it, and a wise craftsman compares little with much: and with what is present over what is absent: and finds a new operation and a new instrument among the descents of foreign matters of this art when they occur.
Therefore, I say that arrows do not exit the members in which they are fixed, except by two methods. Or by attraction from the place whence it entered. Or to the opposite part.
And that which exits where it entered is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place: and it is attracted and exits.
If it does not obey and exit at the time when it falls: then you must leave it for several days, until the flesh around it becomes putrid: and its attraction is lessened, and its exit.
And similarly if it is fixed in the bone and does not obey you to exit, then leave it for several days: and repeat it with attraction and motion every day until it exits.
If it does not obey you to exit after days, then you must drill around the arrow in the bone itself on all sides with a fine awl until the area around the arrow is enlarged. Then attract it, and extract it.
If however the arrow is already hidden in a part of the body and is concealed and hidden from perception then seek it with probes. If however you feel it then extract it with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
If however you cannot reach it because of the constriction of the wound and because of the length of the arrow in depth: and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein: then incise over it until the wound is enlarged, and it is possible to extract the arrow.
If it has ears by which it can be held, then free the flesh fixed to it from all sides with every ingenuity you can apply, and use various methods if you cannot release the flesh through the breaking of the ears and their twisting until it comes out.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow, wherever it is, then use the twisting of your hand, with scissors to all sides, until you make it come out: and do it subtly with the utmost subtlety, so that the arrow does not break, and its extraction becomes difficult for you.
If you cannot reach it at once, then leave it for several days until what is around it becomes putrefied. Then attempt it again: for the skin will be relieved If however the flow of blood opposes you, then apply what we have said about treatment in its chapter: and be careful not to injure a vein, or nerve, or tendon with your incision.
And apply your skill in every way that is possible for you to avoid the Arrow's hit: and do it with ease, and calmness, or slowness, and firmness, as I have told you.
And it is necessary that you do when you pull out the Arrow, that the patient be according to the figure, according to which it was at the time of the Arrow's hit. For it is more beneficial. If it is not possible for you to do that, then apply what is possible for you from the figures.
The Arrow which exits from the opposite part of the other side, or already proceeds from it somewhat to the exterior: or the tip of the Arrow makes a bulge through the sensation from the upper part of the nearby skin, and you see it protruding: cut therefore over it, and let the incision be according to the amount that forceps can take hold of it.
Then pull it out: for it becomes easy to remove.
If it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the Arrow impresses on the bone and enlarges for itself: then pull it out.
And if not: leave it for several days: then try it again until it comes out.
If the arrow's shaft is in it, then push it out with it.
If the shaft has broken off and you wish to apply pressure: then introduce a concave instrument to it, so that its concavity enters into the tail of the arrow: then push it out with it.
If however the arrow is concave, then push it with the entering instrument into it. For the arrow is alleviated by that.
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to concave all the flesh where the poison is: if it is possible for you to do so. Then treat it with what is appropriate for that.
If the arrow falls in the chest, or in the stomach, or in the bladder, or in the side: and it is close to what you touch with a probe, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and beware of the incision of vein or nerve, and extract it.
Then sew the wound, if you see it, and treat it until it heals.
And this is the form of the forceps with which arrows are extracted.
Let the ends be similar to a bird's beak, which are made like irons: when they grasp the arrow, they do not release it.
And many types are made from them, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrow's magnitude, its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
The form of the concave pusher.
And the form of the deaf pusher.
This is the end of the deaf one like a radius, so that its entry into the concave arrow is alleviated, and it is pushed with it.
On bloodletting veins.
The veins to be bloodlet, of which the custom has run in the body, are thirty.
Of which in the head there are sixteen: two pulsating veins, which are behind the ears, called the two Herbae: and two arteries, which are apparent in the temples: and two veins which are in the tear ducts of both eyes, which are called Aspicientes: and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead: and the vein which is at the tip of the nose. And two Guidegi, which are in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. And these are the veins which are called Algecherich. And two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins which are bloodlet in the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalica, and it is on the outer side: and the common people call it the head vein. And the Fusca. And it is the Median vein, and it is composed of the branch of the Basilic and the branch of the Cephalic; and the common people name it the vein of the body. And the Basilic, and it is placed on the inner side: and it is also named Titillicaris. And the common people name it the vein of the belly. And the Sinew of the arm, and it is placed above the bone: and it is the one that is bled from, and it is the one that appears above the thumb clearly visible.
And the Salvatella: and it is the vein which is between the ring finger and the little finger: and it has two branches.
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins. One of them is the one which is under the curvature of the thumb on the outer side. And the second is the Saphena: and its location is near the heel on the inner side. And the vein Nesse: and its location is near the heel on the outer side.
And in the other leg there are three similar veins.
Regarding the bloodletting of two veins behind the ears.
The bloodletting of the two veins which are behind the ears is beneficial for old catarrhs, hemiplegia, sahafati, and old bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bloodletting is according to what I narrate. And it is that the head of the sick person is shaved: and his occipital area is rubbed in the place of two veins with a coarse cloth by good friction. Then the sick person should compress his neck with a ligature until two veins become apparent. And their locations are behind the ears at two depressed areas of the head. Seek them therefore with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, mark there with encaustic.
Then take the lancet, and that is called the Incider. Then insert it under the vein into the skin until the lancet reaches the bone. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upward, and cut the vein with the skin by an intersecting incision. And the length of the incision should be the quantity of two joined fingers, or about that: and let as much blood flow as you wish.
Then bind it with bandages, and leave it until it heals.
And the incision of them has already been discussed at the beginning of the book, and their cauterization as well.
The benefit of bloodletting the two arteries which are in the two temples is for ancient hemiplegia: and for severe headache, and persistent ophthalmia: and for the course of sharp humors flowing to the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting is as I tell you. Let the patient tighten his neck greatly until two veins appear clearly to your sight: and their pulse should be detectable under your finger. Then mark with encaustic.
Then lift the skin over the vein upwards with your index finger, and insert the lancet from below, and raise the vein upwards. And cut it as you did with the other two veins: and let the blood flow according to the quantity necessary for you.
Then release the patient's constriction, and place your finger on the vein for one hour. Then apply pitch and poultice over it, and bind it tightly with a strong constriction: and leave it until it heals.
And the memory of them has preceded, and their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
The benefit of bloodletting from the frontal vein after bloodletting the cephalic vein is for chronic facial ailments: and for hemipity, and redness: and ugly sores.
And the quality of its bloodletting is as I tell you. Let the patient constrict his neck with a strap until the vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called Fossorium.
Place the sharp point which is on the head of the Fossorium over the vein, and strike over it with a comb, or with another instrument in its manner; and let the blood flow in the quantity you wish. Then treat the patient's wound, and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide phlebotomize. However, it should not have a sharp end like other phlebotomes, but rather a broad end. And phlebotomize it transversely because the mouth is nearby, and the phlebotome might break when it is thin.
The benefit of the two veins which are in the two lacrimal ducts of both eyes is for the eye from scabies and redness, and similar conditions in the eye, and ailments of the face.
And the method of phlebotomy for these veins is that the patient should press his neck with a vein. Then phlebotomize them: and you should stand above his head.
And the phlebotomy should be done transversely to a slight length with a small, somewhat broad phlebotome, for there is no flesh in that place. For if the bloodletting vein is delicate, it perhaps breaks.
Then let as much blood flow as you need. And place a bandage over them, bind them for one night, and then loosen them.
The bloodletting of the nasal veins is beneficial for acute fever, and severe headache, and facial illnesses, such as hemiplegia, and the redness that occurs on the face: especially when it is chronic.
And the method of its bloodletting is such that the patient should press his neck. Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a fine, long bloodletting instrument, and insert it in the middle of the nasal septum, between the parts that divide the nose straight. For the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And you must keep your hand with the bloodletting instrument for a moment: and let the blood flow according to your need. Then bind it for one night. For it restores quickly.
The benefit of bloodletting the two Guidegi veins is for constriction of breathing, the onset of leprosy, melancholic illnesses, impetigo, and bad sores, and corrosives, that is, snakebites.
And the quality of their bloodletting is that the patient should bind under both his armpits with a bandage: and the operator shall stand above the head of the patient, and the patient be sitting on a seat.
Then let the vein be opened to the length of a broad bloodletting for a moment. Then draw from the blood a moderate quantity, or according to what you see is necessary for that. Then do likewise with another vein.
Then loosen the bandage, and bind the two veins with a moderate constriction: so that the patient is not choked. And leave it until morning. For the wound is healed.
Concerning the bloodletting of veins by Albucasis. The bloodletting of veins by Albucasis is beneficial: because it helps with alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums: and bad sores: and cracks in the lips, and bad ulcers, even those which are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of their bloodletting is that you should make the patient sit before you: and bind his neck with a cord. Then turn his lip inside out, and look at the two veins: of which one is on the right side of the lip, and the second on the left side of it: and the indication of both is by their blackness. And this is true: because around them are small veins, black. Cut therefore with each cutting cut.
If however there is doubt upon you, and you do not know which of them it is: then aim at the larger of them, and the more evident of them.
And similarly do with the two veins which are in the upper lip: and indeed the custom greatly agrees with this: and cut the two veins which are in the lower lip.
Regarding phlebotomy The veins under the tongue after cephalic phlebotomy. The benefit of the phlebotomy of the two veins which are under the tongue is that cephalic phlebotomy is for obstructions which are in the throat, and sickness of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
And the manner of phlebotomy for them is that the patient should sit before you facing the sun: and raise his tongue, and look under the tongue on one side for a vein, and on the other side for a vein: and the color of both tends toward blackness.
Phlebotomize therefore both: and be careful not to be too hasty with your hand in phlebotomizing them. For beneath it are arteries, and perhaps a flow of blood might occur from those arteries.
The three veins which are phlebotomized in the elbow are those whose phlebotomy has become customary in all people.
And the bloodletting of them is done in two ways. Or by pricking with a broad myrtle lancet: or ointment to subtlety inclined: or by cutting with a knife-like lancet, and this is Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from them are the broad and subtle types according to the width of the veins and their tightness. The form of the myrtle lancet is broad, as you see. And it is suitable for opening concave veins, full, protruding, visible, thick, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this lancet is of lesser width and finer at the tip.
And it is suitable for bloodletting of subtle veins that contain fine yellow blood.
However, the Basilicae, which is one of these three veins, is beneficial for bloodletting. Because it draws blood from illnesses that are under the throat and neck, from what follows the chest, and the abdomen: and it is suitable for the bloodletter to be cautious with this vein and be wary of it, for an artery lies beneath it. If he errs, and adds to the pricking of the lancet, he will cut that artery, and a flow of blood will result. Therefore, it is necessary that he not pierce her with a bloodletting instrument; rather, he should cut with Alnesil.
If the basilica does not appear with a clear manifestation, then it is necessary that you distance yourself from it and switch to another, or seek some branch of it: or bloodlet at the arm's vein instead of it. For it is clear, and cut it with the Anesil bloodletting instrument, as we have said.
If you wish for the bloodletting of it from the same place, then it is necessary before tightening the arm, to touch the area until you know the location of the pulse. Then mark the area with a cauterizing agent, then bind the arm, and cut the vein with a concave incision using the bloodletting instrument Alnesil, as we have said. And be careful that the incision does not fall away from the site of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, swelling at the place you marked with the cauterizing agent, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery: avoid it therefore.
If you see the blood at the bloodletting site leap like a boy's urine, and it is fine, red blood, then you know that it is from an artery. Then hurry, and place your finger on it for a long moment, then remove your finger. If the blood is interrupted (for it is often interrupted), then bind the arm and release it: and let the patient avoid moving it: and let it be under wraps.
And let it not be moved for several days until it heals.
If the blood does not stop and overpowers you: and if there is no medicine present for you at the moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For its extremities contract, and the blood is stopped.
Or take the bark of the sycamore, and boil it: take one half, and apply it to the place of the vein's constriction with a bandage and poultices until the next day.
Then if the blood is stopped, it is good. And if not: then treat it with those mentioned previously from the place of powders stopping the flow of blood: and the stopping of its blood is not difficult in many conditions, because of the small area of the wound, and the possibility of binding from the arm.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the Fuscae vein is that it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body: because it is composed of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalica, as we have said.
And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist to be cautious about fear from its phlebotomy, for there is a nerve beneath it. If therefore the phlebotomist adds pressure at the puncture and finds a nerve, numbness occurs in that area, healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it will not be thoroughly healed.
And this nerve often appears to the sense. And if it is hidden in some men, and is subtle, and is not shown: then you must place your vein-opening where you open the vein, cut with Alnesil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If there is a vein between two nerves, then find the vein along its length.
About the cephalic vein. Opening the cephalic vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and helps with eye diseases.
And you must properly in this vein, if you wish, open it by piercing with an olive lancet or with a myrtle lancet: for it is safer than all other veins, for there is no artery or nerve beneath it.
However, it is suitable for you when opening veins, to avoid the head of the arm with the lancet and seek a softer spot: and it does no harm if it is not found on the first attempt, to repeat over it with the lancet several times.
However, it may become apostematous in some men when it is not opened on the first attempt, but that aposteme does no harm in any way.
About the usefulness of bloodletting and the precautions to be observed in it. The nature of bloodletting and its effects must be considered by you for its proper application.
Therefore, first of all, you must know that bloodletting is not administered except for the preservation of health, and its continuance, and caution against the onset of illnesses.
And for bloodletting to be performed on one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely Cephalica, and Fusca, and Basilica. And let bloodletting be done at the beginning of spring on an empty stomach, in spring and summer: and in autumn, and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
And let bloodletting be done on the first day, or on the third, after three hours have passed since daybreak.
Bloodletting which is administered in illnesses does not have a fixed time: but when circumstances and necessity call for it, whether at night or day, and at any hour, and at any time.
And it should not be the case that children be bled until they reach fourteen years of age. Nor should a pregnant woman be bled, except from the fourth month up to the seventh. Nor should seniors who have already passed sixty years be bled.
Therefore, when someone wishes to be bled for any reason: it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines before bloodletting with a mild enema, if there is much retained feces in them: so that the veins do not attract putrid and harmful superfluities from the intestines during bloodletting to the principal members.
The patient should not be bled when he is surfeited, that is, suffering from nausea; nor when he is drunk, nor as he recovers from drunkenness, until those conditions are removed from them. Nor the patient with dropsy.
And caution should be taken not to bleed after an attack of colic, and vomiting, and flux of the bowels, and multiplication of intercourse, and labor, and exercise, and wakefulness, and fasting, and anything that dissolves the power from the body or animate being.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before that, if the blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medicines: if it is possible for him to do so.
Then let him enter the bath, if nothing prohibits it: or let him engage in some exercise, so that the blood may be refined.
And place his bleeding on the chest, around the third hour of the day, as we have said: and strive so that his chest may be evacuated that day from all harmful animal conditions: such as distress, anger, and fear: and from all bodily conditions, such as labor, pain, and excess, and those similar to these.
And let him have present at his seat things with which human custom runs due to their aromatics, and odors, and spices and similar things according to the extent of possibility.
Then let the bleeder sit on a cushion that is higher than the bleeding cushion: then let him draw out his arm and rub it twice or thrice with his own hand. Then he ties the ligature with a strap, and wraps it twice.
And let the binding be moderate, for when the binding is unequal, whether by excess in the binding, then it impedes the flow of blood; or in looseness, then also it impedes the flow of blood.
Then after the binding, it is necessary that the person to be bled should rub his hands together near the vein, until the veins swell and become apparent to the sense.
Then the phlebotomizer should cleanse the vein with a little oil, in the proper ancient manner.
Then he should place his left index finger on the vein at the site where he wants to perform the phlebotomy, slightly: so that the vein does not escape and the puncture is accurate. For there are veins that you find fleeing like a string during phlebotomy: and among them is one that is full of air: and when you place the phlebotomy instrument on it, it contracts under the instrument, and deceives the phlebotomist, and the instrument does not open the vein: and if it opens it, it is constricted: therefore, the phlebotomist must be steady and careful in all these matters.
Then he should put down the phlebotomy instrument. If therefore the vein is opened with one attempt, then it is good. And if not, then repeat it with another attempt nearby or above the same place quickly: provided the area does not become inflamed.
If it becomes abscessed or the patient swells, then leave it for a day or two days: and do not bind the bandage. For perhaps heat will attract the abscess. Let him not enter the bath.
Then let him repeat phlebotomy if he wishes.
If the opening is small, or blood flows thinly: and you fear that the quantity of blood you wish will not exit: then repeat the phlebotomy at the same puncture straightly, and add a little to the procedure.
And do this with haste before the place becomes abscessed, for an abscessed place is in many people a minor operation.
If you see that it is already abscessed, then do not repeat the procedure at all on it, for nothing excuses it to you. And place something from the dregs of oil on it, for it alleviates the flow of blood. And it is better in this place than the oil itself and than other oils.
And similarly administer the dregs of oil in all your phlebotomies where you bleed veins to prohibit the flow of blood: and they do this with mithridate, alfarachi, and sagzenea, when one of them is placed on the spot.
For blood becomes thinner and dissolves when it is thick.
If a large abscess occurs at the site of phlebotomy, for it often happens, especially to one who has not been bled except that once, or if the vein opening is small, then hurry and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, heated briefly, on the area: and bind it for an hour, for it dissolves.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has exited from the vein itself, with its completion, or from another vein.
If some blackness or greenness remains in the place after several days, it does not harm: and if you wish, put something over it like dissolved aloes or myrrh: or something from the juice of menthastri, that is, calamus or similar to it.
And often enough swellings and protrusions occur around the phlebotomy at Basilicae.
Place therefore your hand upon it, then if you find softness at your compression upon it, then that protrusion is bad. Be careful, then, to put something on it from what we have said. For perhaps the blood of an artery may flow from it.
But make a poultice for it with something that has astringency, so that the area may harden. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And it is necessary to withdraw blood from every person according to the measure of their strength. And what appears from the victorious color over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it turns red: and similarly if you see it thick: then let it flow until it becomes thin: and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for one who is full, strong, and requires blood extraction once, to enlarge the opening of the vein, and let the opening be on the side: and in one who is weak, it should be contrary to that.
And it is necessary to extract it in places, and that the opening be narrow: and better in bloodletting of the vein is a transverse cut, not a puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from blood flow and nerve cutting: and it is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting across the length and width.
And for one who is accustomed to faint at bloodletting, it is necessary to eat slightly before bloodletting with bread infused in pomegranate juice or honey: or secaniabin, if it is heated: and extract from him blood in three places, or four.
And if it is of a chilled complexion, then let them take before bloodletting bread infused in honey syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, or in fragrant aromatic syrup.
If fainting occurs during bloodletting, and the cause is a large loss of blood: then it is necessary for them to drink water with meat and subtle fragrant syrup: and use aromatics with algalia, and anoint their chest with it: and use the other things we mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting from evacuation.
Who wishes to bleed his arm and release his blood a second time: it is necessary for one whose bloodletting is for significant evacuation and whose strength is weak, to release blood gradually according to the amount of strength over consecutive days.
Whoever wants to bleed his arm again, and his body is strong: then let him do it after seven or nine hours from his first bloodletting.
Whoever wants to draw blood from his body to the opposite part to which it leans: it is necessary that he be bled on the second day or the third.
In whose body there is already much heated blood, and it becomes sharp, and causes fever to occur: it is necessary that blood be let from him once, and a large quantity be drawn from him: and the incision should be enlarged until syncope occurs: after you have been preserving all the conditions of bloodletting: and place your hand on his pulse at the course of the blood, so that death does not occur instead of syncope. For it often happens that when the bloodletter is ignorant, negligence occurs.
And it is not appropriate when you want to bleed an arm again, and the vein's opening is already closed, and the blood's exit becomes difficult, to press on it violently, and to extend it quickly while bent. For that is very bad, indeed leave it until it is bled again.
Or remove with the sharpness of a bloodletter what has coagulated from the blood at the vein's opening, and place something dissolved salt in water on it. And place something from theriac alfaroch, or sagzenea on it, and apply it with gentle pressure until the blood flows out.
If however the vein is already an abscess, then leave it uncovered and do not cover it until the abscess settles.
If the necessity provokes to release blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then either perform phlebotomy at that same place or in another vein on the other arm.
The vein of the arm is phlebotomized at the location of the Fuscae and Basilicae, when they are not found and are hidden, because it is composed of them.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is such that the patient should insert his hand into warm water until the vein becomes red and appears clearly.
Then it should be bound above it with a bandage with slight constriction in the middle. Then phlebotomize across gradually, not widthwise, nor lengthwise: and let the opening be wide, and let your phlebotomy where you phlebotomize be at the joint of the hand for a moment.
If the flow of blood is prevented, then dip the hand again into warm water, and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
If however you are in the summer days, then you are excused from dipping the hand in warm water. And it is placed most importantly that the flow of blood into warm water occurs during the winter time.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins because there is no pulsating vein or nerve beneath it.
Indeed, the bloodletting of the right hand is beneficial for liver ailments.
And the quality of its bloodletting is to bind the wrist with a bandage, or with your hand, after you have immersed it in warm water, until the vein swells and is very apparent to the sense. Then puncture it transversely. And if you cut it completely, it will not harm it in any way.
And be careful not to leave your hand with the lancet at the end. Beneath it, the nerves of the fingers are exposed without flesh.
Then return the hand to warm water, and let the blood flow into it. For if you do not return it to warm water, the blood will clot at the vein's opening and be prevented from flowing.
Therefore, when you have extracted the necessary amount of blood, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close quickly.
And similarly, you should do this with every tight branch.
The bloodletting from the left hand is beneficial for spleen ailments: and similarly perform its bloodletting in the same manner as you did for the second one equally.
The benefit of bloodletting from the saphenous vein is for ailments in the lower part of the body, such as ailments of the wombs, retention of menses, and illnesses of the kidneys, and old sores of the hips and legs, and similar ailments.
And the quality of bloodletting is such that the sick person should insert his foot into warm water: and make friction upon it until the veins swell: and bind above the joint of the foot with a strap. And the place of the veins is near the heel, appearing towards the big toe: and many branches branch out from it on the surface of the foot.
Therefore, bloodletting should be done in the larger branch of it, or near the heel at its gathering: for it is better and safer.
If you bloodlet from it on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves which are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And place your bloodletting tool across where you bloodlet it, as if you want to cut it: and let the bloodletter be Nesil.
If the flow of blood is prevented, then dip his foot in warm water again: and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
If the bloodletter misses the vein on the first attempt, then repeat the bloodletting slightly higher up, for the area is safe, and you need not fear any harm from it when you are careful of the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly with the Saphena of the other foot equally.
The location of the Sciatic veins, as we have said, is near the heel on the outer side.
And the benefit of its bloodletting is for the pain of gout, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of his bloodletting is that the patient should enter the bath and hurry: and bind his leg from the side of the ankle up to four digits above the heel with a fine long thread: for it does not appear unless because of this.
When therefore it appears, then bloodlet from it according to whatever method is possible for you, or diagonally: and this is better, or cut it with an incision, or sever it with a section. For its location is safer, and it is very hidden in most people.
For its location is safer, and it is very hidden in most people. If you do not find it and it does not appear at all to the senses: then bloodlet from one of its branches, and that is the one which appears on the back of the foot, towards the little toe: and be careful of the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you wish.
Then loosen the binding, and place skin over the site of bloodletting, and bind the area. For it heals quickly.
Concerning ventosation, and the quality of its use.
Ventouses are made from horns, and from metal, and from glass.
And ventosation is performed in two ways. With scarification and extraction of blood: the other is ventosation without scarification.
And this ventosation which is without scarification is performed in two ways. For it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And for windy conditions which are treated with scarification and bloodletting, there are fourteen parts of the body. Of which one is Ventosatio Alnocrati, and it is at the back of the head: and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck: and windy Alhagdahim, and they are two plates of the neck from both sides simultaneously: and windiness of the chin, and it is below the jaw on the lower part of the mouth: and windiness of the two spatulas: and windiness of Alachosos at the end of the tail: and windiness of the two focilium, and they are in the middle of the two arms: and windiness of the two thighs: and windiness of the two cavillarum.
And Ventosatio indeed does not draw blood from you from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and because of that, strength does not fall from them, as is the case with bloodletting. Nor should ventosatio be administered, whether with fire or without fire, in any diseases that arise from excess, until the whole body is evacuated.
If necessity prompts ventosation due to illness or habit, we administer it at any hour at the beginning of the month, at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at whatever time it may be.
This is because there are people for whom when blood multiplies in them to the point that they need its extraction through ventosation, they find heaviness and sodahan in their head.
And among them is he who finds swelling and redness on his face, his head, and his neck. And among them is he who finds itching on his face, and forehead, and darkness, and dullness in his eyes.
And among them is he who scrapes the place of his swelling. And among them is he whose laughter multiplies. And among them is he who finds the taste of blood in his mouth: or his tongue swells, and he spits out blood. And among them is he whose sleep multiplies. And among them is he who sees in his sleep blood and redness, and the dead, and wounds, and things similar to these.
When therefore we see any of these things, and especially if it is in the middle third of the month: then we prescribe that swelling be treated, after two or three hours have passed.
The remedy for swelling of the neck is: for it contributes to heaviness in the head, and what flows to the eyes. But it should be done after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this swelling is in place of cephalic bloodletting.
And it is not permissible for one of a cold temperament to use it, or for one who has catarrh. For it causes him great harm.
And for that reason, the elderly should not use it, and those who have cold diseases in their heads.
But he who becomes accustomed to it is overcome by forgetfulness.
And for that reason, you should instruct the cupper to temporarily place his hand with the cup towards the lower parts, fearing the onset of forgetfulness.
Cupping or Alkehel is in place of black bloodletting and general bloodletting, and for that reason it benefits asthma, constriction of breathing, windpipe splitting, cough, and congestion.
And it is necessary to apply the cupping Alkehel temporarily, for if placed lower, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
Cupping with alhagdahim benefits accidental pains in the head, opthalmia, migraines, piercings, and pain in the roots of teeth: and it is a substitute for general bloodletting.
And you should instruct the cupper not to press his hand with scarification so as not to hit an artery and cause a flow of blood.
Cupping under the chin benefits alcoholism in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth: and it serves as a substitute for bloodletting from the veins in both lips.
Cupping of the spatulae benefits alchafacham, which occurs from obstruction and heat.
Indeed, the blowing upon the interior parts of the two bellows brings benefit equivalent to the bloodletting from three veins, Basilicae, Fuscae, and Cephalicae: for it attracts blood from all those tiny veins which are in the flesh: and these tiny veins attract from other veins thicker than themselves, until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And you must instruct the Ventosator not to proceed too much in scarification: for the area is devoid of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
The ventosa which is applied over the alchausos provides relief to hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
And you must instruct the Ventosator to use a large ventosa, and let it be of air: for the area requires strong suction, and perhaps delicate Ventosae may break: and it should be scarified with a large incision.
The Ventosae of the legs noticeably reduce: for they attract blood from the whole body, and relieve old pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder: they provoke menstruation, and help bothor and ademenul: and serve in place of bloodletting from two saphenous veins and alhorcobeni.
However, they greatly weaken the body and cause syncope in many people.
And the benefit of the Ventosae of alhorcobeni is similar to the benefit of the Ventosae of both legs.
The quality of the placement of the Ventosae is to place the ventosa initially empty, and suck with moderate suction: and do not prolong the placement of the ventosae, but place them quickly and remove them quickly, so that the humors come to the place with an equal arrival: and do not stop iterating and continuing this until you see the area already redden and swell, and the redness of blood appears: then scarify, and repeat the suction gradually. Then consider in the arrangement of bodies.
For he who is of tender flesh and fine pores, you must scarify him once, not more: so that the place does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the bloodletter to enlarge the scarification and make it a little deep: and regulate the suction with ease, speed, and gentle movement.
If there is thickness in the blood, then you must scarify him twice. In the first juice, the way is opened for the refinement of blood and its aqueous quality: and in the second, for the thorough extraction of thick blood.
If the blood is very feculent, then let the scarification be done a third time: so as to achieve the ultimate.
And finally, when we wish to extract blood gradually or for a short while, one scarification is sufficient for us. If we wish for the extraction of much blood, we scarify with multiple scarifications.
And if we measure that the blood is thick: then it must be scarified with deep incisions: and the limit in scarification is the depth of the skin.
What should be administered from oils at the site of bloodletting, and what the person being bled should beware of.
For him whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are tight, the areas for bloodletting should be anointed with opening, soothing, and resolving oils: if it is in the summertime, such as oil of alkeiri, or violet oil, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of pumpkin seed.
And if it is in winter time, then use narciss oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or balsam: and things like these.
And if the excess is thick and cold: then the oil should be rue oil, or balsamite oil, or dittany oil, or anise oil: and things like these.
And if the windiness is of large pores, tender flesh: then it is necessary to prohibit oil, and these places of windiness should be washed after windiness with rose water, or with cold water, or with water of solatri, or with water of cucumber, or with water of portulaca: and things like these.
He whose blood is of much moisture, should wash windiness with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and sumach: and things like these.
Whose excesses are thick, should wash his windiness with old wine, or with henbane water, or anise decoction, or chamomile: and things like these.
And it is necessary to be cautious about windiness in a bath, or near the bath, rather it should be administered after exiting the bath by one hour, or by two hours.
And it is not advisable for someone to sleep after windiness.
What is it that should regulate windiness or bloodletting before windiness.
And after that, it is necessary to first consider: then if the windiness or bloodletting is for a choleric person, and sharpness and inflammation overcome his blood: then it is necessary for him to take cooling things, such as pomegranate molasses: and also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and cyclamen, and rue: and things like these.
And place his foods as chicks, and meats of sheep satebiget, and seasoned foods with herbs: and things similar to these.
And for one whose complexion is cold, he must take in drink syrup of honey, or of almaua, or alsecaniabin made from seeds: and let him take fragrant wine that is middle-aged, which is between old and new: and let it be ordered that he use sparingly of food. And place his food as chicks, and canebir: and sparrows, that is, small birds: and chicks of pigeons should be cooked with issia.
And it must be that the drink on the day of bloodletting and phlebotomy be more than food: and it must be that in some men's drinks there is given at certain times theriac alfaroch, or medicine of musk, that is, muscata, or alesselite before bloodletting: and before phlebotomy, or after: so that the principal limbs may be strengthened, and the blood made finer. And it should not be taken in heated drink.
Regarding Windiness without Scarification. Windiness which is without scarification, is windiness that is placed upon the liver, and spleen, and gout, and upon the stomach, navel, and areas of the kidneys, and the anus: because these members do not tolerate scarification upon them.
And they are not sought for, except for the transmission of blood from one member to another: as we place windiness upon the breasts in the illness of nasal bleeding. And we use them to resolve cold invisible swelling in the limb: just as we place swollen on the stomach and navel. For it rarefies the limb, and heats it, and removes pain because it resolves that swelling.
It is also placed on the kidneys when obstruction or stone occurs in them. For by the power of its attraction, it perhaps opens the obstruction or removes the stone from its place.
And it does the same when placed on the spleen and liver for swelling to be treated in both of them.
And these swellings are treated empty with only incision. And sometimes they are treated with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in pleurisy illnesses: and this is done by filling the Ventosa with hot water alone, or water in which herbs suitable for the condition have been decocted.
The method of applying the Ventosa with fire.
Let the diameter of its opening be that of two spread fingers, according to how we have formed it: and let its depth be half a palm: and let there be a small hole on its side at a place which is about the middle of it, according to the size through which a needle can enter: it should be made of copper or brass, with thick, smooth, equal, clean edges: so that it does not harm the limb when placed upon it: and let there be a crossbar in the middle of it made of metal or iron where a candle with fire is placed.
And now this becomes large and inflated, larger than what we mentioned, and somewhat smaller than that, according to the illnesses and age of the one who uses it.
For the flatus of children and those who are emaciated is different from that of men and those with thicker bodies.
The quality of placing this inflated device over a limb with fire is to light wax with fire properly from linen, or a small candle from tallow: and place it on the middle crossbar which is in the middle of the inflated device: so that the fire ignites around the lower part of the inflated device, so that the body of the sick person is not burned.
Then it should be placed on the limb: and a finger should be over the hole I mentioned, until when we hold the inflated device: while we need to, remove the finger, and the vapor will escape through that hole, and the inflated device will deflate immediately.
Then light the wax according to its manner, and repeat it, if you need it.
In the cupping device used for the illness of pleuresis with water, there is no crossbar, nor a hole: and it is not used except that it is filled with water and placed on the limb only.
And this is its form.
And this cupping device, the larger it is, to hold more water, is better.
Regarding the suspension of bloodletting devices.
Leeches are not applied to many places, except where it is not possible to place cupping vessels on the limbs due to their small size, such as the lip, and gum, and similar areas. Or on a bare limb of flesh, such as the finger, and nose, and similar areas.
And the quality of using them is: to use leeches that are from sweet waters, clean from putrefactions.
Then let them be kept day and night in sweet water until they are hungry, and nothing remains in their stomachs. Then the body should be purged first with bloodletting and with cupping. Then clean the patient's limb until it turns red. Then place them on it.
Therefore, when they are filled and fall off, and it is possible to suction the area with a cupping vessel, then it is most beneficial for treatment: and if not, then wash the area with vinegar. Then with plenty of water, it should be rubbed and squeezed.
If the flow of blood continues after the leeches fall off and it is seeping out, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the seepage stops.
If the blood flows excessively, then powder and sprinkle ground zegi, or galls, and similar astringents over it until the bleeding stops.
Or let halves of peeled beans be placed on the site: and leave them until the beans adhere in place, for the blood is congealed.
And it is necessary if the repetition of bloodletting is required, when possible, to change the places.
If bloodletting is prohibited due to suspense, then the area should be cleaned with fresh blood. Or pierce with a needle in the places until some blood comes out. Then they should be placed, for they adhere immediately when they sense some blood.
When therefore you want them to fall off, sprinkle something over them from ground aloe, or salt, or ash: and they will fall off immediately.
This Chapter is also often necessary in the art of Medicine, and it is the restoration of fractured and dislocated bones.
Know, O Sons, that foolish doctors and the common folk boast about this Chapter, and those who have never examined an ancient book or read a letter from it.
And for this reason, this method is deprived from the sciences in our land. And I never entirely complied with that good thing, and did not attain from it what I attained except through the length of reading ancient books, and studying their understanding, until I extracted that knowledge from them.
Then I adhered to experience and study throughout my life.
And now I have described to you from that in this Chapter all that my knowledge contains: and beyond what my experience has passed, after I have shortened it for you, and freed it from the burden of lengthiness, and shortened it to the end of abbreviation, and shown it to the end of deviation: and I formed many shapes in it from the forms of instruments which are used in it, since it is by the addition of deviation, as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
We must say in the prologue of this Chapter the summaries of the discourse and the chapters to whose understanding the artisan is first compelled to stand on their truth: that is, so that you and those who are quick may know or learn this noble art and others from you.
I say, therefore, that when a fracture, or dislocation, or torsion, or fall happens to someone, then you must first hurry to bleed him and to relieve him, or both at the same time: unless something prohibits it, such as weakness of strength; or he to whom one of these things happened is a child or an aged infirm person; or it is a time of extreme heat or extreme cold.
Then let him be content with his food, cold vegetables, and flesh of birds, and of kids: and prohibit wine, and thick meats, and being filled by foods and all food which fills the veins with blood. Until when you are safe from a warm abscess, and do not fear the discharge of matter to the limb: then may the sick person return to his initial regimen with which his habituation has become accustomed.
When therefore the broken bone begins to heal, then it is necessary that the sick person be fed with nourishing foods, rich in nutrition, thick, heavy, which have viscosity: such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, and roots, and heads, and feet, and bellies of cows, and eggs, and fresh fish: and thick wine, and similar things. With this regimen, the fracture is healed faster and better.
And know that broken bones, when they are in men who are in their early old age, and the infirm, it is not possible for them to be healed and consolidated according to their natural way, because of the dryness of their limbs: and they are consolidated and continued which are at the end of softening, like the bones of small children.
However, nature attaches something similar to glue over the broken bone from all sides, in which there is thickness, by which it adheres and binds itself, until they are glued together and bound together, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was at first, until nothing prevents it from its functions: and for this reason it is necessary to provide the sick person's nourishment with foods that have heaviness, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
And you shall know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of limbs: for the fracture of the leg is different from the fracture of the skull bone: and the fracture of the chest bone is different from the fracture of the back bone: and similarly all other limbs exist different from each other: and I come with the recollection of every species of fracture exposed in its Chapter distinct from another. And the species of bone fractures also differ among themselves.
For its fracture is curved, besides which shards may occur in it. And sometimes its fracture is along the length of the bone: and its fractures are splintered, that is, shards, and projections proceeding, as they are in a reed, when it is cut with a knife for writing. And not proceeding: and there is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head: and there is a fracture, a small fissure.
And each species has its own method or instrument for its restoration, according to which its recollection will come, distinguished in their respective places.
And by which the fracture of the bone is known, is its twisting and its prominence: and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you compress it with your hand.
When therefore there is no apparent twisting in the place, nor sound at your touch when you touch the bone with movement, nor does the patient find great pain: then there is no fracture there, but it is possible that there is a twisting or a small fissure: therefore it is not necessary to move it with hand and compression at all, but place upon it from the medicines of which its recollection comes, after the moment which befits the place: then bind with a fine bandage.
And you shall know that when the place is bent and split into two, apart from the pus that may occur in it, however, all parts are removed from their companion: then it is necessary for you to begin at your appointed time for its correction, equalizing it before a warm abscess befalls it.
And if a warm abscess occurs in it, then leave it for several days until the abscess rests. Then equalize it according to whichever method can be done based on its mildness and ingenuity.
And you shall know that the restoration and equalization of it is easier than that of bone in which pus occurs.
Then bind it according to how the memory of it will come to you.
If pus is in the bone, then the extension of this fractured member from its two parts is necessary, if it is a hand or foot: or with your hand if the member is small: or with two ropes, or with one rope and your hand.
And let your position be such that you place the member on an equal ground according to its natural form, until when the parts of the fractured member are extended: then strive to restore those additions with all ingenuity and in whatever way you can to their places: and be careful according to your strength, lest excessive weakness result from your operation, neither pain nor injury: and strive according to your strength to apply one of the two bones with its companion according to the best forms.
And it is necessary at that time for you to test and touch it with your hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it, and equalize it according to the extent of your skill.
And beware strong extension and forceful compression, as many foolish people do. For they often cause a warm abscess or contraction in the limb through their operation: as we have already seen many times from their procedures.
Then apply after equalization, and proper treatment, and constriction of that limb, and rest, and tranquility: and advise the patient about it. And make him beware not to move it during his waking hours, and in his sleep regarding his turning, and stirring, and in his evacuation, and all his movements with his utmost strength. And let him be cautious that the position of the limb does not cause pain. Which means that when he feels pain or injury in the position of the limb: then it is necessary to change it to another position where he does not feel pain.
And be careful with it, so that its position is equal and straight: so that no distortion occurs in the limb when it is restored.
And the quality of the constriction of the fractured limb is as I narrate.
Know that fractured limbs differ in their smallness, and their magnitude, and their form.
Therefore, those among them that are small, such as the arm, and finger, and toe, and similar to them, then it is necessary that there be a wrapping of a soft, fine cloth. Which of them are thick, like the thigh and leg, must have a wide, hard wrapping.
For the wide bandage connects the large limb and tightens it equally on all sides so that no spot enters it.
Then begin after your evacuation to apply a suitable liniment to that, on soft tow over the site of the fracture. Then begin to wrap the bandage over the site of the fracture with three or four layers, according to what the limb deserves: and hold your hand firmly with the bandage.
Then proceed with it to the upper part from the site of the fracture, and hold less tightly than your previous tightening of the fractured site. Then move away with the wrapping from the site of the fracture gradually, and loosen the tightness little by little until you reach a large part from the healthy area.
Then take another strip and wrap it again over the fractured area with layers. Then proceed with the wrapping to the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be in the tightness of the wrapping and its loosening according to what we said in the first upper wrapping.
Then place between the wrappings with soft tow or cloth, with which the curvature of the fracture is evened if there is any curvature: and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then wrap another strip over it. Then apply the splints evenly over these wraps immediately, if there is no swelling or warm abscess in the place.
If there is swelling or an abscess, then place on it something that will sit on the abscess and reduce the swelling; and leave it for several days. Then tighten the splints over it.
And the splints should be made from the halves of a broad, shaved, and wisely shaped cane; or they may be made from wood used for sieves, which is made from pine, or geraid, that is, palm branches, or calingi: and the width of each splint, according to this form, should have the same shape.
However, it is necessary that the splint which is placed over the traction be thicker and slightly wider than the other splints: and the length of the splint should be according to what is suitable for the member in size and smallness.
Then wrap another strip over the splints according to the same tightness as the first one. Then bind it with strings appropriately, according to what we have said about tightness: and it is so that your binding over the site of the fracture is tighter: and the further it extends from the fracture, the looser the binding should be.
And it is necessary that the strings be of medium thickness and fineness, and they should be made of soft linen.
For if the strings are thick, as I have seen in the work of foolish ones who use twisted linen cords, it is a great mistake: for the tightness with them falls outside the proper quality.
And fine threads again do not suit: because you do not achieve with them what you want through tension.
And it should not be less than a finger's width between the stake and the stake.
If the patient is injured by the ends of the stakes after they are tightened at healthy sites: then place under them soft tow or carded wool until nothing is injured from that.
When there is a fracture with a wound, and the skin is ruptured, I will come to it with a reminder of that in the second chapter by its particularity.
And you should know that not every fractured limb should be bound with stakes on the first day. This is because when the limb is large, you should not place stakes on it until after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from the risk of hot abscess.
And this is the method of plasters with which the ancients restored fractures and dislocations.
Method of a brief common plaster restoring fractures, suitable for most complexions, especially women and children: because it is such that heat does not overcome it nor cold.
And it is done by taking the millstone dust, which is the flour residue hanging on the walls of the mill near the motion of the millstone: and prepare it as it is, except that you sieve it with egg white: and place the mixture not too thick nor too thin. Then use it.
Method of another plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions. Take almess, and laudanum, and acacia, and enula, and mugwort: and the juice of all  X myrrh, and aloes both  V and alcohol  XX are to be ground, sieved, and mixed with alcohol: or with egg white, if the complexion of the patient is heated. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, restores broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Method of another plaster which also benefits fractures and torsions. Take mugwort, and fenugreek, and white hollyhock, of each  X, myrrh, and aloes both  V, acacia  VI, Armenian bole  XX. All are to be ground finely, sieved, mixed with water or egg white: and administered.
Method of a plaster for joints and bones separated from their places: and to alleviate pain occurring in them, and bone Take suet wool and soak it in vinegar and boiled oil: and place it on the area.
And in this plaster there is no restorative power, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess: and it properly relieves pain.
The method of the plaster which restores the broken bone. Take the leaves of the fig of the deaf, and the leaves of the wild poppy: and grind all, and make a plaster from both.
The method of the shortened plaster, applied for the restoration of the fractured bone: and when you want the resolution of the remaining abscess. Take the root of althea, and chamomile, and flowers of violet, and flour of the herb, of all one part each: grind all, and prepare with wine, if the limb is not heated.
If it is heated, then prepare it with water of moist coriander, or with water, and use it.
The method of another stronger plaster for resolution, than this first one, when a hard abscess occurs at the restoration of the limb. Take the root of althea, and seeds of flax, and pomegranate flowers, and sweet clover, and marshmallow, and flowers of violet, and chamomile, of all one part each: grind all, and prepare with willow water, or with sweet water, or with wine. Use the whole according to the heat of the member, and the cooling of its temperature.
Hippocrates, however, did not say in his book that anything should be placed on the fractured limb during its restoration, except a plaster made of wax and oil: nothing else: and he described it to be a balance between thickness and fineness.
But Galen thought that over the fractured limb during its restoration should be placed things which have a drying heat, such as myrrh, and aloe and frankincense, and similar to these of those which we have narrated.
Method of the plaster that helps with the wound and pain. Take myrrh, and chickpeas, and human hair that has been cut, or a bird's feather, and coltsfoot, and salt in equal parts: they are ground, sifted, and prepared: and make a plaster from it.
The quantity according to which it is necessary for the bandage to remain, and then be loosened, is such that you should consider whether there has not occurred to the patient pain, nor itching, nor movement of the fractured bone from its place: then do not loosen it for many days. If there occurs to him a severe itching, or disturbing pain, or swelling in the place: then hurry and loosen it within an hour, and remove the plaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a soft sea sponge, wet: and submerge it in warm water, and wash the area with it until the itching ceases, and the pain subsides.
If there occurs to him a severe itching, or disturbing pain, or swelling in the place: then hurry and loosen it within an hour, and remove the plaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a soft sea sponge, wet: and submerge it in warm water, and wash the area with it until the itching ceases, and the pain subsides. Then let the limb rest for one hour. Then place wool soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil, on it: and bind it for one night, until you are sure there is no warm abscess, and the swelling of the limb subsides, and its pain is removed.
Then bind it with a fine compression and a small plaster: and do not constrict it with your first binding, and use fine bindings until it heals.
If you see that the abscess, and redness, and pain, and swelling, and all symptoms are now completely removed, and you need a plaster and binding, then do it again as you did at first equally.
If nothing of what we have said has happened to the limb, then do not loosen it, unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is left for twenty days, do all of that according to what appears to you from loosening the limb as we said, until the fracture adheres and the coagulation of flesh approximates over it: then add more in binding than your whole first binding: and also increase the infirm man's food according to his previous recollection of it.
If you see the place of the fracture already drying out and becoming thinner than it should be: then know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. So fumigate it with warm water every time you loosen it, and do this for all three days, and lighten the binding momentarily.
Through this operation, nourishment flows to the limb, and it heals quickly.
That which foolish restorers do with a fractured limb by some other means when it is not restored at first as it should be, and is restored with a twist, is an error from their operation, and it is a great fear: and if it were right, the ancients would have said it in their books and acted upon it.
And I did not see any trace of them in it at all, and it is better that it not be done.
Of the treatment of an accident to the head.
The types of fractures are diverse, and its shapes are many: and its causes are distinct.
For there is a fracture caused by a blow with a sword: and the blow removes the entire bone until it reaches the saphac, which is beneath the bone, just as an axe affects wood: and because of this, this type of fracture is called Axial.
Or the sword cuts through part of the bone, and cuts its surface, but the cut does not penetrate to the end of it: and this type of fracture is called Kalaan, which means Absolute Elevation.
And it is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture which is a grinding or wearing down: and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall upon a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which approaches the membrane beneath the bone: or it is on the surface of the bone: and it is a wound of these two fractures, either small or large.
And there is a fracture which is hidden in the bone like a hair's thickness: and it is a small crack, and because of this, this type of fracture is called Capillary.
And among them is a fracture caused by a fall or a blow with a stone, and similar things, which cause the bone plate to extend into the interior, and a concavity is formed: just as happens to bellows of brass when they are struck and part of them extends inward.
And that happens very much in the heads of humid bones, as are the heads of children.
And separate efforts are made for all these types of fractures, and I will come with a recollection of the whole of that in its proper place.
And we know all these types of fractures through examination of them, and inquiry into them with probes, and removal of the corrupted flesh which is on them.
The capillary type is recognized by this, that it is detected on the bone, cleaned, and anointed on it with encaustic: for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, first consider the symptoms of the patient: then if you see from the symptoms that it clearly indicates fear, such as choleric vomiting, and extension, and loss of intellect, and cessation of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and protrusion of the eyes, and redness of them, and similar ones among the symptoms in most dispositions, undoubtedly it is not cured: and if you see symptoms that do not terrify you, and hope for recovery: then begin its treatment.
Which means, if a wounded person comes to you when first wounded: and it is during the winter months, then it is necessary that you focus on the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is during the summer months, then it is necessary that you hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what is under the bone from the membrane becomes corrupted, and those symptoms we have mentioned occur.
If the fracture of the bone has already reached the membrane touching the brain, and it is with fragments, and traction: then it is necessary that you cut away the shattered and worn part, as I tell you.
And it is so that you should scrape the head of the wounded area: and expose over the bone in whatever way is possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light over the injury.
If during the exposure of the bone there happens to be a flow of blood or a warm abscess: then apply what is necessary to it. And it is so that you should fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil: and make the wound rest until the abscess settles, and be secure from the flow of blood. Then begin in the treatment of the bone, and its removal.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
One method is to cut the bone with an instrument of a sharp edge: and this is its form.
Then apply another cutter after the first, somewhat wider than the previous one: and this is its form.
Then apply another cutter even wider than the second one.
And the second method is to have a number of different cutters with you: some of which are wider than others, and some of which are shorter than others: and they should be sharp at their ends, and they should be made of Indian iron or steel: and use them easily in striking over the bone, so that it does not shake the head and harm it.
If the bone is strong, hard: then you must pierce around it before you apply the cutting instruments with drills which are called non-deepening drills: and they are not so named unless because they do not penetrate the limit of the fleshy bone to that which is behind it: therefore, the drill has a round end above that which is under its sharp head, similar to an edge, and a small circle prevents submersion, and penetration through the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting for you to take from these drills a great number, each of which should be suitable to the thickness of the bone, until you have a drill appropriate for every skull: the sharpness of whose ends in length and brevity should be according to the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three species of drills, or trephines.
The quality of piercing around the fractured bone is: to place the drill on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then change the drill to another place, and place it so that there is the width of a radius or about that between every hole.
Then cut with the cutting instruments what is between every hole from the bone: and make it finer than you can at the lighter end, as we have said, until you root out the bone, either by hand or with some other of the instruments you have prepared for this: such as forceps and fine chisels.
And you must be cautious with all care that the drill or cutting instrument does not touch anything from the sinew.
Therefore, when you drill around the tooth and separate it from the gum, if it is connected to it, and you extract it, you must file it and even out the end that remains in the bone with another similar chisel-like instrument. However, it must be thinner and finer than the other chisels.
If any small pieces of bone remain and cause trouble, then remove them easily with the instruments you have. Then treat the wound after that with licinis and the ointments we have mentioned.
And another method of the operation is easy, entirely free from fear: which Galen mentioned and praised highly: and this is his teaching. It is necessary for you to begin by exposing the part of the bone where the fracture is more severe and evident: until you expose that part and place under it the end of this lens-shaped chisel, which has this form.
And the lens-shaped part, being blunt, does not cut anything: and the sharp part of it running along the two sides in length, as you see: so that the lens-shaped part rests against the gum, with its sharp face facing the bone.
Then strike on the chisel from one side with a small mallet until you cut through the entire bone easily, as it turns: and you shall be secure about the flap, that no accident will happen to it which you fear entirely.
And if the medic were not stupider than others and more ignorant of it, nor asleep, then if anything remained attached to the bone from the flap in some places, he would cut it off with the end of the lens-shaped chisel and free it easily. For it is freed from it without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the panniculus, and that which is severed from the bone is its surface, and roughnesses and fine splinters remain in it: then you must scrape away that roughness, and root out those splinters with subtle rasps of various sizes which you have prepared, so that you may be able to use the most suitable and appropriate ones among them according to what the operation leads you to do, and the bone itself, and its shape. And you must apply yourself with reason, whereby you first scrape the bone more widely with those rasps. Then use the finer one after it.
And you must apply yourself with reason, whereby you first scrape the bone more widely with those rasps. Then use the finer one after it. And do not cease to do this continuously until you reach the point of using the finest and most subtle of them all.
In each of the remaining small capillary fissures and fine fractures, you must apply care according to what leads to its correction.
And it is a matter that is not hidden from anyone who has any interest in this art, and who has stood over what we have written and shown in large fractures.
But if the panniculus detected is retained when you remove the bone: then you must take a piece of linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth, doubled or tripled, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth: and make it as light as you can on top of it, so that it is not too heavy.
Then apply over the broad ligament: and do not tighten it except to the extent that it holds the wound only: and leave it with this care for one day or two days, until you are secure from warm abscess. Then loosen it, and apply after it medications with which there is excessive dryness: such as lily roots, and flour of the herb, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar to these: and it is that you make from these medications a powder, which is dusted over the wound like they are dry.
And universally apply to it all medicine whose property is to cleanse and not to irritate. And be careful according to your ability, that the wound in your care is clear: nor should there be any ointment dirt or filth in it.
And be careful according to your ability, that the wound in your care is clear: nor should there be any ointment dirt or filth in it. And do not allow pus to accumulate in it at all: for when pus accumulates on the brain membrane, it corrupts and putrefies it, and great harm befalls the patient afterwards: and it often happens in scalp infections, when the bone is cleansed of it, especially when its care is neglected, blackness appears on its surface.
Therefore, consider then, if the patient experiences the symptoms we have mentioned, you shall know that it is certainly dangerous.
And if blackness does not occur except from the medicine placed upon it, and it is in the power of that medicine to cause that blackness: then you must take one part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and wet the cloth with them. Then place him on a shiffin: afterwards care for him with the types of treatment which are appropriate, until he is healed.
On the restoration of the nose when fractured.
You should know that only the two upper parts of the nose are fractured simultaneously or one of them: because there are two bones; since its lower part is cartilaginous, it does not fracture, and what happens to it is only wear, distortion, and flattening.
If one of the two parts is fractured, then you must insert a small finger into the nostril and align that fracture with your index finger and thumb from outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape: and this should be done skillfully, with ease. And beware that your operation does not cause pain to the patient.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be aligned using the end of a rod, which should have a small thickness.
If the fracture is in both parts, then do the same: and hurry with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day when the inflammation has subsided.
Then insert a strip of linen cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part: or insert two strips if the fracture is in both parts: and let the strip have a thickness that fills the nostril.
And some of the ancients said that quicksilver should be poured into butter, and changed every day. That indeed does not seem right to me; rather, it should be poured into the curd of sheep's milk, mixed with mill dust. Then apply the quicksilver until the bone is set and the cartilage hardens.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the nose instead of quicksilver, after being wrapped with a soft cloth; and it happens that it holds the nasal fracture very firmly, and does not prevent the patient from breathing.
And this thing is not necessary. If you wish, do that: and if you wish, use quicksilver.
And if the nose is affected again while you are treating a warm abscess, apply plasters to the nose with cerote, or with cuttlefish bone infused in rose oil, or a little dyaciton.
But if a warm abscess does not occur, then it is necessary to apply plasters made with sesame flour and incense powder mixed with sheep's curd. Then place a soft piece of tow on it, and do not bind the nose with anything at all.
But if the bones of the nose are fractured slightly or shattered, then it is necessary to incise over them and extract them with suitable instruments. Then sew the incision and treat it with what promotes fleshing and strengthening, using appropriate plasters or ointments.
If a wound occurs between the nose, then you must treat it with rushes: and administer a lead pipe until it heals.
On the restoration of the lower jaw when it is fractured.
When the lower jaw is fractured and the fracture is not with a wound: then examine if the fracture is only on the outer side and is not broken into two, and is bent inward: then its diagnosis is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert the index finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient: similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the index finger of the right hand: and push with it the prominence of the fracture from inside to the outside easily with your other hand from the inner part of the bone properly, and straighten it with it.
If the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then you must apply extension from both sides, according to straightness: until it is possible to align it.
If, however, the teeth have already been shaken or broken: then bind those that you hope will remain with gold thread, or silver thread, or silk. Then place wax over the fractured jaw. Then place a doubled cloth over it, and put a well-made large splint on top of the cloth: or a piece of sole leather equal in length to the jaw.
Then bandage it according to how its binding is prepared and its application suits, until it is not destroyed: and instruct the patient to maintain tranquility and rest: and give him a diet of mild sorptions.
If however you think that something has already changed in its appearance in some way: then hurry and treat it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from it, and make a poultice of mill dust, with egg white, or with sesame flour, after you have removed the scabs: and place soft wool on the poultice.
Therefore, while that poultice remains on it and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it alone and do not remove it until it heals: or bind the fracture. For this fracture is often bound in three weeks.
If during this time a hot abscess occurs, then apply what we have said many times for its reduction, until that abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, take note. For if a fragment is already separated from the bone or from the soft tissue: then be precise in this, to remove those fragments from the soft tissue using whatever instruments are suitable for their removal.
If however the wound opening is narrow, then enlarge it with a lancet according to the amount necessary for you.
Then when you have removed those soft tissues and nothing remains of them, sew the wound opening if it is large: and if not, apply a poultice suitable for it, and promote flesh growth until it heals.
Regarding the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
The collarbone is mostly fractured from the front part near the shoulder, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.
For it is either broken and separated into two parts, besides which contusions may occur: and it is easier to restore it.
Or it is such that contusions occur in the bone: and it is more difficult to restore.
Or it is such that there is a fracture with a wound.
And the operation for it when the fracture is without a wound is to have two assistants present, so that one of them holds an aid following the broken collarbone, and the other extends the neck towards the side.
Then equalize the fracture with your fingers until its form becomes as it should be: and there should not be any prominence or concavity in it.
If you need more extension, then it is necessary to place a sphere of cloth or wool under the patient's neck. The size should be according to your needs: and extend and lift the collarbone, and compress the sphere with your hand until you equalize the fracture as it should be.
If you cannot pull the end of the collarbone outward because it has gone deep, then it is necessary to lay the patient on their back with their neck down. Place a medium-sized pillow under his shoulder and have an assistant press his shoulder downward until the end of the collarbone that is deep rises upward. Then correct and equalize the fracture with your fingers.
If you feel a splinter from the collarbone and it moves, then you must cut over it and remove the splinter with ease.
If it is retained in the bone, then you must apply yourself to cutting it with one of the files which you have prepared for this, after you have placed under the collarbone an instrument that preserves the skin; and it is an instrument made of wood or iron. And this is its form.
It resembles a spoon that does not have a concavity.
And its width should be according to what you need from the size of the bone, and its smallness. Its length should also be according to what is possible for you in performing the operation.
And it should have two ends, as you see: one end should be broad, and the other narrow.
If the disruption of the wound which you made when you extracted the bone splinter is wide and threatens to become inflamed with warm swelling: then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear warm swelling: then fill the wound with cloths and lint according to the amount of the wound's tear.
If a warm swelling does occur, then soak a cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place it on the swelling.
A constriction of the bone when it is without a wound and without a cut is treated by placing on the bone a poultice made from mill flour with egg white. And place a soft cloth over it. Then place the ball under his scrotum, if you need that. Then take the himematem, that is, the roll which the Saracens use, which should be very long: and its width should be one palm, or about that. Then place a doubled poultice over the cloth and plaster. Then take a strip from a thin board, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then wrap it in a cloth. Then wrap that cloth with the strip in place of the himematem which falls over the fracture and area. Then place the himematem over the fracture as wrapped, and wrap it around his neck, and under his healthy scrotum, and under his injured scrotum: and bring it back over all parts, and how you see that the binding holds the fracture with proper tightness: and this is what is not hidden from you, and all of it, so that the strip is not removed from over the broken end. And for this reason, it is necessary to look after the patient every day. Whenever the bandage softens and you see that the strip can now be removed: then adjust it, and tighten the bandage.
Then place the patient's scrotum on his back, and put a small pillow under his scrotum at his side during the night, so that his support is lifted from beside him. The fracture of the furcula is raised by elevating the shoulder.
Either bind his arm to his neck: and do not loosen the bandage, if no accident occurs from itching or an abscess, until twelve days.
Then renew the plaster, if you see that it is needed. And add to the binding, and leave it until it is restored and healed.
And the fracture of the furcula is bound and strengthened to the utmost within twenty-eight days: and sometimes it happens in some men in a shorter time.
Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the spatula.
The spatula is rarely fractured, and if fractured, it is at its wide part: and only the edges of it are broken.
When therefore that part is fractured, and it is broken in the middle of it, and it is not recognizable except by touch: then according to the shape of the fracture attempt its preparation. And restore it to its natural shape by any means of skill that is possible for you.
Then apply mill powder with egg white to the area, and a soft tow, and place a poultice made of doubled cloth over it. Then place a wide strip from a thin board over it according to the size of the entire spatula, or slightly larger than it.
If however there is a concavity in some places of the spatula, then equalize that concavity with soft tow, until the needle descends according to equality.
Then bind over it with linen bandages, with appropriate constriction, and the firmness of the needle, until it is not removed from its place.
And consider the bandage every day. Whenever the bandage is softened, tighten it, and equalize the needle if it is moved from its place: and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When this number is complete, then loosen the bandage: and you will be in safety. For it is made of bones whose joining is not feared, nor their separation.
If however a fragment protrudes from the bone and pricks under the skin: then cut over it, and remove it. And do what we have said in the case of a clavicle fracture from the settling of a hot abscess, if anything happens from it.
Regarding the restoration of a fractured rib.
The chest is sometimes fractured in its middle, and this rarely occurs. Its extremities are often fractured and crushed from its accidents.
When its middle is broken, which inclines towards the lower parts, and there occurs intense pain to it, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps he vomits blood, and a concavity is evident in the broken bone, and not hidden from sense, Its restoration is for the sick person to lie supine on his back: and place between its spatulas his pillow.
Then press his shoulders, and bring the ribs together from both sides or sides with your hands: and adjust in its alignment, according to every way that it is possible and appropriate, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
Then place upon it a plaster and tow, and place above a slender stick from willow board, or chalingi, and those similar in lightness, after you wrap it in cloth. Then adjust in binding it over the fractured bone, so that it does not move: and go with the bandage around to the back several times, and secure it with a proper tightness.
Then examine the bandage at all times, and whenever it loosens, tighten it: and if the necessity of it provokes its removal due to itching, or corrosion which occurs in the place, or pain, or swelling: then hurry and remove it, and take off the plaster, and correct what happens according to the method of its treatment.
Then apply the plaster again if you see that it is necessary: and secure it with a bandage until it heals.
On the restoration of ribs when they are fractured.
Know that the fracture of the ribs does not occur except in the thick parts following the back, and from their extremities on the front side. And wear and tear does not affect them, unless because they are made of cartilage. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sense during the examination with fingers.
And its restoration is done by aligning the fracture with fingers as much as possible until the shape is even, as it should be. Then apply plasters and bind the fractured ends with a splint, if it requires one.
And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the interior: then the patient suffers intense pain and puncturing, like the puncturing that occurs in one who has pleurisy: therefore, because the bone pierces the membrane, and also the patient suffers difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting much blood: and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients have devised many ingenious methods for this: among them are those who say that you should give the patient foods that generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the stomach becomes inflamed, expands, and pushes the fracture towards the exterior.
We, however, abstain from causing a quick formation of a hot abscess unless it occurs. If it has already occurred, then address it accordingly.
And some of them have said: place something suction-like over the area, then suck it with strength, and it is similar in reasoning. However, it is feared that it attracts windy excesses to the place because of the condition of weakness.
And some of them said: it is necessary that the place be covered with wool which has already been submerged in warm oil: and poultices should be placed between the ribs, until it is filled: so that the bandage is even when you wrap it according to the roundness.
Then the sick person should be treated for pleurisy with food and medicine.
If a strong thing that the sick person cannot tolerate constrains them, and the cloth pierces the mouth with a damaging puncture, and we are concerned for the sick person: then it is necessary to cut above the place and expose from the broken rib. Then we place upon it the instrument that sews the lips, of which the description has preceded: and we cut the lip with ease, and incise it.
Then we bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large with a suture: and we treat it with plasters until it heals.
If a hot abscess should occur in the meantime, then hurry and pour poultices into rose oil, and place them on the area: and treat the sick person with what is appropriate for the abscess.
In the meantime, he should also lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Regarding the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
The vertebrae of the neck are sometimes fractured, and rarely do they suffer from wear; similarly for the vertebrae of the back. When therefore this happens to someone, and you wish to know whether he will be healed or not healed: then make your judgment. For if you see that his hands are already softened, numb, and dead: and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor contract them: and when you contract them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it, and does not feel pain in them: then you know that he will not be healed, and is in a condition that is mortal in most cases.
But if he moves them and feels the contraction with fingers and the pricking: then you know that the bone's function is intact, and that the patient will be healed with treatment.
If a similar condition befalls the vertebrae of the back, and you wish to know whether he will be healed or not: then look at his feet: if you see that they are softened, and what happened to the hands happens to them as well: then when he lies on his back, flatulence and excretion escape involuntarily: and when he is placed on his stomach, excretion escapes involuntarily: and when he is laid on his back and wishes to urinate but cannot: then you know that it is mortal. Therefore, do not labor in his treatment.
If however none of that happens to him, the case is lighter.
And the treatment for what happens from that is to endeavor the cooling of the inflammation: so that you place on the worn vertebra rose oil alone: or with eggs of a roasted hen.
Place it on the same several times a day until the warm abscess is calmed; then place one of the strengthening, drying, and binding plasters on the area and bind it with a bandage: and instruct the patient to use rest and tranquility. Let him not sleep on the side where he feels pain until it is healed.
If it happens near the worn bone or something that is already separated from it, then it is necessary to cut over the skin and remove it. Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture if it is large. Then treat it with some flesh-forming ointment until it is healed.
If the last bone of the tail is fractured and it is the end of the tail: then you must insert the thumb of the left hand into the anus and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible, and perform the second alignment.
Then place it on the area and remove it: and treat the wound with the preceding treatment until it is healed.
Regarding the restoration of the anchor.
Chapter Eleven.
The bones of the ankles rarely fracture. If they are fractured, then the fracture is not complete but a comminution at their extremities: and they are split lengthwise and displaced inward: and the patient experiences pain and swelling in the area, and the leg that is fractured becomes numb.
And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it until you stand over the fracture how its figure is.
If the fracture is only at its extremities, then equalize that fracture according to what is prepared for you by the equation until it resembles its natural figure.
If the fracture is along the length, or already inclines towards the interior: then make the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. When therefore you have equalized it, place a poultice on it: then place a splint of wood or of hide on it: and bind with a bandage on which you do not fear the displacement of the fracture nor the removal of the splint.
And equalize the concavity of it with what fills it until it is taken by the bandage according to equality: and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their healthy side.
If a warm abscess happens to him: then cease from extending it and its restoration until the warm abscess is seated: and place on it what seats it, as precedes, then return to its restoration: and bind it as necessary.
If, however, there is pus in the bone or it is crushed, extract it.
Regarding the restoration of the Adiutorius fracture.
The Adiutorium is that which is between the elbow and the head of the Spatula.
If therefore it is broken, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One of which is: to take a piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this form that follows.
And let two bands be tied at the two ends.
Then it should be suspended from an elevated place: and the patient should sit on a seat. Then he should throw his broken arm over the wood until it reaches the tip of it, where the bend of the wood is attached in the middle.
Then hang something heavy above it, so that it may stretch downwards. Then the physician equalizes the fracture with his hands simultaneously, until the fracture returns to its proper position.
And the other method is to have the patient lie on their back: and suspend his arm from his neck with a band. Then command two assistants, so that one of them holds what is above the fracture with his hands: and the other holds below it, and each one extends to their respective part.
And if you wish for a stronger extension, then bind below the fracture with one band, and above it with another band: and each of the two assistants should extend them to their respective parts.
If therefore the fracture is near the shoulder joint, then it is necessary to place one band below the tip and another below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow: then it is necessary that a bandage be placed on that place, and on the elbow itself.
Then equalize the fracture with ease without effort, until when the fracture is equalized as it should be, and is applied with good alignment: then bind it, if a warm abscess does not occur.
If a warm abscess occurs, then release the binding until the seventh day. And place upon it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess quiets: then bind it: and the method of binding it is to place a plaster over the fracture.
Then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster. Then let the arm be bound with support, and place his open hand on his shoulder.
And place a cloth and bind the arm with support, so that the arm remains in its proper place: if nothing prohibits you from it, nor anything alters from the fractured bone on you.
If you fear that something from the fractured bone may alter on you, then use splints: and it is to place a splint over the fracture itself which should be wider and stronger than the other splints. And place the width of a finger between each splint: and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture with an additional three fingers on every side.
Then bind over the splints with the bandage as I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your binding on the place of the fracture should be tighter. And the more the fracture is lengthened, the binding should be looser.
If you see the placement of the splints and the binding as we have said, at the hour when you restore the limb immediately, then do so: and if you fear a warm abscess, then remove the binding and the splints until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then observe the binding for all three days, so that itching or swelling does not occur, or food is prevented from reaching the limb due to the excess tightness of the binding. Therefore, correct all of that according to what we have said.
If however you are confident that nothing will happen from it: then do not loosen the binding unless after three days, or more.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his hand on his stomach: and place under the support a cushion filled with wool evenly.
And observe at every hour of the night or day that the shape of the fractured limb is not loosened or the binding softened. Therefore, correct all of that with your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order we have mentioned, so that the food is light at first, until the wound begins to heal: then it is necessary to make his food more substantial.
For it is customary for the support and leg to be bound for forty days: therefore, it must be loosened, and a bath administered, and treated with ointments that correct it.
If the fracture is ugly, ground down: then do not remove the bandage and splint until fifty days, and until two months.
On the restoration of a fractured arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus.
Of which one is small: and it is that which follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is that which is placed below the small one on the lower part.
Perhaps therefore only the larger bone is fractured, or the smaller one: and perhaps both are fractured at the same time.
When therefore the smaller bone is fractured above, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower bone is fractured, its fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse it is when the two bones are fractured at the same time.
If therefore the bone that is fractured is the small upper one, then it is fitting for the doctor in its restoration to apply a slight extension with ease, until it is straightened.
If however the large bone is the one that is fractured: then it is necessary to apply a much stronger binding.
And it is necessary to place the hand in a position during its restoration, and to extend it on a pillow. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers; and let the lower joint be common to all the fingers or the rest: and the patient sitting squarely on himself, and let the pillow be before him, or directly in front of him, in height, so that the patient does not incur labor.
Then let the minister extend the arm from the lower part, either with his hand or with a bandage. And another minister shall extend similarly from above.
Then the doctor equalizes the bone until he restores it to the best shape possible.
If there are fragments in the fractured bone, then endeavor to reduce every fragment to its place by your skill.
If there appears a separate piece of bone protruding and piercing the skin, and you have no hope for its restoration: then incise over it, and remove it according to the method we have described in the preceding.
If the fracture is with a wound, I have already made a separate chapter on this, so take the treatment from there.
If a warm abscess should occur at the beginning of your restoration, then line cloth with a plaster made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be neither too thick nor too thin: and bind the cloth tightly over it with a fine bandage until the abscess is calmed; then remove the plaster, and apply an ointment prepared from mill powder with egg white. Then place the splints, and let the splint that is placed over the fracture itself be slightly wider and stronger.
And you shall know that the number of stars in the arm is six in most dispositions: whether the fracture be in one socket or in two sockets at once.
Then place your binding over the site of the fracture stronger and more forceful, and somewhat more with the binding toward the upper part of the fracture, or towards the lower part of it: or place a milder binding for a while according to how the preceding recollection at the beginning of the chapter dictates.
And let the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture be soft cloths, moist; and not hard, rough. And let the thread with which it is bound be of flax, properly medium between fine and thick, as we have mentioned.
And consider the limb and the binding after days. And if something happens which requires correction, such as itching which occurs in the limb: then it is necessary to foment the limb with warmed water until that itching ceases, and leave the limb unconstricted until it rests, then bind it again.
And if the binding has already been softened, and the bone has already been removed, and things like that: then correct all of it with your skill, and examine again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightness of the binding, then it is necessary to soften it for a while and leave it for several days until nourishment flows to it, then bind it again.
But if none of the things we have mentioned happen to the patient, then it is not necessary to remove the binding unless after twenty days, or around this time.
Then let the patient's hand be suspended at his neck. And let his neck be steady, and protected by its strength from disturbing motions. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days. All of that depends on the dispositions of complexions and the dispositions of strength.
Regarding the restoration of fractures of the hand.
Know that fractures rarely occur in the knuckles of the hand and the joints of the fingers. And it does not happen to him, except through frequent attrition.
When therefore the fracture or attrition occurs to the palm, then it is necessary that the patient sit upright, and before him be a seat according to equality. Then place his hand extended on it.
Then let the assistant extend the fractured bones, and let the doctor align them until they are joined well together.
Then it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, if a warm abscess does not occur. Then place a splint on top according to the length of the area: and you have now wrapped it in a linen cloth.
If however the fracture is near the lower part around the heel, then make something like a sphere from cloth: and instruct the patient to bind it with his fractured foot: then wrap it with a long cloth.
And let the splint be made of leather, which should have softness, so that the leather may be applied with the body of the foot: and bind it according to what is necessary.
If however the fracture is on the outside, then it is necessary to place a splint on top, and another splint below on the foot: and let the hand be open straight. Then place the binding, as the hand is rotated: and extend between the toes with a band.
If a fracture occurs to any of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, align it according to what is necessary. Then bind it with the sole: and if you wish, place a straight, small splint on it: so that the fracture is raised, and not moved.
If however the fracture is to the other fingers, such as the middle finger, and index, or little finger, and ring finger, then align it, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows it: or bind all according to continuity: and this is better. Or place a small splint on it, as we said for the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after the disposal of a warm abscess: and oppose with what is necessary when something from it occurs, according to how its narrative is repeated.
On the restoration of the fractured hip.
The hip bone is often fractured, and it is noticeable because it turns inward and backward.
And its restoration is done in such a way that a band is applied above the fracture, and another band below the fracture. And the patient should lie on his face.
Then the surgeon should stretch all the band to its part according to equality: and this is done when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
If the fracture is near the root of the hip bone, then the band should be placed at the part of the pectineus muscle, so that the extension falls upward: and another band below the fracture.
And thus similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then the band should be placed near the knee, so that the extension is downward.
Then the doctor equalizes the bone with both of his hands until he restores it to its natural shape: and the bone is joined with a good union.
Then it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, if swelling does not occur in the limb. If swelling does occur: then leave it for several days until the warm swelling subsides, then return to your treatment.
The binding should be done in this way. You must wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, and fold it twice or three times, leaving some excess. Then wrap the leg until the heel reaches the root of the thigh.
And insert a long thread between the hip and leg near the knee to the lower part, and let the ends of the thread come from the upper part of both sides. Then roll over the leg and hip what is excess from the bandage.
Then place on the hip at the site of the fracture the splints, and put one of them over the bone of the leg.
Then fill the spaces between the leg and hip with soft cloths, so that it equalizes the binding.
Then begin with a strong binding from the middle above the site of the fracture with three or four windings. And the further you extend with the bandage from the site of the fracture, let your binding be looser and softer, and gentler.
Then pull on the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the hip and leg. Bind therefore with both three splints which are on top. Then proceed with the two ends of the thread to the lower part until you reach the ankle. And with both pull also the ends of the splints from the other side so that the binding does not move from its place.
Then apply the binding over it while it remains, in such a way that no corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar things occur to the member. If something happens from it. Hurry therefore with its solution, and correct everything that happens from it, according to what we have said many times.
If however there is a fragment in the bone that pierces from the bone: then it is necessary to equally remove it, if it is possible for you. And if not, find it and remove it: and treat it according to the preceding instructions until it is healed.
And sometimes this hip fracture is bound, besides adding splints to it, as we have said in the case of support and arm.
However, in the restoration of it thus fractured, the patient does not suffer from limping. And if it is restored alone, besides applying the other leg to it, then it is necessary that the one to whom it belongs limps always.
And know that the hip is bound for fifty days, or a little is added, or a little is subtracted: all of this depends on the diversity of complexions and other conditions.
Regarding the restoration of the fractured kneecap.
Know that fracture of the kneecap rarely occurs, but wear often happens to it.
If however a fracture does occur to it, then it is only either a crack or a hole in its parts. And it is with wound, and without wound. And it stands over the whole with feeling.
And the restoration of it is such that the parts which are torn are equalized with fingers until they aggregate and are joined as much as possible by equality and ease, and construction.
Then place a poultice of sesame flour, or from the mill, with egg white: and place a round splint on it if you need that: and bind it tightly with an appropriate bandage.
Then consider all the treatments we have mentioned in other fractures: such as a warm abscess, and similar ones: so that you oppose every occurrence with what is appropriate to it until it heals.
Regarding the restoration of a fractured leg.
Know that the legs are two bones, of which one is thick and is named the name of the leg: and the other is slender, and is named Fibula.
And it happens to both species of fractures as it happens to the two bones of the arm: and because of this, its restoration is like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation is the same.
If both bones are fractured simultaneously, the leg turns in all directions.
And if the slender bone is fractured, the leg turns to the front part.
And if the thicker bone is fractured, you find it below: and it is one of those that are not hidden from you.
Then administer extension, and equalization, and ligation of the stars according to that equally.
However, it is necessary, if the fracture of the leg is a nasty fracture, having many septic signs: that there be less extension, and milder alleviation by you.
And in the leg indeed there is something from the operation for the arm: and it is that when you equalize the stars, and complete all your operation, then take two bands from pine wood, which is used in the fabrication of solariums which is placed under boards: and they are made from palm spatulas: and choose from them those which have small thickness, and let them not be from the thin ones: and their length should be according to the length of the leg from the knee downward.
Then wrap over each one two layers of cloth according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side, and the other on the other side: and they should be from the knee down to the foot.
Then bind the two bands at three places from both ends and the middle. For when constriction is prohibited, the leg deviates to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And now a cradle of wood according to the length of the leg should be administered, and the leg should be placed in it, so that it keeps it from movement.
And it is very necessary that you do this in a fracture when it is accompanied by a proper wound.
Then consider the leg every day, and strive with utmost diligence to remove abscesses, or swellings, or other such things. If any of those things happen, then apply to it what is necessary until it is healed, if God wills.
On the fracture of the bones of the foot and toes.
A complete fracture does not occur in the heel.
Bones of the foot sometimes suffer a fracture, and toes rarely suffer a fracture as well; and in most cases, they only sustain a bruise.
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and you see those bones protruding above their normal position, then let the patient place his foot on prepared ground, as if walking.
Then stand and place your foot on what has protruded from those bones; then press or tread on it until it is aligned and returns to its proper place.
Then apply a poultice and place some tow over it; and put a small board under the arch of the foot, which has two flat ends.
Then bind it to the foot with a suitable bandage after you wrap it with cloths and other necessary materials.
When three or four days have passed, then loosen the bandage. For you will find the bones aligned whether they are fractured or dislocated. The operation therefore is on them, as you see.
If some fingers are fractured, then restore them, and equalize them as I have told you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place the splint on your finger according to the length of the finger, and let it be slightly wider than that; then place under the foot the board I have told you about, and secure it with a proper binding.
If however what is fractured of the bones is two, or three, or more, then place on every finger a splint of its size, wrapped in a linen cloth: and secure the board at the lower part of the foot: and let it stand on one end of the board outside the bottom of the foot, so that it holds with good retention.
And it is fitting for you, so that you do not forget, to consider all that I have told you about other fractures from the accidents we mentioned: and address every accident with what is necessary.
Regarding the fracture of a woman's vulva, and the pubic bone, and a man's virga.
When the vulva of a woman is fractured, then make her sit squarely. Then tilt her to the side of her back slightly, and let her be held backwards.
Then let the midwife fill her vulva with cotton until it is full: and let it be in the vulva like a sphere.
Then shake the woman, and raise her back gradually. For that exits the cotum until it becomes like a sphere in front of the Vulva's gate, and the broken mouth returns.
Then place the poultice on her back. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotum with ease, then let her urinate: and reintroduce it in the manner you first inserted it; then return to her original poultice.
Let her do this for seven days, or so, for the mouth itself is restored.
And if you wish, take the bladder of a sheep, and attach a reed tube to its opening, and insert the entire bladder into her Vulva. Then blow into the tube with force until the bladder inflates inside the Vulva, for the fracture returns.
Then it should be filled with cotum and remain in place for several days, as we have mentioned, until it heals.
And when the mouth of the Pectinis of a man or woman is fractured, then administer for its restoration and equalization what we have mentioned for the Anchae bone.
And the rectum is not concealed in these nearby fractures that slightly affect it, especially in one who has some practice or use.
And understand my book greatly, for the fracture itself indicates to you the right way in its restoration and tightening in many dispositions: therefore understand.
When the man's penis is broken, take the neck of a goose and insert the rod into it. Then place a wrapping of cloth on it and wrap it up, and leave it for three days, or around that time, and it will be healed if God wills.
On the restoration of fractured bones when there is an injury.
It is suitable for one to whom a fracture with an injury has occurred, especially if it is severe, such as the hip bone or the scapula or similar, that you should hurry and bleed him immediately: if the conditions for bleeding are evident to you, as we have mentioned before.
If the wound is bleeding, then you must hurry to treat it by dusting ground zegi over it: if you have nothing else available.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day: and do not postpone it if an abscess has not occurred.
If an abscess does occur that is hot, then postpone the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess has settled. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you would cause harmful complications to occur.
If the broken bone protrudes above the skin: then you must try to reduce it and align it with your hands with ease and a slight extension.
If it cannot be extended and aligned with your hands: then reduce it with this instrument. And there is an instrument that is made of iron, whose length is seven fingers, or eight: and its width is according to the size of the wound. And for that reason, it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them according to the amount he needs for that part of the treatment in every kind of fracture.
And let it be round: and let there be a small thickness in it, so that it does not double under pressure on it during the time of the operation: and let it have a sharp end, which has an edge at its ends. And let the upper part of it be thickened from the middle of it down to the lower part.
And this is its form.
It is necessary in this operation to place its sharp curved end on the protruding bone end: and push it with it once, until the bone returns and is leveled by some alignment.
Therefore, attempt to align the ends of the fracture closely together.
If the ends of it are finely fractured and do not receive good hold by the instrument, then it is necessary to cut that bone end until the instrument can grasp it.
If you cannot reduce them at all with what we have described, then cut it with one of the scalpels we mentioned that is suitable for it: or saw it with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
Then scrape what remains on the bone from roughness and small shards.
When therefore the bone is reduced, and the patient finds after its reduction a very severe painful pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Do therefore that. For you provide great assistance to the patient when the restoration that you perform on the bone is completed.
Then soak the cloth in black styptic wine. And especially if it is in summer. And you shall not place wax on the wound, nor anything containing oil: so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption in it.
Then apply the splints at the completion of your restoration of the bone. And leave the wound exposed: so that you cut with scissors a hole in the bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be cautious with all care, lest you compress the wound with the fracture. For foolish doctors have often done this: and have caused either death, or corruption, or pus, that is, suppuration, to occur in their patients. And let your binding be gentle, mild, different from the binding of other fractures.
If the wound is severe, or it is a large wound, and you fear some of the bad accidents we have mentioned might occur, and you find pain in the suspended area: then it should not be covered with splints. And make involutions from hard cloths at the site of the splinters, and bind it with them.
When it is after one day or two days, and you see the wound beginning to generate pus: then remove the cloth you placed over it with wine. Then apply licinia, and ointments with which it is our custom to treat wounds: such as the ointment tetrapharmacum, and those similar to it.
And it is appropriate for you to loosen the bandage. And consider the wound every morning and evening until it becomes firm and healed.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that pus may run to the lower parts with ease.
If many days pass for the wound and it does not become firm, nor does the pus separate from it: then you know that there are small bone growths there. Therefore, it is necessary to examine the wound with a probe. How many of those growths have separated, remove them, and extract them. And those among them that are not separated, and prick the limb, and cause pain, attempt to cut them and remove them in any way possible for you.
If gangrene or ecilten, that is, estiomenus, or some other form of corruption and putrefaction befalls the wound: then it is necessary to oppose each of them with what is appropriate to it according to the treatment previously described in its chapter.
And from which my speech must stand, and to whom you should present your mind when a bone is broken, and protrudes over the member, such as the hip bone, and thigh, and similar ones from large members, it is that you do not presume its attraction, for death often results from it, rather leave it until it putrefies.
For perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Then therefore treat the wound if it seems right to you: and if not, leave it.
Regarding the treatment of swelling in a fractured limb.
This swelling often occurs in the limb during the healing of a fracture. Especially those near the joints: and the figure of the member is disfigured by it. And it may prevent the limb from its natural function.
Therefore, consider if the swelling is recent: apply to it medications that have astringent properties, such as aloe, frankincense, myrrh, tragacanth, acacia, and similar ones.
So that you take some of these, or all of them: and mix them with astringent wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar: and place them on the swelling with tow, and bind them tightly over it.
And leave the binding, do not loosen it for many days. Then dissolve it, and repeat another, until the knot is removed.
Or bind over the plate of lead appropriately. For lead has the property of removing everything that is feared from the members.
If however the knot has already turned into a stone and is tight, and necessity urgently requires its removal: then find on it from its upper part, and cut off the protruding excess: or scrape it with some scrapers until it is removed: and care for it until it heals.
Regarding the treatment when it is restored, and a subtle member remains afterwards, not according to its natural state.
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and a subtle, weak member remains afterwards: then this does not occur except for many reasons. One of which is the excess of loosening and tying the ligaments not as it should be: or due to the excess of tightness of the ligaments, until the nourishment is prevented from flowing to the member: or due to the excess of application of unnecessary embrocation at an inappropriate time: or due to the lack of blood in the body of the patient and the weakness thereof.
And the treatment for this is to feed the patient and make their body tender until the blood is multiplied in it. And administer a bath. And bring joy and happiness to him.
Then put pitch on the limb: so that the pitch attracts much nourishment to it. And apply frequent rubbing of it with warm water until the nourishment flows, and it returns to its natural form.
On the treatment of fractured bones when they heal crookedly.
When it happens that after the restoration and healing of a limb, there is crookedness, prominence of the fractured bone, or knotting, and the form of the member is marred by this, yet the limb is not hindered in its natural function: then you should not heed the advice of one who thinks the limb must be broken again.
And there have been many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land.
And this operation is indeed greatly disgraceful, leading to death or great fear, so as to be mortal.
But if the limping and knotting are recent: then it is necessary to apply a warm water rub, in which softening herbs have been decocted, such as the leaves of althea, and its root, and melilot, and things similar to these. And a poultice should be made for it with a softening plaster, such as properly made dyachylon.
Or take the mucilage of the root of althea, and mix it with chicken fat or sesamin oil: and apply a poultice with it.
Either take fat figs, and pound them with pigeon dung, and similar things which are named among medicines diminishing consolidation.
And sometimes the knot is dissolved with frequent, old, and gentle friction, which is done with wet hands. And the movement of the limb should be administered to all parts at all times.
If however the twisting has already preceded, and become strong, and turned into stone, and the necessity has been provoked for its treatment with iron: then it is necessary that the upper part of it be cut, and the continuity of the bone be dissolved, and what is superfluous from the knot or bone be cut with subtle chisels: and ease be administered to that with care and diligence.
Regarding the discussion on dislocation.
Dislocation is the departure of some joint from its place. Therefore, it is prohibited from its motion, and the figure of the member is disfigured. And it causes severe pains and injuries to the afflicted.
Therefore, when dislocation happens to someone, then it is necessary to hurry to its restoration: do not delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the area becomes swollen, and possibly the reduction of the dislocation with it.
Therefore, during the swelling, it should not be moved or extended. For it often causes spasms and painful pains.
But when that happens, then you must hurry to bleed the patient. Then it should be left until the swelling subsides.
Then the limb should be rubbed with warm water and oil. Then it should be reduced with ease.
And the entire limb should be treated with what will be mentioned in its proper place.
I have indeed already arranged the chapters on dislocations, even as it preceded in fractures, from the upper part of the body to its lower part.
Regarding the treatment of the dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two jaws rarely dislocate slightly.
And the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways. For either they are moved from their places slightly, and are softened for a while. Or they are dislocated completely and entirely until they soften toward the chest, until the saliva of the patient runs out and he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is involved with speech.
When the dislocation is slight, then it often returns to its proper position on its own with little intervention.
If indeed there is a complete and total dislocation, then it is necessary that the reduction be administered quickly, and not delayed at all: and this is how it should be done, the assistant should hold the patient's head: and the physician should insert the thumb of one hand into the root of the jaw dislocation between his mouth, if the dislocation is on one side. Or he should insert two of his thumbs simultaneously, if the dislocation is on both sides. And the other fingers of his hands should be outside, with which he equalizes.
And instruct the patient to clean his jaws and prepare them for eating on all sides. And the physician should equalize the jaw and push the jaw until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time: then administer fumigation with hot water and oil until the reduction of both becomes easy: do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
When they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed, and they do not soften: then place upon them cloths with plaster made from wax and rose oil.
Then it should be bound with soft bands with ease.
And let the patient sleep on his back: and let his head stand between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left: nor should he attempt, or be forced to chew anything: rather, let his food be given by gentle sipping until the pain is removed, and the jaw is set: then let him eat what he wishes, and let it be administered with ease.
Let not the operator work on the mouth's operation concerning eating and drinking, and yawning, until the jaw is set and healed.
If the reduction of the two jaws becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their places, then fevers often result from this, and constant thirst: and perhaps the stomach of the patient may loosen, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
When therefore you see that: then know that it is a loss, and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the humerus.
The collarbone does not dislocate from the inner side because of its connection with the breastbone. And it sometimes dislocates outward: and this is evident to the senses.
And its restoration is for the patient to lie on their back and extend their arms. Then compress the area firmly with your palm, for it will return to its place.
Then apply a plaster and poultice over it and bind it tightly.
The ends of the humerus that follow the elbow and are connected to it do not dislocate, except rarely. If it dislocates at some time, then it is necessary to reduce and align it as we have said, and prepare it accordingly.
Then place over it a plaster, and powder, and a bandage. And instruct the sick person to adhere to tranquility and rest until healed.
And with this same method the arm extremity is reduced when it is also displaced from its place.
On the reduction of dislocation of the humerus.
Know that the humerus does not dislocate except in three ways.
One of which is that it dislocates toward the outer lower part. The second is that it dislocates toward the chest. And it may also dislocate toward the upper part of the humerus: and this rarely occurs.
And it does not dislocate toward the back, because of the spur. And it does not dislocate toward the front, because of the nerves.
And it dislocates and protrudes most toward the lower outer part, especially in those whose flesh is sparse. For it exits quickly in them and enters quickly.
In those whose flesh is abundant, it is the opposite, namely that it exits with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And it may happen that some people suffer a blow or fall, and the humerus becomes inflamed with a hot swelling, and it is assumed because of this that it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, it is necessary that you test it until you stand upon its certainty, and then proceed in its cure.
And the dislocation is known when it is turned downward towards the armpit: and you distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a healthy shoulder. For you find a clear difference between them, and you find a concavity in the head of the humerus, and below the armpit upon touching the head of the humerus it feels almost like an egg: and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move it in all ways.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards: then you find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easy when it is recent, or the patient is a child.
And its reduction is to have the assistant raise the hand upwards. Then place your thumbs below its armpit, and raise the joint with strength upwards to its place: and the assistant raises his hand and extends it upwards. Then place it below, for it returns quickly.
If it does not return by what we have said, and many days have passed since the dislocation first occurred: then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water, and a massage that softens and soothes should be administered, such as when the roots of coltsfoot, fenugreek, and sweet clover are boiled in water, and applied.
Then the patient should lie on his back: and a sphere of wool, which is equal in softness and tightness, should be placed under his buttocks.
Then the doctor should place his heel on the sphere, and lift the head of the shoulder with force, and pull the patient's hand towards the lower part.
And if you wish, return him according to this method: and it is that you should have present a man who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on the side, and insert his shoulder under the buttocks of the patient: and lift his buttocks upwards until the patient is suspended in the air. And another assistant should pull the patient's hand towards the lower part of his abdomen. And if the patient is light: then it is necessary to suspend something else with him to weigh him down: for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is also reduced by another method: and it is that a long piece of wood should be fixed in the ground, whose head is round in shape: like the sleeve of a mortar: which should not be thick nor thin. Then place under the patient, after soft cloths are put on top of the head of the wood, and let the patient stand along the length of the wood.
Then extend his hand downwards from one side, and stretch his body from the other side with strength: for the joint returns to its place quickly.
If the reduction is difficult by all that we have said, then use this treatment: take a piece of wood whose length is the amount of two arms, and its width the amount of four fingers, and its thickness the amount of two fingers: which has a round head, so as to ease its entry into the deep wound, according to this form.
Then soft cloths should be tied over the round head, so that the wood does not harm the weak area.
Then it should be placed under the wounded area of the patient, so that the hand or arm is extended over the wood down to the lower parts: and the wood should be bound over the support and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then the arm should be placed on a step of a ladder by its width, and the hand should be extended downward, and the rest of the body should be left suspended from the other side. For the joint moves immediately.
Therefore, when its insertion is completed in whatever way possible, then it is necessary to place a sphere of equal size made of wool under the wound. Then apply a plaster prepared from mill dust with frankincense, and egg white over the entire shoulder, as it is spread from above.
Then bind under the wound with a suitable bandage: and wrap the bandage over the plaster from above: and attach his hand to his neck, and leave it, without moving his hand for seven days.
And it is necessary that the patient's food be reduced until the limb is strengthened: for it is faster for its healing.
Then it should be enlarged after seven days, or five, and exercised with movement. If therefore it is firm and does not soften, then it is already healed.
If however the joint is dislocated frequently, due to moisture that affects it, or for another reason: then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three holes to it, according to what has been stated in the chapter on cauteries.
If all this is done, and the ligament loosens after seven days, and the joint does not strengthen, and the plaster and binding are reapplied several times, and it still does not firm up, and falls off, and cannot lift itself upwards: then you know that the nerves which are at the head of the humerus have either been cut, or stretched, or softened: and you know that the joint will never be set in its place.
The reduction of a dislocation which occurs towards the chest and nipple, or towards the back, is performed with force and extension by hand: until it returns to place, and then the rest of the binding and care should be applied until it heals.
If after healing there is heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use a bath frequently until that heaviness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
Regarding the treatment of the dislocation of the elbow.
Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty, and likewise returns with difficulty as well: and it is dislocated in all directions, but particularly towards the front or the back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: for it falls under sight and touch, according to whatever shape it is dislocated. And when you join the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, it is clearly shown to you. For the joint is concave, and it cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder with it.
And you must hurry and reduce the dislocation immediately before a hot abscess occurs.
For if a hot abscess occurs, the reduction becomes difficult: and perhaps it will not heal at all, especially when it is towards the back. For it is worse than all other forms of dislocation, and involves more intense pain: and often death follows with it.
And the restoration of it, when it is one of those that can be reduced, is to extend his hand with two hands: and his arm should be spread out, and the physician's hands should be above and below the elbow, and he should push the joint with his thumbs simultaneously, or with the base of his palms, until it returns to its place.
Or the dislocation is to the front: then it is reduced by bending his hand with his own hand, until he strikes the dislocated elbow with the base of his palm.
If the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer a very strong, powerful extension: and it is done by two assistants extending the arm: and two assistants should also hold it firmly so that it does not move during the extension.
Then the arm is rotated in all directions after a doubled long cloth or a wide bandage is wrapped over his hand.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, let him anoint it with oil: so that it may be one of those things which help in lubricating the joint with ease. Then push the joint with a forceful thrust until it returns.
And after its reduction, it is necessary to place on it a plaster that has astringency and drying with egg white: and bind it with a proper tight bandage. And suspend the arm from the patient's neck: and leave it for several days.
Then it should be loosened. If then the joint is stabilized in its place, then loosen the bandage from it, and leave it.
And if you see the joint not well secured, then apply the plaster again, and the bandage, and leave it for several days until it is secured. Then loosen it.
If however heaviness befalls it after the reduction of the joint, and the placement is in motion: then administer moistening in bathing, and subtle friction, and compression, until it straightens, or place on the joint fat Euphorbia, that is, fat ewe's marrow. Then it should be bandaged, and leave it on it day and night. Then remove it, and insert it into the bath. When therefore he sweats, then friction the joint with moderate friction. Then repeat on the same joint once, and twice, and thrice with each entry to the bath until it is softened.
And if you wish, put cow dung on it, moist and heated with butter, and bind over it.
Do this several times. For it is indeed softened and returns to its normal state.
On the treatment of dislocation by Almahassem.
Almahassem frequently dislocates the hand, that is, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy. On the contrary, for the other joints. However, it is necessary that the reduction of its dislocation be swift at the time when it is dislocated, before the place becomes inflamed or a warm abscess occurs in it.
And the reduction of its dislocation is to place the affected hand of Almahassem on a board, and have an assistant extend his hand; and the doctor should place his palm over the prominence of the joint and push it until it returns.
However, it should be considered if the palm has already retreated to the belly of the hand: then the patient should place the back of his hand on the board during extension and reduction; and if the dislocation proceeds toward the back of the hand, then the position of his hand should be inward on the board, that is, the inner part of his hand should be placed on the board so that the doctor's hand falls over the prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, it is good: and if not, then bind it with a plaster soothing the swelling: and leave it, do not repeat that.
For if it does not tolerate, nor can you put it back in place after the days have passed, yet the joint remains according to its own curvature: and it does not harm the patient except that the hand becomes weak, and cannot grasp anything: then you know that the nerves are cut or worn.
There is therefore no remedy for it except to be treated with a cautery near the site of the injury. And perhaps it does not help it at all.
Therefore, when Almahassem does not return, then apply to it the plaster that we have mentioned. Then it should be bound and left for five days: afterwards it should be loosened and left, and the hand should be exercised.
If however its movement is impaired, and something serious occurs in it: then soften it with warm water and rubbing several times until it is softened.
Regarding the treatment of the displacement of fingers.
When one of the fingers is dislocated to any side, or one of the fingers to the back of the palm, or its front: then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then hold the tip of the finger and suspend it toward the side to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then hang him and stretch him until he is straight on his day.
When therefore it will be night, bind him according to this account: and do not cease to loosen him during the day: and exercise him with movement: and bind him at night.
Do this for several days until it is stretched.
And do the same if the hand is dislocated towards the abdomen: bind it to that part and perform your first treatment on it until it heals.
And do the same when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When it happens to someone that there is a complete dislocation of the vertebrae of the back or neck, or many vertebrae are displaced from their places: then there is no treatment for it, because death approaches the sick person.
And the sign of this is that the excretion of the sick person exits without will, and they cannot hold it in: and often some of their limbs are weakened, or both of their legs, or both of their arms, or one of them: or a vertebra is displaced from its place.
For it often happens that they are displaced to all four parts.
Therefore, that which is displaced backward is called humpback.
The treatment, however, is to consider then, if the humpback occurred from childhood: then there is no treatment for it, nor any healing at all.
In those that occur from a fall, or blows, or similar things, the ancients have already spoken at length about the methods of treatment. Of which much does not return with profit.
But I have already abbreviated from that, which is little excused by its much due to my closeness to the intention: and in my explanation wherein I explained it, and formed its instrument in a different way from how they showed and explained it.
I say therefore, that in the hump that occurs on the front side, there is no remedy, nor healing from it.
And similarly in that which occurs on both sides as well.
And it is not cured by them, except that which occurs on the back properly, with what I narrate: and it is that the patient should be extended on his face on an equal podium near a wall: and a wet straw should be spread under him, so that his chest is not harmed.
Then a straight piece of wood should be placed fixed in a socket in the ground at the end of the podium, near his head: and another piece of wood near his feet at the other end of the podium: and the assistant should hold the wood, and it should not be firmly fixed in the socket. And another assistant should hold the other one.
Then wrap a soft, strong bandage over the patient's head and under their armpits: and extend the end of the bandage to the wood that is by his head: and tie it there.
Then bind another ligature above his thighs, and above his knees, and at his ankles. Then gather all the ligatures, and tie them to another wooden piece that is at his feet.
Then let all the attendants pull the ligature to the wood part, and do not move the two pieces of wood from the places where they are fixed: however, they should not be firmly fastened, as we said.
And the doctor should place his palms on the spine with force, until it returns; or place a board on it. Then attach his feet to the board until it returns.
If it does not return through this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms. And make a hole in the wall of which we spoke that is near the patient, into which the end of the board can be inserted. Then place the middle of the board on the spine. And let the doctor place his feet on the other end. And pull firmly until the spine is constricted and returns to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with a device that is wrapped around with your hand: and it is such that you fix into the ground near the head of the patient at the end of the footrest two pieces of wood, whose length is one arm's length: and near his head at the end of the footrest two pieces of wood.
And the length which is between all the wood should be one palm: and now make a hole in every place where the turn runs: and secure all the wood very much to the ground so that it does not move at all.
And insert the round wood: and it is a turn where the ligament is rotated in two holes of two woods.
And at its end is a hole, in which the wood is secured, whose length is one palm with that which rotates: and in two other pieces of wood is similarly that.
Then tighten the bands which you have tightened on the chest of the patient to the turn which is at his head: and the bands which you have tightened on his legs to the turn which is at his feet.
Then let a servant stand by each turn, who turns his hand with the leather strap with which the turn is rotated: and the doctor aligns the spine according to what we have said.
This is the form of the turn which follows.
Then after the spine returns and the place is aligned, then it is necessary to apply a drying plaster with egg white. Then apply tow. Then place a strip of board over the plaster, whose width is three fingers, or about that. And its length should be the amount that covers the hump and extends over the healthy part of the spine.
Then it should be bound with the band we have mentioned. And let the patient use a subtle nourishment until he is healed.
And if there remains some prominence in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and alleviate, along with the application of the plate we mentioned for a long time. And now it is administered in that sheet of lead.
And sometimes there is a prominence at the last vertebra of the spine: and it is thought that by it there is dislocation, and that bone which now protrudes. Therefore, it is not advisable to administer this medicine to him: for it may cause death.
Regarding the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
Know that the joints of the ankle and the shoulder joint only suffer dislocation: they do not experience what happens to other joints due to slight displacement and concavity.
And the joint of the ankle dislocates in four directions. It is because it dislocates towards the front and towards the back.
And it dislocates most towards the inside: and slightly towards the front and the back.
And the treatment for its dislocation towards the inside is as follows: when you align the healthy leg of the patient with the injured one, it appears longer: and his knee protrudes more than that of a healthy person, and the patient cannot bend his foot near the groin: and the area following the groin becomes inflamed with a warm swelling, because the head of the femur has now reached there.
And the sign of one to whom a dislocation outward has happened is that its accidents are contrary to these accidents.
And the sign of one to whom a dislocation forward has happened is that he extends the sound leg according to its fullness: however, he does not double it without pain which is in the knee: and if he attempts to walk, he cannot step forward on it: and his urine is retained, and his groin swells, and in walking there is a dropping of his heel.
And the sign of one to whom a dislocation backward has happened is that he does not extend the knee, nor can he double it before he doubles the groin: and his leg is even shorter than the other: and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip bone is at the place of the ilium.
The reduction of this species of dislocation is to consider then, if the dislocation is old, which has already become ancient with the one having it. Then if you administer its reduction, and it remains according to its own disposition: then there is no cure in it at all. Therefore, it should not be entirely presumed for him.
In the case of one whose dislocation is recent, and it is from one of the four species of dislocation: then hasten to this, to rotate the joint, and extend it inward and outward, and move it right and left: for perhaps it will return, and will not require further treatment.
If it does not return this way, then you must prepare a strong assistant, and have the leg extended from the lower part: either with his hands, or with a bandage, which is tied above the leg over the knee: and another assistant should extend his hand from above, so that he inserts his hands under the tendons. Then bind with a gentle bandage over the root of the thigh, and hold the end of the bandage with the other hand.
And let the extension be either from the front part of the groin to the shoulder part, or from the back part to the dorsal part.
And let the extension of all be at once, until the sick person is lifted with their body from the ground, and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is a common type among the four types.
If therefore the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary for every type to do what I will say about the proper cure.
In its proper reduction when the dislocation is inward, it is necessary that the sick person lie on their healthy side. Then place the bandage over the root of the thigh, between the head of the thigh and the area under the groin. Then extend the bandage upward from the groin area to a higher part of the body, toward the shoulder area.
Then let another strong minister take his arms, and press the thick part of the diseased thigh, and extend outward with a forceful stretch. For it now returns to its place.
And this type is easier than the other types of treatment by which this member is reduced.
If it slips out of your control and does not obey you for insertion with this type of treatment at all, then it is necessary to bind both feet of the sick person together with a strong yet gentle bandage over both heels and both knees: and let the length of each be four fingers from its counterpart: and let the sick leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then let the patient be suspended over a beam in the house: and its length from the ground should be two arms' lengths.
Then instruct a strong youth to support the head of the thigh: and let him be suspended with the patient another one: and let another youth push, supporting the thigh with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
In its return to the proper position, when it is dislocated outward, it is necessary that the patient lie on a raised platform, as we have described in the case of one having a hump. And let the band be tied above his diseased leg and above his chest.
Then two pieces of wood should be placed, one at his feet, and the other at his head. Then let an additional piece of wood be placed in the middle of the platform, firmly fixed: on which wrapped wet cloths should be placed, so that it does not harm the patient: and let the wood be between his thighs, so that it is not drawn downward during the extension.
Then let all the attendants pull on their respective parts, and the doctor equalize the reduction with his hand.
If therefore it obeys the return, it will be good.
And if not, place it on the same board and press it as we have said in humpbacked cases, equally. However, it is necessary that the patient lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the limb of the patient be extended quickly: and this is according to the same account on a platform: and the physician should place the palm of his right hand upon the groin of the patient. Then he should compress it with the other hand, and with that compression place it extended downwards to the knee area.
And if the dislocation is to the back: then it is not necessary that the patient be extended downwards, and he should be raised off the ground: rather he should be placed on a hard surface, as is necessary when his hip is dislocated outwardly, according to what we have said about lying on both hips: and it is on his face, with the ligaments extended: as we have said recently.
And it is necessary that compression be administered with a board on the place to which the joint protrudes, when the reduction is completed as required.
And the sign of its return is not hidden from you: and it is that you extend the two legs of the patient: and when you see them equal, and the patient can move his leg and stretch it without difficulty: then know that the limb has returned as required: then join the two hips, and apply a poultice, and bind with an imemati, that is, a wheel: so that the hip does not move in any part: and the patient should rest quietly for three days or four.
Then loosen the bandage and the poultice, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in standing, then know that the dislocation is now fixed: therefore allow the patient to walk.
And if you see any softening: then return, and plaster it, and tighten it according to your first tightening: and leave it for three days.
Then loosen it and make him walk slowly on both for several days until he is well strengthened.
On the Dislocation of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated outward, inward, and downward, that is, backward.
And it does not dislocate forward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you instruct the patient to apply his leg to his hip. If it does not adhere to the hip: then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of its dislocation is to make the patient sit straight, so that he may extend his leg if he can over it, and press your back against his face: and place his foot between your feet.
Then hold his knee with your palms, and place them straight across his knee on top of it between your fingers. Then apply with your palm the two sides of his knee with strength. And another assistant should extend his foot until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction is that the leg adheres to the hip with ease, not laboriously.
Then apply plasters to it, and make the leg adhere to the hip. Then bind them together with wool for three days, or four. Then loosen them.
And the patient should not use walking for several days until healed.
If the reduction of it resists you, then administer strong extension with ligaments, the use of which was previously described in the treatment of ankylosis, until it returns.
Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the calcaneus.
The calcaneus is sometimes displaced slightly, and sometimes dislocated completely. And its dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the calcaneus swollen, protruding to the side to which it is dislocated.
The treatment of its displacement is an easy reduction: it is to be extended with ease by hand and equalized until it returns.
In the treatment of it when it is dislocated completely, it is necessary to make the patient sit straight: and let a strong attendant hold him firmly from the back part of his spine, in the middle of it.
Then hold with your right hand his foot from its upper part, and with your left hand from the lower part of his foot at the site of the spur.
Then pull his foot towards you with your right hand. Then with the left twice.
Then extend with the left, and push the sole of the foot with the right towards the leg without effort.
Do that twice, as we have mentioned.
Then push the sole of the foot towards the leg on the third attempt, and you pull out the spur.
If therefore it returns in one attempt, or in two according to this method, and you see the foot even, it is good: and if not, then repeat the procedure on it: because it will return.
If the reduction is prevented by what we have mentioned: then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and fix a stake in the ground very firmly, so that it falls between his thighs: and you now wrap a cloth over it, so that it does not harm the patient.
Then the assistant should take hold of his thigh: afterwards the assistant should extend the other foot, either with his hands, or with a band that is tied above the ankle. Then the assistant should extend against the extension of his patient: and the stake should stand between the two thighs of the patient holding him so that his body is not drawn downwards during the extension.
Then the doctor should equalize the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant should hold the healthy leg at the lower part. For the dislocation returns with speed.
When therefore the dislocation returns, and the health of its restoration is declared to you: then apply a poultice and tow, and bind it firmly with bandages, and tie the foot to the leg with a bandage.
And you must be cautious or fearful of the nerves that are above the posterior heel, so that the bandage is not too forceful over them and injures them.
Then leave it for two days or three. If the bandage softens, bind it tightly: then loosen it on the third or fourth day: and prevent the patient from walking for forty days. If however he attempts to walk before that period, there is no security that the dislocation will not be dissolved over him, and be corrupted, and not receive healing after that.
If a warm abscess should occur to him, then it is necessary to administer in its reduction what was previously described by our account in another place concerning treatment and embrocation, until it is removed.
Regarding the dislocation of the toes and its treatment.
It is necessary that what is dislocated among them be aligned with slight extension without difficulty: and indeed this is not difficult, but rather easy.
If the dislocation is in some of the joints of the foot's arch: then it is necessary that the patient sit with his foot on an even place on the ground, or on a board: and he should stand as if walking.
Then stand and place your foot on that which protrudes from those joints. Then press it with your foot forcefully until it returns and you see it now even, and no protrusion appears in the place.
Then place under the arch of his foot a board that captures the entire foot, which has two ends. Then bind it tightly for three days. Then release it, and have him rest from walking for many days, until it is tightened and secured from displacement.
Regarding the types of dislocations with wounds or fractures.
When something of this kind occurs and you attempt its cure and restoration, death often follows: and for this reason one should not presume to treat such a condition unless he is wise in the art through long experience, merciful, pious, cautious, not bold, nor presumptuous: and that he use at the outset only medicines which calm hot swellings: and leave the patient to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for recovery from peril with the mildness of the illness, and in which there appears some hope. Therefore, attempt its reduction immediately at the beginning of the matter, before a hot swelling occurs.
If the limb returns as we wish, then administer treatment that calms the swelling: and treat the wound with a drying ointment suitable for it.
If there is dislocation with fracture, and saprae separate accidents occur in the bone, then attempt their removal, and do what we said for simple ailments resulting from that which precedes in their locations.
And be careful according to your ability, and guard yourself from entering the way of fear: according to what my previous teaching has told you.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more enduring for your glory, and more beneficial to your body among them in your time.
