Now that I have completed for you, O sons, this book, which is the final part of medical science with its completion, and have reached the end in it, through its explanations and declarations, it seemed good to me to complete it for you with this Treatise which is a part of practice, that is, surgery with the hand.
Since the operation with the hand has fallen into disuse in our region and during our time entirely: until perhaps its knowledge perished, and its trace was cut off: and nothing remained of it except small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which were altered by hands: and they fell into error and hesitation, until its intentions were closed, and its power was lost: It seemed good to me to revive it with the order of this Treatise according to the method of positioning, declaration, and abbreviation: and to come with forms of cautery tools and other instruments of work: which is made by addition of declarations, and by hastening what is necessary.
The reason why a good practitioner of it with his hand is not found in our time is: because the art of medicine is long, and its author must be trained beforehand in the science of anatomy, as Galen narrated, until he knows the benefits of the members, and their forms, and their conjunction and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, tendons, and their number, and their emergence, and of pulsating and quiet veins, and the exits of those places.
And because of this, Hippocrates said that the name is abundant with the name, but scarce with the work, and especially in the art of the hand.
We have already spoken of this at the beginning of this book.
For he who is not knowledgeable about what we have said concerning anatomy will not be able to avoid falling into error, by which people are killed: as I have seen many of those who are formed from this science, and who boast about it without knowledge and without experience.
This is because I saw a foolish doctor cut into a scrofulous abscess on a woman's neck, and he cut certain arteries in the neck: therefore the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead under his hands.
And I saw another doctor who attempted to extract a stone from an elderly man, and the stone was large. He therefore proceeded to do so and extracted it along with a piece of the bladder. Therefore, the man died on the third day.
And I had indeed been called to extract it: and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was receiving payment from one of the Dukes in our land for his medical services: and it happened that a black eunuch who was with him broke his leg near the heel. The doctor, acting with his ignorance, quickly bound the fracture over the wound with cushions and tight wooden splints, and did not allow the injury to breathe.
Then he finished treating him according to his own desires. Then he left him for several days and instructed him not to loosen the bandage: and he remained thus until his leg became abscessed, and his foot as well, and it led to their destruction.
I was summoned therefore to him: and I hurried to loosen the bandage: and peace followed, and he escaped from his pains.
However, the corruption was already confirmed in the member: and I could not restrain it.
Let corruption cease to spread in the member until it perishes.
And I saw another doctor who punctured the cancerous abscess: and it became ulcerated after days, until its malice was magnified with its lord.
Which means that when the cancer is purely from a melancholic humor, then it should not be approached with iron at all, unless it is in a limb that can tolerate being entirely cut off.
And for this reason, O sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, the operation which is associated with safety: and the operation, with which there is danger in most dispositions.
And I have already alerted in every part of this book where the operation comes that is filled with fear and dread.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to beware of it and abandon it: so that fools do not find a way to speak about it and dishonor it.
Take therefore the measure with care and protection, and tend to your patients with ease and firmness, and make use of the better way leading through God's grace to salvation and a praiseworthy succession: and leave behind terrible diseases difficult to heal: and remove from yourselves that which causes you fear, so that hesitation may not enter upon you in your faith and comfort.
For it remains more to your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to your quantities.
For Galen has already said in some of his admonitions. Do not treat bad illness: lest you be called bad doctors.
Now I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
First Chapter.
About the Hot Cauterization and Sharp Medicinal Cauterization, categorized and ordered from head to foot, with forms of instruments and cauterizing tools: and everything necessary for the procedure.
Second Chapter.
About cutting and piercing, bloodletting and venting, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and similar procedures: all categorized and ordered with forms of instruments.
Third Chapter.
About restoration, dislocation, and treatment of twisting, and similar procedures: categorized and ordered from head to foot, with forms of instruments.
But before I recall the procedure with it, I must say what its benefits are and what harms it has: and in what complexion it is administered.
I say therefore that the discourse on the quality of the benefit of the cautery and its harm is a lengthy and subtle matter of knowledge and an hidden secret.
Also, many wise people have spoken about it and disagreed on it: and for me, a little of their discourse is sufficient, fearing lengthiness.
I say therefore that the cautery is beneficial universally to all complexions that have matter and those without matter: except for two complexions, which are the hot complexion without matter, and the dry complexion without matter.
In the hot and dry complexion with matter, they disagreed. For some said that the cautery is beneficial in it. And others said the opposite of that, namely that the cautery is not suitable for the disease which arises from heat and dryness: because the nature of fire is heat: and it is inappropriate to be cured from a hot and dry illness with something hot and dry.
And he who says the opposite said that through the cautery there is benefit in every hot and dry disease which occurs in human bodies: because when you compare the body of a man and its moistures to the temperament of fire, you find the body of a man to be cold.
And indeed I say through his words: because from the experiment it has already revealed to me that many times.
However, it should not come to that unless one who has already been tested and trained in the chapter on the last exercise of cauterization, and known the diversity of human complexions, and the disposition of diseases in themselves, and their causes, and their accidents, and the duration of them.
From the other complexions there is no fear for you: especially in cold and moist diseases. For indeed all doctors have agreed on these: and they have not disagreed about treating them with cauterization.
And know, sons, that from the secret of healing with cauterization by fire, and its goodness over cauterization with burning medicine is this: for fire is simple, whose action does not reach beyond the part that is cauterized: and it does not harm another connected part except with a slight damage.
The action of burning medicine reaches to that which is distant from the parts: and it may cause disease in a part that is difficult to heal, and it may even kill.
But fire, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause that, unless there is an excess.
Now this has become known to us through experience, because of the length of service and study with the art, and standing on the truth of things: and because of this, I am excused for the length of the speech.
And if it were not, because it is not permitted to this my book to bring you the hidden secret in fire, and the nature of its operation in the bodies of its expulsion, by which it expels diseases demonstrated philosophically, which would be sharpened by your minds.
And know, sons, that they disagree on the time when the cautery should be done, and they place the better time in spring.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times: because the harm caused by the time is overshadowed by the benefit that is drawn with the cautery. And especially if the cautery is for pains caused by necessary, strong, urgent pains that do not tolerate delay: because it is feared that a greater harm may occur than the small damage that temporarily intervenes due to the time.
And let it not fall into your minds, o sons, that which is not feared except by the common people and foolish doctors, namely that there is not always a return of that disease which is cured by cautery: and they put forward this consequence, and things are not as they think: because cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the temperament and dries up the moistures which are the cause why pains occur.
However, cautery exceeds medicine by the speed of its recovery and the power of its operation, and the strength of its dominance: and it is possible for the disease to return at some time according to the temperament of the patient and the location of his disease and its power: and what is prepared in his body by the aggregation of superfluities in him: and what comes to him in acquiring from foods and similar things due to those causes, unless the disease is such that cautery is administered.
A subtle illness in the limb of few excesses and moistures, like a tooth cauterization, because of pain, and similar to it, for it is possible that that pain does not return in it. But that happens in few cases.
But the common saying again, that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, is a true statement: not in regard to what they aim at in it: for they believe that there is no cure which compares with medicine, nor with anything else after the failure of cauterization.
The matter is contrary to that, and the intent, which states that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, is not so, except when we administer modes of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not help: then we apply cauterization at the end, and it helps: thus it follows that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and many foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron: and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance: and they said that the site of the cauterization does not produce pus. But that is not absolutely true: for I have already tested it and found that it does not cause that effect in some bodies without other factors.
And cauterization with it is good and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you ignite cauterization with gold in fire, it is not clear to you when it is ignited according to the amount you want, because of the redness of the gold: and when it quickly cools down, and if you add more heat to it, it melts in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the artisan falls from that into the task: and because of this, the Cauterization with iron is done more quickly and closer to us, from straightness to the operation.
And indeed I have already arranged this Chapter on Cauterization according to the chapters: and I have ordered them from head to foot: so that it may help the seeker find what they want from it.
Chapter II.
Here, cauterization is applied to the dominance of moisture and cold over the brain: these two are the causes of phlegm, and the abundance of fluid flow from the head to the regions of the eyes and ears, and an abundance of sleep, and tooth pain, and throat pain: and universally all illnesses that occur due to cold, such as paralysis, phlegm, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
The method of cauterization is that you instruct the patient to purge first with cleansing and dissolving medicine for three nights or four, according to what the strength of the patient, their age, and their habit require.
Then instruct him to shave his head with a novacula. Then have him sit between your hands in a square position, so that he has placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the tip of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever therefore your middle finger reaches, mark that place with ink.
Then cauterize with olive oil fire: whose form is this.
Then place it on the marked spot with ink, by the descent by which your hand is gradually tightened, and you will rotate it. Then quickly remove your hand, and look at the place.
If you see that the amount of alkali or the amount of zehreb has been exposed from the bone, then raise your hand. And if not, apply your hand with the same iron, or with another one if it cools down: until the bones appear, which I have told you about.
Then take something from salt, and dissolve it in water, and soak the cloth in it, and place it on the spot: and leave it for three days.
Then place on it a cloth soaked in butter, and leave it on the spot until the burn scab is dissolved. Then treat it with the ointment tetrapharmacon until it heals.
They have said that the longer the wound remains open, it expels pus: therefore it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized down to the bone: and the cautery should be held until something of the density of the bone is burned.
Then it is scraped after that which was burned from the bone, then it should be treated.
And others say that it is necessary to use the cautery until it makes a deep impression on the bone so that the bone falls out, which becomes like the shape of a key: or an instrument which women place with a small amount of alphabet poured in: and they claim that vapors of the head escape from this location, and the wound should be left open for a long time.
Then it should be treated until it is stabilized.
To me, these two types of cautery do not seem to work at all except in certain people according to a method of fear.
And to leave it, in my opinion, is better for its safety.
For the head is weakened by the breaking of its natural continuity: as we have testified in other members: and especially when the head of the patient is weak by nature: and indeed the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and I use it: therefore act with it for safety.
Chapter III.
When chronic pain occurs throughout the entire head and persists in the patient, they use hirers, cochiis, head purges, oils, and emplasteries. And especially if it has already been cauterized with the cautery we mentioned and it does not benefit from those treatments: then consider. For if the head of the sick person is strong in its natural constitution and not weak, and finds intense cold: then cauterize with another cautery a little under it. Then cauterize the entire horn of his head with a cautery, so that it does not penetrate the skin, and uncover from the bone the amount we have mentioned. And cauterize it with one cautery on the back of his head, in the place which is called the vase: and it is the place where the cupping vessel is placed: and raise your hand here, and do not uncover the bone. For the sick person finds because of that a very severe pain, and different from the pain of all the other head cauterizations.
And I say this is the Cautery in its place: and it must be a cautery with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of the head more finely than the cautery with which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occur in part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and it is purged with cleansing medicines for the head, and the remaining treatment, which I mentioned in the divisions of diseases, does not help: then cauterization should be performed in two ways: either with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
The cautery with sharp and burning medicine is such that you take one garlic clove, and peel it, and cut off its ends from both sides. Then cut the painful area with a wide lancet until you make a place under the skin where the tooth is caught.
Insert it under the skin until it is hidden; then bind over it with a poultice of proper constriction, and leave it for fifteen hours, then remove it, and let the wound be open for two or three days: afterwards apply to it a cloth soaked in butter until the place produces pus: then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do this with some burning medicines, which I have written about in the twelfth chapter, on burning mediines.
The cauterization of it with an iron is according to this method. A cautery with fire, whose form is this.
And it is named Clauilis: because the form of its head is like the form of a nail, in which there is something curved, and in the middle of it there is a small protrusion.
Then place it on the area and hold your hand steady: and you shall rotate the iron gradually with speed: and the amount that is burned should be according to the thickness of the skin, like its midpoint. And lift your hand so that the artery below is not burned and blood flow does not occur.
Then soak the cloth in salt water, and place it on the area, and leave it for three days: then place the cloth with butter: afterwards treat with ointment until it heals.
And if you want, cauterize this half of the head with the second knife end of the Cauterizer. And beware of incising the artery in this half of the head, not properly the old one.
On the method of cauterizing in the old half of the head.
When you treat half of the head, with what we have said from the previous treatment, and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not help: and you see from the disease that what we have said about using the first cautery with medicine, or with fire cautery, is not enough for it, then you must heat the knife cautery until it whitens after you mark the place of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or almost so: and withdraw your hand once, and press it until you cut the artery, and reach the bone.
However, you must be careful not to continue the cautery on the jaw that moves during chewing, so that the side or the nerve that moves it is not burned, which could cause spasms.
And be on guard and cautious about the flow of blood from the artery that has been cut. For in cutting it there is fear, especially for one who does not know what he is doing, and who is not skilled or experienced: and he leaves the operation at the very beginning.
And I will come with a recollection of the management of blood flow occurring from an artery according to its manner, and in its place in this book.
If you see from the illness that this cautery is not sufficient for it, and you see the body of the sick person tolerating the cautery in the middle of the head as we have narrated, treat the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of an artery with a cautery having two knives. For cautery is better than this and more beneficial.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for ear pain.
When pain occurs in the ear due to cold and is treated with solutions and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not subside, then use fire cautery: and it is that which is called a Point, whose form is this.
Then make points with it after its ignition around the entire ear, as it revolves: or around both, if the pain is in both at the same time. And move the cautery away from the root of the ear for a moment after you have marked the places with branding: and let the quantity of the cautery be ten points on the entire ear, and about that.
Then treat the areas until they heal.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for torture.
Chapter VII.
Torture which is treated with cauterization is only of the kinds that occur from phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of diseases.
And avoid cauterization in the kind that occurs from dryness and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this kind of torture with plasters, and head purgations, and gargles, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the second a little below its temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area. Because softening does not occur unless in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is to cauterize directly at the upper end of the ear under the temple a little, and another at the temple, whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cautery until the amount equal to the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a type of knife, whose shape is as mentioned before; however, it is not as fine, as you see: and it must be a knife that is somewhat excessively thick.
Then treat the areas with what precedes: until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in old apoplexy.
When apoplexy becomes old, and you treat it with what we have said, and your medication does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on every horn of his head, and a cauterie in the middle of the head, as we have said, and a cauterie on the back of the head, according to what precedes: and the method of the cauterie should be according to what precedes.
It is also cauterized with a cautery on the mouth of the stomach: and it is the very last.
Then it should be treated with what has been mentioned previously.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in the drink given first to the patient there be hyraceum and pills that cleanse the brain.
Then shave the head of the patient entirely, and place on the back of his head a poultice of mustard as described in the chapter on poultices: and apply it several times.
This is the method of the cautery: and do it according to the same order which I said there.
If therefore he is healed by that, it is good. If not: then make three cauteries on the back part of his head, which should descend from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye: and place between each cautery the thickness of a finger.
Then care for the cautery with what preceded it.
If however you wish for an addition, and the patient is tolerant of it: then make a cautery in the middle. If you wish for an addition: then cauterize it over the two horns.
Then care for it until it heals: let the cautery be oiled according to the method which was mentioned.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in paralysis and softening.
Chapter Ten.
It is necessary that you proceed with the cleansing of the head with hogweed and with what we have mentioned.
Then shave the head of the patient: afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and a cautery on every horn of the head, and a cautery on its posterior, and three on the cervical vertebrae.
If however you need more than those for the sickness and softening of the body, and the patient is tolerant, and the illness is strong: then cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and the last with a cautery until it is burned deeply from the skin, and lift your hand. Then care for it until it heals: and thus oil the cautery.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless his epilepsy is due to phlegm.
Therefore, you must cleanse its brain first with honey, and with the rest of the treatment we mentioned in the division: when the patient is severe, or is tolerant in receiving medicines.
If it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then a gargle and cleansing mastications for the brain are administered, after many days with the improvement of foods.
Then shave his head, then cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head, according to what preceded in the method: and with another cautery on the back of his head, and on all the horn of his head with a cautery. If the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize it with the cauteries I mentioned for those having paralysis, and softening of the body over the cervical vertebrae, and dorsal vertebrae: and let it be an olive oil cautery according to the method that preceded.
If the patient is a child, then apply a fine cautery according to this method.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with the cauteries we mentioned for those having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess inclined towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him in drink what will cleanse his brain, according to what preceded in the division: then shave the head of the patient, and make afterwards a properly made band from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the patient sitting upright shall be held on all sides.
Then apply the liniment. And it is better from old sheep's butter. And heat it over the fire with moderate heating, to a degree that can be tolerated by a finger when inserted into it. Then evacuate it in the middle of his head in a circle, and leave it until it cools down.
Do this for the patient once every week, along with the rest of his good regimen, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making very many small points, except where you hold the hand with the cautery: let it be smelled.
For this type of cautery moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place on it a cloth soaked in butter or hen's fat.
About the method of cauterizing for water descending to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When the beginning of water in the eye is made clear to you by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and purify the patient, with what cleanses his head.
And keep him away from all moisture, and have him sit in a bath, on fasting for several days.
Then command him to shave his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize it over both temples with two cauteries, if the onset of water descent is in both eyes at the same time: or from one side, if the onset of water is in one eye: and sever with the cautery all veins and arteries which are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in width across the temples: and beware of the flow of blood.
If you see anything of it, then sever it immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with the wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries, and their severing, and caution against the flow of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, below two bones, with two ultimately extended cauteries.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in ancient tears.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient, persistent: and they are over veins, and arteries which are on the exterior of the head, it is verified that this is from cold, phlegmatic excesses: then cauterize with the cautery I mentioned in the onset of descending water, a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries over both temples, and two cauteries on the neck below two bones. And if additional treatment is needed, then cauterize it on the entire side of the eye, over the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
On the method of cauterizing for nasal odor.
When you treat it with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment does not help: then hurry, and give the patient infirmocochias for three nights: then shave his head, and cauterize it with a medium cautery, with olive oil. Then cauterize it with a key cautery twice, above the eyebrows slightly under the hair.
And be careful of the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the key cautery.
On the method of cauterizing for the relaxation of the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is relaxed due to illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid once with this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it slightly above the eyebrows with two cauteries on each side: and they should extend from both temples: and the length of each cautery should be according to the length of the eyebrow: and do not push your hand too much with the cautery, but according to the amount that the third eyelid is burned.
On the method of cauterizing the eyelid when the inverted hairs irritate the eye.
Cauterization is performed in two ways: either with fire; or with burning medicine.
In cauterization with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to remove his hairs, if he is one of those who shave them, until they grow out and are even. If they puncture him at their origin: then bind his eyes with a thread, so that they do not move until they heal.
When they grow out and are even, then place the patient's head in your lap: then mark above the eyelids of his eyes with a branding iron, making a mark in the shape of a myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place a cloth soaked in egg white: or in psyllium mucilage over the eye.
Then cauterize with fire, the form of which is this.
Then cauterize over the figure you marked gradually in many places until the surface of the skin, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, appears properly burned all over.
And the sign of the healing of your work is: if you see the eyelid already contracting, and the hairs rising around the eye's puncture.
Therefore lift your hand then: and leave him for three days.
Then place a cloth with butter over it until the eschar is removed. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
If any of the hairs return after an hour, and the eyelid softens: then apply the cautery again to that place as you did at first.
If the hairs are on the lower [lid]: then cauterize it until it rises to its natural position: and [make sure] it is even so that the hairs do not pierce the eye.
It is that you should advise the patient to let the hairs grow until they lengthen and even out. Make a shape of a myrtle leaf from cloth paper.
Then take from known soap and from unslaked lime one ounce each; then grind them together well, and make it quickly so that it does not cool. Then spread it over the paper you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place under the eye a cloth soaked in egg white: and let the patient's head be in your lap.
And place your index finger on the medicine and press it for a moment. And you should move it whenever the patient feels the bite of the medicine: for its bite is like fire.
Therefore, while this which he discovered as a bite persists, then discontinue the medication, and move it with your finger. Therefore, when the bite ceases, then remove the medication, and wash the eye with water.
And then consider, if you see the eyelid rise, as it rises with contraction by fire or with incision, it is good: and if not, then again apply the medication over the place where the medication does not leave a mark and does not blacken, until your operation is equalized and the eye contracts.
Then apply Cottus with butter on it until the burnt skin is removed. Then treat it with a diaphoretic ointment, or another, until it heals.
And it is necessary for you during the operation to guard with utmost care that nothing from the medication falls into the eye.
If the eyelid softens after a few days and something from hairs struggles in the eye, then apply the medication again to the place that softens from the eyelid itself, as you did at first. Then treat it until it heals.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And you should know that the eyes of humans differ in size and smallness. Therefore, let your consideration be according to this: and the way of righteousness is not hidden from one who has a zeal for this art.
On the method of cauterizing in a lacrimal fistula.
When you treat a fistula, with what we have said about the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not help: then, you must cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and let the attendant hold his head between his hands in such a way that it does not move or jerk with his head.
Then place a cloth soaked in egg white or in psyllium mucilage over his eye: then cauterize with fire, the form of which is this.
Let it be hollow, like the form of a vulture feather quill from one end, with which the cauterization is done: and if you want it to penetrate to the other end, and if you want it to go up, try it thus.
However, this hollow one is better for your work.
Then express the fistula if it is open, and extract the pus from it, and dry it: and if it is not open, then open it and extract its pus.
Then place the cauterization tool, which is made very hot, on it.
And hold your hand near the cauterization tool by the eye, toward the nose side, so that your hand does not waver or disturb the patient: and place the cauterization tool on the fatty part of the eye and burn it.
If therefore you reach at the beginning of your cauterization up to the bone, it will be well. And if not: then repeat the cauterization once, or twice, if you need that: and leave it for three days.
Then apply the poultice with butter, and treat it with a drying ointment until it heals.
If forty days have passed and it has not healed: then apply a sharp corrosive medicine over it until the bone is exposed: and scrape it according to how it is described in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing the fistula, which some first mentioned. Attend to the location of the fistula and find it: then place a fine camahan into the fissure, that is, a fine cannula, whose form is this. And pour into it the quantity of a drachm of molten lead, and hold your hand with a good retention cane, and do not move the patient at all, so that the molten lead does not run to or reach his eye.
And it is necessary to place on the patient's eye a poultice soaked in egg white, or in water.
For the lead burns the area of the fistula and heals it with a remarkable healing.
If the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nasal passage and redirect the fistula to the course of the nose, according to how it will come to its own proper place.
On the method of cauterizing in fissures of the lips.
Often fissures occur on the Lip, which are called Pili, and especially on the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat these fissures, with what we have said in the division of diseases, and if the treatment does not help, then prepare a small knife-like cautery with fire, according to this form.
And its concavity should be according to the fineness of the knife.
Then place it, when ignited, quickly on the fissures, until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
Then treat it with cerote until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in oral fistulas.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus and bursts: afterwards it becomes old, and pus runs, and a fistula forms: then you treat it, and if the treatment does not help, then you must heat a cautery according to its size, so that it may fit into the fistula. Then insert it, when ignited, into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches its depth and bottom: do this once or twice.
Then treat it afterward with what we have said about the treatment until it is healed.
If therefore the pus is removed and it heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what will come upon its head.
On the method of cauterizing in gums and softened teeth.
When the gum is softened due to moisture and the teeth are loosened, and you treat it with medicines and it does not improve: then place the patient's head in your lap.
Then with a fire cauterize it, the form of which will come after this, so that you place a cannula on the tooth: and insert into it a ignited cauterium quickly: and hold your hand for a moment, until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And lift your hand: then repeat the cauterization several times, according to what you wish.
Then let the patient fill his mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour: and spit it out.
For the loose tooth is fixed, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
On the method of cauterizing for tooth pain.
When the pain of the tooth is due to cold, or there is cold in it, or a worm, and treatment with medicines does not help: then cauterization is applied in two ways: either cauterization with butter: or cauterization with fire.
The cautery of this is with butter, that you take cow's butter and boil it in an iron spoon, or in copper. Then take the cloth, and wrap it over the end of the bandage. Then submerge it in boiled butter: and place it on the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools: then repeat it several times, until the heat penetrates to the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool, or cloth in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth: and place a heated iron on top of it until the heat reaches the bottom of the tooth cavity.
The cautery of this with fire is to apply a brass tube or an iron tube. And let there be something thick on the body of it so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
Then with fire cauterize it, whose form will come: and place it on that tooth: and hold your hand until the cautery cools.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed, either on that same day or another day.
And it is necessary after applying that cautery that the patient fills his mouth with good butter and holds it for one hour: then spit it out.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Cauterize with whichever end you wish according to what is possible: and this is the form of the cannula.
On the method of cauterizing in strophulus.
When strophulas are caused by phlegm and cold moistures, and do not respond to digestion through medicines, and you wish for their rapid digestion: then use a concave cautery, whose form is this.
Having two open ends, so that smoke may exit at the cautery from the other end: and place it ignited upon the aposteme once, and a second time if needed, until it reaches the depth of the aposteme.
If the aposteme is small: then place the cautery according to the size of the aposteme.
Then leave it for three days, and place upon it a cloth soaked in butter until what the fire has burned is removed.
Then treat it with tooth ointment until the shape of the cannula heals.
On the method of cauterizing in hoarseness of voice and constriction of breathing.
When moistures overcome the channel of the lungs, and especially when this occurs with a cold temperament, then it is necessary that the patient be first evacuated with dissolving medicines.
Then cauterize it in the no crater at the root of the throat in a depressed area: and be careful not to reach with the cautery to the throat itself, nor on the skin, except slightly.
Then cauterize it with another cautery near the joint of the neck at its last vertebra: and let the cautery be according to the method that preceded.
Then care for it with what has preceded until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in diseases of the lungs, and cough.
When cough and disease of the lungs are from cold humidities, and the patient does not have fever, nor consumption, and the disease is chronic: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the clavicle in depressed, mild, empty places. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples: and let the cautery be of a tube according to the form that preceded.
And if you wish your cauterization to be done by pricking with a cautery which is called Point, whose form has preceded in the pricking of ear pain: and let the pricks be from thirty points up to about another.
Then care for it with what has preceded until it is healed.
And now let the cautery have three branches: according to this form. Therefore, the cautery is alleviated when you perform three cauteries with it at once.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
When the head of the helper is displaced due to moisture and does not return to its place at the time of its usual return from displacement, until it becomes accustomed to returning, then it is displaced by a small movement, which occurs as we have already testified, then you must restore the displacement first. Then the patient should lie on their back, or on the healthy side. Then lift the skin that is inside the Titillici upwards with the fingers of your left hand: and if the joint is displaced inward.
Then take a cautery with two prongs. Its form is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of the cauterization will come with four cautery marks.
And sometimes the cauterization is done with a cautery having three prongs, hence the figure of the cauterization then has six marks: and the prongs are according to the fineness of the wire.
And this is the form of the cautery having three prongs.
And sometimes one is added to this manner, hence there are eight cautery marks.
Then place ground onions with salt on the cautery. Then secure the patient to stillness, so that the limb is not moved for some time until it is strengthened.
And if the displacement is upward, and this rarely occurs, then cauterize it on the shoulder with a key-shaped cautery or with multiple punctures of cauteries.
For the joint is strengthened, and the moisture is removed: and the sick person is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and excessive moisture occur in the stomach, causing it to deviate from its natural disposition, and phlegm increases around it, and usual methods of treatment are not beneficial: then the sick person should lie on their back, extend their legs, and hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries, a cautery under the spoon-shaped area of the chest the size of one finger with a key-shaped cautery, and two cauteries below from both sides of one cautery, until the shape of the cauteries forms a triangle. And space them apart so they do not join, when they would form pus.
And the depth of the cautery should be two-thirds the thickness of the skin.
And the shape of the cauteries should follow this form without addition: and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery with which this cautery is made be one according to the shape of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by marking the area to be treated with this cautery: and it is done by marking a point on the stomach according to the size you wish with encaustic; then cauterize it with a point cautery; then treat it with the preceding method of treatment until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing the cold spleen.
When there occurs in the spleen pain from cold and moisture, or from thick wind, until it departs from its natural complexion by expelling excess, and the patient is treated with what we have said, but does not improve: then the patient must lie down on his back, and you mark out with encaustic three cautery points according to this figure and the same quantity below the spleen near the hypochondria, where a man's elbow reaches: and let there be space between each cautery point according to the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery point be straight according to the length of the body: and do not press your hand with the cautery too much.
And let the quantity that is burned be according to the thickness of the skin, a quantity not exceeding half of it: and let the patient stand on his feet.
But if he cannot stand, then let him lie down, extending his legs and raising his arms.
This is the form of the cautery.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these points with a knife cautery when you have subtlety and skill in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too deeply in cauterization, so that the entire thickness of the skin is not burned, causing the whole body to be burned and reaching the intestines: for the skin there is thin, so you should know this.
On the method of cauterizing abscesses of the liver.
When it happens that one is about to die, and you wish to know if that swelling is in the flesh of the liver or in its covering: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the sick person suffers pain and heaviness without sharpness; and if it is in the covering of the liver, there is with the pain a very intense sharpness; and you see now that its treatment has fatigued its doctors.
Therefore, the sick person should lie down on their neck. Then mark the location of the abscess with encaustic: then heat the cautery which resembles a rod. And this is its form. And cauterize with it once, until the skin is completely burned and reaches the siphac, until all the pus comes out: then treat it with the treatment for burns, until it heals.
And one should not use this type of cautery unless their study in the art of medicine is prolonged: and through whose hands such illnesses occur repeatedly with experience: then indeed they may dare to perform such an operation.
But to leave it alone is better in my opinion.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in pleurisy.
The ancients said, the cautery with roots of aristolochia for cold pleurisy according to this method. And it is that you take from the dried long roots of aristolochia one longer root, which is found among them, and let it be as thick as a finger. Then dip it in oil: and light it on fire. Then cauterize with one cautery where the fork joins the neck, and with two small cauteries below the slightly sloping area towards the part under the beard.
And with two cauteries also where the fifth and sixth ribs slope towards the back slightly: and with another cautery on the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three cauteries from the back: one where the two spatulas meet: and with two cauteries from the two sides of the chest, the lower cautery being between the two spatulas.
And you should not compress your hand with the cautery, but let the skin be clearly smelled.
And some ancient ones have said that there are men who use a cautery similar to a rod: and they heat it, and insert it between the ribs until they reach the abscess with it, and the pus comes out: as we have said about the abscess of the spleen.
But in this puncture with the cautery, there is a fear that either the patient dies immediately, or an ulcer forms at the site, which has no cure.
Regarding the Method of Cauterizing the Spleen Chapter XXXII.
When you treat the disease of the spleen, and your treatment according to what we have said in the section on the treatment of diseases does not help, then cautery is applied in three ways, all of which are correct.
One is to make three cauterizations or four by lining according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauterizations of the liver, whose figure preceded.
And there should be between each cauterization the thickness of a finger, or more or less.
And the method of the cauterization, which we have mentioned for the cauterization of the liver, should be equal.
And do not compress your hand with the cautery: and let the patient lie supine on his back.
And another method of cauterization is: to ignite a cautery having two prongs, which we have mentioned in the chapter on the dislocation of the shoulder: and elevate the skin which is directly over the spleen, where the patient's left elbow reaches: and your elevation should raise the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauterizations fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert the two prongs that are very hot until you penetrate the skin from the other side: then withdraw the cautery: thus four cauterizations are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with another cautery having three prongs.
Then care for the cautery after you leave it to discharge pus over many days: for it is more beneficial than all that have preceded in the treatment.
Regarding the method of cauterization in hydrops.
The cautery does not apply in hydrops unless properly positioned.
When you treat the water-retainer with the methods of treatment we have mentioned in the division, and if the treatment does not help, then you must cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel, and one caustic on the stomach, and another caustic on the spleen, and two cauteries behind the back between the vertebrae, and one directly on the chest, and another directly on the stomach: and the depth of the caustic should be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the cauterization open so that it discharges pus over a long period of time.
And do not evacuate the weak from treatment after cauterization with it; two intentions should be gathered for him: and healing will hasten to him with God's help.
The form of the caustic with which the stomach is cauterized should be key-shaped, according to its previous form; and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, according to its previous form.
Regarding the method of cauterizing the feet and legs.
When abscesses form in the water-retainer and are filled with yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot at the nocker, which is between the toe bone and the ankle: lift your hand with the caustic and do not twist it; then lift your hand: and do not repeat it at all.
For yellow water will sweat out, and the caustic should be in this form.
Then make two cauteries on both legs, on every leg, and let the cautery be made with the edge of the knife-like cauterizing tool: and let one cautery be made according to the length of the leg, one below the knee, and another below it, about the middle of the leg: and on each hip two cauteries: and leave the open cautery without treatment for a long time: so that some water may sweat out from it: then treat it with the other things we have said.
On the method of cauterizing for the treatment of abdominal conditions.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
When the abdominal condition arises from cold and humidities, until it weakens the retentive and digestive powers which are in the stomach and intestines: and it is treated with methods of treatment, and does not heal: and you see the patient tolerating the cautery of excessive power, then cauterize him with a large cautery on his stomach, according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery, and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle key-shaped cautery: and a large cautery on the alcatin above the alhosos, or two cauteries.
And if you see excessive humidities and the patient tolerating it, then cauterize him with a cautery on the comb area, and a cautery on all the ilium: and perhaps you may add two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one.
For it is an effective treatment whose benefit does not fail.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter XXXVI.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the year, or one, and they are from thick, cold humors, or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with what we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help: then cauterize three times above the lower spine under almeidati momentarily in a triangular shape, and below the navel with a cautery almost two fingers wide.
And if you think that his stomach is overly cooled, and his food is not digested, and you see his face becoming swollen with pus, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described: and with a cautery on his liver, and another on his spleen with a key-shaped cautery: and leave the cautery open for some time: then treat him until he is healed.
Chapter XXXVII.
When you cut off althelul, then heat the cautery which resembles a rod. Then insert the heated cautery into the cut althelul: and hold it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows: do this once or twice.
If there are many althelul, then cauterize each one with a cautery as we have described. Then treat them with what heals them from ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize it with a large cautery over linen, it is more ultimate in healing.
On the method of cauterizing an anal fistula.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
When the patient does not obey the cutting and procedure which we have described in its proper place, and is frightened by it, perhaps he may be healed with a cautery.
When therefore an anal fistula occurs in someone and becomes old, pus runs from it, and corrupted humors. It is therefore more proper to probe it with a fine. Then know the quantity of its depth with a probe.
Then heat the cautery, which is like a rod. Then insert the heated cautery into the fistula itself and the length to which the claw entered.
And repeat the cautery on it until all the corrupted bodies are burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to the amount of your need.
And guard yourself from burning the nerve, if it is there, or large veins: or if the fistula leads to the bladder wall, or to the intestinal wall, then guard yourself from all these areas.
And do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area: and you think that it is not penetrating.
Then care for the area until it heals.
If the area is sealed and materials are separated from it and remains so for a long time: then you know that it is now fully healed.
And if materials do not separate from it, then you know that it is penetrating, or there is a corrupted bone in its depth, or something like that, of which the recollection will come in its place.
Regarding the method of cauterizing the kidneys.
When pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or severe wind, and it is reduced because of the patient's weakness, then it is necessary to cauterize it over almethen on the kidneys, with a claw-shaped cautery over the entire kidney, as previously mentioned.
And perhaps we cauterize it a second time on the almeidatum. Therefore, three lined ones will come. Therefore, they will be more last in healing.
On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture until the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it on the lower part of the sumen above the bladder, where the pubic hairs begin, and with one cautery on the right side of the sumen, and another on the left side of it: and let the length of that lateral cauterization be according to the size of a thumb knot: and cauterize it with the lower back cautery, or with two cauters if needed: and let it be according to what precedes the clavicle cautery.
On the method of cauterizing the womb.
When cold and moisture occur in the womb, preventing conception and corrupting its menses, and delaying their onset, and pain occurs at their arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize it with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with one cautery above alcatim below the back, or with two cauteries: and let the cautery be clavile.
On the method of cauterizing the ankle in dislocation.
When mucous humidities flow to the hip socket of Anchae, and become the cause of its departure from its place: and the sign of this is that one leg is extended over the other when they are placed together; and the site of dislocation is found empty in it.
Therefore, you must cauterize the affected area on the hip socket with a similar circular cautery: after you mark with ink around the socket, as it revolves: and let the socket itself fall in the middle of the circle.
If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive oil cauterizations: and the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the entire skin.
Then care for it until it heals.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in sciatica.
When pain occurs in the hip socket and its causes are cold and humidities: and the patient is treated with what we have mentioned in the division, but if the treatment does not help and the condition persists: then it is necessary to relieve the patient of thick humors with foul pills, or with artificial pills, and similars. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
The cautery with fire is according to many methods.
One of which is to cauterize above the lid of its container with three triangular cauteries, according to this form. And make their depth good or bad. And let the space which is between each cautery be the thickness of a finger: let the cautery be olive-shaped.
Sometimes, however, the cautery is made in the middle on top of the lid of its container. Therefore, there are four cauterizations.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose form preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the lid, with one: so that the circle contains the entire lid.
And burn the thickness of the entire skin.
This is the method of the cautery for sciatica, when the pain is attached to the lid itself, and does not extend all the way to the hip and leg.
If it extends all the way to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip, on the spot where the patient indicates there is pain, and with your cautery on the caudal area four fingers towards the wilderness side: and let the cautery be knife-shaped.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the patient indicates that the pain extends nearly to the toes of the foot, then cauterize it where they indicate with a point cautery, three, or four, or more if it is needed.
And if he indicates that pain is under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize that place with one knife cautery.
And be careful in all your cauterizations so that you do not end up using the cautery to such an extent that you burn a nerve or a large artery, and thereby bring upon the patient severe harm or contraction.
And indeed I have seen one and another of those who cauterized above the ankle, and they ended up in cauterization, and the leg swelled until a tumor followed to the foot, and it was entirely perforated, and the entire foot corrupted; then came a rupture of the abdomen, and death followed that.
If pain is in both parts at the same time, cauterize both according to this method.
And some wise men said regarding the cauterization of anchae, for which this is the method of cautery. Make a similar cautery from iron, whose diameter is half a palm: and let it be at its opening according to the thickness of a kernel of a fingernail, or slightly less: and within that cautery be a third cautery.
And let the space between each cautery be the width of a thumb knot: and let the cauterizations be open on both sides: and their depth should be about one or two thumb knots: and make handles from iron suitably fitted to the cauteries.
Then it is heated in fire until it turns red and throws out sparks: then it is placed on the armpit of the sick person lying on their healthy side. Therefore, cauterize him with three round cautery devices in one turn.
Then leave him for three days. Afterwards, apply plasters with butter: and leave the wound open for many days. Then treat him with an ointment until he is healed.
Albucasis says, we have used this kind of cautery little, O sons, because of the terror of its appearance: and furthermore, because we find few who can withstand it.
However, it is one of the good cauteries for those who endure, and find its proper place.
The cautery with burning medicines is such that you make two jars having a perforated ring, through which descends the hinge of its lid made of brass or iron, the length of the wall: each should have two knots, or something like them, in their height.
And let the space between the two be the thickness of a finger, and let them be open both below and above: and let them be joined together tightly according to this form.
Then place it on the lid of the anchor, with the patient lying on their sound side. And press your hand strongly on the lid of the anchor. Then pour between the two circles with hot water, which has been heated briefly over fire, and keep it for the duration of an hour: and let the patient endure its biting sensation and burning, for he will find the biting like fire until the burning subsides.
Then lift your hand with the instrument, and clean the entire wound with warm water and sweet water; then leave it for three days.
And put butter on it until the blackness of the burn is removed: and leave it for several days, and pus will flow from it. For it is the last in healing.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the thigh or leg: make a poultice on that which contains water, according to what you did for the wound equally.
And this is the method of warm water: and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Take alkali and unquenched lime, each one part: grind both, and place them in a new pot, whose lower part has one small hole according to the size that a finger can enter: and place under the bottom of the pot another earthen pot: and pour over the alkali and lime sweet water enough to submerge both by a finger's depth: after which you compress them with your hand firmly: and leave the pot until the sharp water descends to the lower part of the earthen pot.
Then gather all that water and pour it over another lime: and distill it until it is renewed.
For it will then be very strong in sharpness, which is used in many medical procedures and in cauterizing other parts of the body. For it makes the action of its fire.
And among the medicines are those with which the ankh is cauterized, even like tesiie, and cashew apple honey, and lime with soap, so that each is thoroughly mixed.
And Galen narrated the treatment of an ancient man's cure, by which he was cured of the pain of the ankh and the sciatic vein: and he praised it greatly. And he said that he did not need another treatment, and that he was cured with one attempt, until he reported that he perhaps entered a bath carried in, and exited it already healed.
And it is to be taken from green seitaragi: and if green is not found, take the dry, fresh: and grind it much with some fat, and place it on the ankh where there is pain, or leg, or in the thigh: and bind it, and leave it for a duration of three hours, or for a length that the patient feels the sedation of the burning. Then introduce him to the bath.
Therefore, when his body becomes moist, introduce him into the seat. For the pain retreats, and it is healed.
And you should know that one should not use a cautery with these medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides said that goat dung, when it is used to cauterize the sciatic vein, helps it: and the cautery is made in this way. Take wool, and soak it in old oil, and place it on the deep spot that is between the big toe of the foot and the instep, and it is closer to the instep.
Then take dried goat dung, and ignite it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the wool, and leave it until it is extinguished. Then do it again. Do not cease to do this until the sensation reaches the nail through the intermediary and the pain ceases.
And this method of cautery is called Vaccinum cautery.
On the cauterization of back pain.
It sometimes happens that pain occurs in the back for many reasons, either from a fall, or from a blow, or from excessive evacuation, and similar causes, due to the infusion of cold and humid matter; and indeed cautery is only applicable in this particular type which arises from the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the patient with foul pills and similar remedies, three lines should be made on the back where the pain is, according to the width of the affected area itself. Once you mark with encaustro five cauteries on each line, or more according to the quantity that comes from the patient's tolerance and strength: and the cauterization should be done with a cautery point.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a middle-claw cautery according to this form.
On the method of cauterizing at the beginning of hump formation.
This disease often occurs in small children.
And the sign of the beginning of this condition in children is: that it occurs upon him a tightness in breathing during elevation and movement: and you find at the last vertebrae of the spine and its joints, that it has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
Therefore, when you see it and wish to treat it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery according to this form.
And let the cautery take effect on every part of the vertebra equally: and if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a point cautery in two lines, or three: and let the points be close to each other.
Then care for the area until it heals with what we have said.
And beware, do not apply the cautery to the hump that occurs due to nerve spasm.
On the method of cauterizing in gout and joint pains.
When joint pains are caused by cold humidities that are poured out to any part of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is customary among physicians to call this gout properly.
Therefore, when gout caused by cold is treated with methods of cure and the pains are not removed, then the cautery removes them.
And it is so that you cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the feet, with many cautery applications: and let the cautery be Oleum.
And if you need to prick on the surface of the foot, then do it with a puncture cautery. If the pains ascend up to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize over the entire knee with three or four cautery applications from all sides, with this same Clavus cautery.
If you need more applications of this cautery, then cauterize it. And do not plunge your hand with the cautery, but let it be about the thickness of the skin only.
If the pains ascend to the knees and the back, then apply what we have said about the cautery in its chapter.
If the pains are only in the hands, then prick around the joints as if two lines are drawn.
If the pains remain in the digits, then prick them on every knot and on the palm of the hand.
If the pains ascend after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both from all sides.
And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen or from the reception of medicines. For if good regimen is established and the phlegm is evacuated, he will be healed with the help of God by this cautery.
On the method of cauterizing in ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestine or hernia descends near the testicle: then you must advise the patient to abstain from food on his day. And let him use mild remedies so that the stool may descend from his abdomen.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and advise him to hold his breath until the hernia or intestine appears.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and mark with cautery below the rupture on the rim of the pubic bone, with a mark whose end resembles half a circle directed towards the upper part of the body.
Then apply the cautery with this form of fire until it turns white and sparks. Then reduce the intestine or hernia to its concavity. Then let the assistant place his hand on the area to prevent the intestine from protruding: and you have already parted the patient's thighs, and placed a cushion underneath him, and another servant is above his legs, and another on his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery on the mark, with your hand holding the cautery straight. And hold it until you reach the bone with it: or repeat with it another time, if you have not reached the bone with it on the first try.
And prudently observe from the exit of the intestine during your cautery hour, lest you burn it, and thereby cause either death or great harm to the patient.
And you should know that when you do not reach the mouth with the cautery, your operation does not help.
And it is necessary that the cautery for infants be fine, according to their size.
Then treat with other ointments until it heals.
And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you provide nourishment for the duration of his healing, which soothes his stomach: so that the intestine does not come out during effort and defecation.
Then when he wants to rise after forty days, administer a properly made bandage, and let it stay for another forty days.
And he should be reduced in labor, and fullness of food and drink, and loud voices.
For when he follows this regimen, he is healed with complete healing.
And I will speak of the treatment of ruptures with incision in its chapter.
When ruptures occur in the rest of the abdomen and are initial, and you want to prevent them from worsening, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size: and let one-third of it be burned from then on. Then care for it with what we have said: and nothing shall be added.
And some have said first: that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
After it is marked with encaustic, and a line is placed across the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with a key-shaped cautery.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for pains due to falls or blows.
Chapter XLVIII.
When pain occurs in some limbs due to a fall or blow, and that pain persists for a long time, and treatment with medicines does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize with a Point cautery.
And the cautery should be suited to the entire member according to its size, and its sensitivity, and its weakness, and its strength, and the location of the twist, and the pain from it.
If it is healed by the first cautery, it is well. If not: then repeat on the same cautery.
For it is the custom of these pains to shift from one member to the adjacent one. Therefore, it is necessary to address them with cautery until the patient is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes greatly helped by the cautery. And especially the type of leprosy that occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melanchole: when you wish to cauterize it, consider.
If the leprosy is spreading, and you have treated it with what we mentioned in the division, and it does not subside nor remain stable: and you fear that the corruption may spread over the entire constitution of the patient: then cauterize him on the head with five cautery points: one in the middle of the known part of the head, and the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hairline, and two on the two temples, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And lastly, apply your hand with the cautery for a moment until it makes a small imprint on the mouth, and the scabs fall off: so that the expiration of gross vapors from it may be alleviated, and cauterize the spleen itself with the cautery as previously described.
If the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly apparent: then it is necessary to cauterize with these cautery points which we mentioned in the chapter, and a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both jaws, and two cauteries on the cervical vertebrae, and six on the dorsal vertebrae, and one large one on the alahosos near the tailbone and one above it, on the almeidati: and two on the hips: that is, one on each hip, and two on the knees: one on each knee, and two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows, and two on the soft parts of his chest: and cauterize him on every joint, from the joints of his fingers and toes: and cauterize on every heel of his feet and palms of his hands.
And beware of the nerves which are above the posterior part of the heel, lest you burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the mouth of the pelvis, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And you should know that the more you apply the cautery, the greater the benefit and the more it helps.
And you should know that the sick person does not find pain in the cautery as much as healthy people do: because their body is already numbed.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of size and smallness according to the members and joints: according to which precedes from the kinds of instruments.
Then care for the cautery with flour of the herb and honey, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in stupor.
When some member is numb, and it is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then cauterize the numbed member with cauteries according to the size or smallness of the member as it deserves.
And let your cautery penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin. Then care for it with an ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes it is cauterized for a kind of numbness that affects the hand and foot, at the vertebrae of the back near the exit of the nerves that move that member: and the numbness is removed.
But let not one who is not wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the moving nerves presume upon it.
Chapter Fifty-One.
When Alvarus becomes old and none of the medical skills are effective in it: then cauterize over it with a deep cautery for a moment, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color changes.
Then treat it with flour of the herb, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and blood of dove, and blood of swallow: let there be one part of each; mix all these, and apply them on cloth, and keep in place until it heals.
On the method of cautery in cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it, as it surrounds.
The wise have said that it should be cauterized with the final cautery in the middle.
To me, however, it does not seem right: for I fear that it may ulcerate: and I have already seen this several times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around it with a circle, as we have said: or with many cauteries.
On the method of cautery in adubelati.
When someone has an abscess and its maturation is delayed either due to excess causing it or due to the age of the patient if they are frail and of little blood, or due to time, and there is a need to hasten the maturation of the abscess, then cauterize around it with many small cautery points. Then release her. For it will hasten with the maturation.
If you wish to pierce it with a cautery, then take this cautery, which has this form.
And place it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery be applied so that the following patient may be relieved of the course of pus.
Then care for it until it is healed.
About the method of cauterizing in a corrosive disease.
Chapter LIV.
A corrosive is nothing but corruption in a limb that spreads and corrodes it: just as fire eats dry wood.
If you see a corrosive in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then use many cauteries, small and large clavi, according to what is suitable for the place where the corrosive is.
Then cauterize it from all sides until you root out the entire corruption and nothing of it remains entirely.
Then leave it for three days, and place ground sulfur with oil on the cauterized areas until all the eschars are removed, and all corruption is gone.
Then treat it with flesh-generating ointments.
If you see that after three days flesh is born with a healthy growth, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not, then apply the cautery again on what remains of the corrupted areas.
And it is treated with sharp medicine when it corrodes. For it rises up from the place of the cautery.
However, cautery with fire is faster for healing: and I have already mentioned its cautery with sharp medicine in the division: therefore take it there when you need it.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in claws and warts.
Chapter LV.
This illness often occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a thick, filtered substance that harms the foot.
And there are two methods of cautery for these: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
As for cautery with fire, make a concave cautery instrument similar to an eagle's feather: it should be made of iron according to the size that can contain the claw on all sides: and let it have fine edges.
Then place it ignited upon the nail. Then revolve the hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail: and leave it for three days until it begins to emit pus. Then apply plasters with wild apples, crushed with salt: and leave the plaster on it during the night. For it will be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the area with a flesh-generating ointment until it heals.
If they are not converted and often occur on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet: then apply a cautery with warm water: and it is as follows, take a tube made of metal, or iron, or from an eagle's quill: and place it over the nail, or splinter. Then pour a small amount of warm water into the tube: hold your hand, and revolve it with the pressure of your hand for a moment, so that the edge of the tube is imprinted on the root of the nail, and let the warm water find its way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and let the patient wait for a while over the effect of the warm water for one hour.
Then leave it, for the nail is uprooted with its roots.
Do this one by one until you have addressed all of them that are in the body.
Then treat them after they are uprooted with what generates flesh from ointments.
On the method of cautery in tremor.
When tremor occurs in someone due to cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or another cause: then it is necessary to cauterize him with four or five cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and a cautery between each vertebra, and a cautery on his chest, and a cautery on his stomach.
For tremor is calmed with olive oil cautery, and recovery from cold illness is hastened.
On the method of cautery for Albathir.
Chapter LVII.
Sometimes in the body, Albathir causes ugly eruptions, that is, pustules which are caused by corrupted thick materials.
Therefore, when they first appear, they should be cauterized on the entire head of the pustule with a fine cautery using myrtle wood, the end of which is ignited with fire. Or with the root of long Aristolochia. Or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the ademenul is cauterized at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner: and they do not increase: and the excess causing them is dispersed, and they are healed from them.
However, it should be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the method of cauterizing in the flow of blood from an artery in a wound.
Often it happens that blood flows from an artery which is cut at a wound, whether occurring externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cauterization of a limb, and similar cases; and it becomes difficult to stop it.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then quickly with your hand go to the opening of the artery, and place your index finger on it: and press it tightly until the blood is blocked under your finger, and nothing can escape from it.
Then place small olive cauteries and a larger number of them on the fire, and blow on them until they are thoroughly ignited.
Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the wound and the place where the artery is ruptured, and place the cautery on the vein after you quickly remove your finger: and hold the cautery until the blood is stopped.
If the blood flows out when you lift your finger from the opening of the artery and extinguish the cautery, then quickly take another cautery from those that are prepared in the fire.
Therefore, do not stop doing this with one after another until the blood is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is there, and do not cause another harm to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop it, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is drawn out, its ends contract, and the blood is severed. Or it should be tied with a strong thread. Or let medicines with the property of severing the blood be applied to it, and constrict it with a suitable pressure bandage.
He who administers its severance with a ligature, and constriction with cloth, or application of burning substances, and similar methods, does not fully heal it, except rarely.
If it happens to someone and there is no physician present, nor medicine: then begin by placing the index finger on the orifice of the vein itself, as we have mentioned, and constricting it very tightly, until the blood is blocked from the upper part of the wound, and over the artery. And the finger should not be removed, always cooling it with very cold water, until the blood freezes, thickens, and is severed.
And during this time, one should consider what it needs from a cautery or medicine.
 On Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in Wounds, and Similar Cases.
We have already spoken in the first chapter about every ailment in which it is appropriate to use fire for cauterization and burning medicines, its occasions, its causes, and its instruments, and the forms of cauters.
And I have placed there chapters from the top of the head down to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner: to alleviate and provide the sought-after for the seeker.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you to learn, O sons, what is in this chapter concerning the fear that is mentioned in the first chapter about cauterization.
And because of that, it is necessary to have a more severe caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, evacuation with blood often occurs, through which life depends on the opening of a vein, or incision over an abscess, or the opening of an ulcer, or the treatment of a wound, or the extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and things similar to these: from all of which trembling and fear are associated, and in most of them death occurs.
And I warn you not to let hesitation overcome you, for sometimes methods of people with methods of illnesses fall upon you in this art. For there are those among them who become angry with their sickness, and death is And when the illness is from fear which signifies death.
And among them is he who gives his music, and enriches you with it, hoping for health, and his illness is deadly.
Therefore, you should not agree with him who comes to you from them, whose manner is such. And let your caution be stronger than your desire and your greed. And do not presume anything from it unless after certain knowledge, which verifies for you that to which a praiseworthy succession leads.
And use it in the treatment of all your ailments, by prognosis and indication of that to which health appropriately leads.
For in that is your assistance for gaining fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you with His understanding, O children, and not deprive you of guidance and inspiration: for that is in His hand.
And I have indeed arranged this Chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what preceded in the chapter of Cauterization, from the neck down to the feet: so that your search for what you want from it and what you need may be alleviated.
Regarding the treatment of water that accumulates in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
Know that this illness often occurs in children at birth: or when the midwife grasps the child's head without gentleness.
And it also happens at times for a hidden cause which is not known.
And indeed I have not seen this disease in anyone other than children: and death hastened to all of them that I saw: therefore it seemed to me to abandon the treatment of it.
And indeed I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head swelled every day until he could not sit up straight because of the size of his head, and the swelling increased until he died.
And this moisture indeed gathers either between the skin and the bone, or gathers beneath the bone on the surface.
And the operation for that, if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you must make one slit in the middle of the head in width: and let the length of the slit be almost two finger breadths, until the moisture flows out.
And this is the form of the spatula.
If the moisture has increased more and the abscess is larger, then make two slits according to this form.
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open on all sides: and the water is depressed when you press it with your hand towards the interior, and this is not hidden from you: then you must make three slits in the middle of the head according to this manner.
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. Then bind the wounds with cloths and poultices. Then fumigate it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the bandage, and treat the wound with tents, and ointments.
And do not allow binding the head equally. And feed the patient with all dry food of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to observe where the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of fluid appear.
For sometimes it is more on the occiput, or on the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore, make the incision where the abscess and the accumulation of fluid appear to you: and cut it open as much as you can.
And observe, lest you cut an artery, and a flow of blood occurs, and the patient dies from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
Regarding the incision of the arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When catarrhs occur to the eyes or to the chest of someone, and it becomes chronic, and the treatment with medicines does not help: then the final treatment for that is the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you wish to incise them, the patient should shave his head. Then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries appear. Then the patient should compress his neck with any cloth. Then observe where the vein pulses. And the locations of both are the depressed areas behind the ears: and it is rarely hidden, except in some individuals.
Then mark with encaustic on both: and cut each with a scalpel on both sides sharply, the incision reaching the bone: and let it be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel under the artery, and cut it upwards with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be about two joined fingers.
For when the vein is cut, blood exits with a pulsating flow, which leaps into the interior frequently.
If however the artery does not appear to the sense, then it is necessary to measure from the ear a length of three fingers. Then mark with encaustic, and cut until you reach the bone.
And what is necessary to release from the blood is six ounces, and you may release more or less from it. All of this according to the amount that appears to you from the strength of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
Then attend to the wound. Then if anything remains at the bone from the cut, then cut it off, so that a warm abscess does not occur: then bind the wound with bandages of linen cloth.
Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
On the removal of arteries that are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When an old hemicrania or acute catarrhs occur in a person due to sharp humidities and heat in the temporal arteries, or severe and similar old sodas: and it is treated with methods of medical cure, but does not improve: then we have found in these illnesses the extraction of arteries from the temples or their cauterization, as we have narrated.
And the method of the operation in their extraction is that the patient should shave the hairs that are in the temples and focus on the visible artery in the temple. For it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is rarely hidden except in a few people or due to extreme cold.
If it is hidden from you, then let the patient bind his head with any of his cloths; then rub the area with a coarse cloth. Or steam the area with hot water until it appears to you clearly. Then take the spatula that I shaped slightly before. Then scrape the skin with it easily until you reach the artery. Then throw the hook into it, and pull it upwards until you extract it from the skin, and make it emerge from the tissues beneath it on all sides.
If however the artery is thin: then wrap it with the tip of the hook. Then cut from it the portion according to the amount by which its ends are lengthened, and drawn together, so that bleeding does not occur. For if it is not cut, and if it is not severed, the blood does not fully stop.
Then evacuate six ounces of blood, down to three.
If the artery is large: then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a double, strong thread, of silk; or from the gut of a hare, so that rot does not set in too quickly before the wound heals, and bleeding occurs.
Then cut the excess that is between the two ligaments. Do this at that hour, or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a knife cautery up to the mouth: until its ends are cut, and it will remain in place for the same procedure.
And it is better to do this, unless the patient has a fever, or is of a heated temperament. For cautery is one of those things that helps to stop moist discharges. Therefore, it is better treatment.
And after the extraction of the arteries, the place should be filled with old lint: and properly made poultices should be placed on top.
And after the dissolution, it should be treated with drying medicines that promote flesh growth, and with lint, until it heals.
If during the operation a flow of blood occurs from an artery, then quickly proceed to sever it with a cautery, or fill the place with zegi: and hold your hand until the blood is severed. If none of those are available to you, then place your finger on the place until the blood"congeletur sanguis"the blood freezesthe blood clots And embrocate the place with water of intense coldness until the sharpness subsides and is constricted as appropriate.
And because it is lighter and easier to extract the artery, you should cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives: let the sharpness of the two knives be similar to almadgem. However, they are much less sharp than the two knives. For if they are sharp like the two knives, cold quickly sets in for both: and they do not cut the flesh with speed. Therefore, because there is a little thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut quickly: with this method, the work is better, lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And let the space between the two knives be the thickness of a finger, after you mark two places with cauterization: and place both very hot until they reach the mouth, and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between its ends may be lengthened. For they do not consolidate completely with this cautery.
Chapter IV.
On the treatment of acute and persistent tearing from the eyes.
When the tears are constant and their flow comes from the veins that are above the skull externally: and no remedy is effective with medicines for this condition, and you see the face of the patient already reddened, and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead, like the crawling of ants: and their eyes are weakened, moist, so that their eyelashes are already corroded by corrosion: and their eyelids are heated by the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients required this procedure for their treatment, and named it cure with a Sword.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead. Then make three equidistant cuts on the forehead along its length: and let the length of each cut be about two fingers, with one cut equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second along the length slightly from the movement of the eyebrows, and the third from the other side: and beware of cutting the arteries that are on both sides: and keep your hand away from the junction of the two jaws, and let the total space of each incision be the width of three joined fingers: and have a piece of prepared sponge or many pieces of dried cloth with which to dry the blood.
Then introduce a spatula with two sharp ends, whose following form is this. From the incision which is on the temple side, to the second incision: and with it remove all the skin which is between the two incisions, with a scalpel, which is over the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision to the second incision. Then remove this spatula, and insert into the first incision again another instrument which is called a sharp little knife, blunt on one side, not sharp on the other side. And this is its form.
And place its sharp side towards the flesh attached with skin, and its blunt side towards the bone: and push it until it reaches the middle fissure: and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision continues until it appears through the skin.
Then do this in the middle fissure until the other fissure.
And after a quantity of blood equal to that has flowed out, press the areas from the clots of coagulated blood.
Then place in every fissure lint from old cloth, and put on them small pieces soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And take care that a warm abscess does not occur.
And on the third day, remove the bandage, and administer a large infusion with warm water. Then treat it with basilicon ointment, and other things with which wounds are treated: until it is healed.
Chapter Five.
On the treatment of sharp tears and catarrhs to the eyes from the inner parts of the head.
When sharp, pungent, persistent catarrhs occur in someone: and you see his eyes weakened, small, and their sight already impaired: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out of them, and there is a sharp, piercing pain deep in the head, followed by sneezing: then take note of these occurrences, that such conditions and catarrhs do not come except from many veins.
And the better treatment for these is this. And it is that you instruct the patient to rub his forehead. Then make one incision in the middle of the forehead, or another shortly across its width, and begin with an incision from the left temple to the right temple: and let the incision go all the way to the bone: and keep your hand away from the jaw muscles, which move during chewing: until when the bone is exposed: and you will dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with an old spatula, or with threads from linen. Then bind it above with bandages: and soak the bandages with wine and oil, so that a warm abscess does not occur.
And when you loosen it and see that the warm abscess is already decreasing: then you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes flesh growth: such as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony: and prepare an ointment from them, and administer it for the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter Six.
On the treatment of what falls into the ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is of one of four types: either a mineral stone, or similar to a stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is a fluid substance, such as water, vinegar, and similar substances; or it is some animal.
When a stone or stone-like substance that does not add to or grow in the ear falls into it, expose the ear to the sun: if you see the stone, then drip something from violet oil or sesamin into the ear. Then administer its extraction and make the person sneeze with condysi, and plug the nose upon the onset of sneezing, after which you place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and pull the ear upwards.
For it often exits with this treatment.
If it does not exit, then administer its extraction with gesti, that is, fine pizigarolis: whose form is this.
If it exits with the gesti, it is good.
And if not, then administer its extraction with a fine, slightly bent blind hook.
If therefore it does not exit through that, then make a tube from bronze, and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole very much, and pack what is around the tube with wax softened with oil, so that there is no way for air except through the tube: then extract with your breath strong suction.
For it often exits along with what we have mentioned. If it does not exit this way, then take a small amount of helkalimbat or visko, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are captured, and place it on the end of the probe after you wrap a properly positioned cloth around it; then insert it into the ear hole easily after you dry the ear from moisture.
If therefore it does not exit with all that we have mentioned, then hurry to incise before a warm abscess or spasms occur.
And the method of the incision is to let blood from the patient first in the cephalic vein: and draw out blood according to the measure of his strength. Then make the patient sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and find a small incision at the root of the ear near its fat in a depressed area: and let the incision be of a crescent shape until you reach the stone; then remove it with whatever is possible for you from the instruments.
Then clean the incision quickly with your own speed, and care for it until it heals.
If the thing falling into the ear is one of the grains that grow and swell, then administer its removal.
And if it does not obey you to come out, then take a thin, fine spatula according to this shape.
And administer with it the cutting of that kind from the grains which fall into the ear, and do not do this when you think that grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you place it in many pieces: then remove them with hooks, or with a fine thread, or with suction, as we have said, for its extraction is alleviated.
In the water that enters the ear, the patient must use sneezing with condysium at first: and he has already filled his ear with some old cooked substance: and he is lying on that ear in which there is water. If it exits through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, thin, soft, and heat them with fire for a moment, and let the patient insert one of them into the opening of his ear: and hop on his foot from that side, and strike with another stone on the stone which is in the ear. Therefore, he should not stop doing this with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out in such a way that you take one from a parpyro, or from a reed, and insert one end of it into the ear: and light the other end with fire until most of it is burned. Then use another reed, and do this multiple times until all the water comes out: and extract it with a tube as described earlier with the stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering into it, if it is of a small body, like a flea, and similar to it, treat it as I said in the division.
But if it is of a large body, which appears to the sense: then administer its extraction with hooks and forceps: and its matter is easier than all those held in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division, and in the treatment of distillations, and your cure does not succeed: then you must look into the ear in the sun. If therefore something of the worms appears there, then extract it with hooks or with subtle forceps.
If however nothing appears there, then take a cannula, which has this form, narrow below, wide above: and insert the slender end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate it: then suck with a strong suction. Do this many times until all the worms come out.
If however they do not obey you to come out, then coat the tip of the cannula with wax, as I said with the stone.
If they do not come out with what we have said, then administer the distillations which the ancients have already used to kill worms: and you will find this in the treatment of distillations.
And let your pouring of oil and medicines into the ear be with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it from silver or bronze, narrower below, with a small hole, wider above.
Let it be that the piston which is in the concavity of the tube is properly made of bronze. And if you wish, take a rod and wrap cotton at its end with a proper wrapping; then pour oil, or juice, or whatever medicine you choose into the tube: and place it in the ear; then insert the rod with the cotton above, and press it with your hand with moderate compression until the oil is pushed into the auditory concavity, and the patient feels it internally; and what is infused into the ear should already be warmed slightly by fire: and beware that what is distilled into it is not very cold; for the medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter Seven.
Regarding the care of auricular ailments caused by foreign objects.
Sometimes some infants come out of their mothers' wombs not perforated.
And it has also happened to some people that blockage in the ear canal occurred due to a wound or flesh grown in it.
And this blockage sometimes occurs in the deep part of the ear canal, which is not visible: and it sometimes happens near the outer part of the canal, which is visible.
Therefore, that which occurs in the deep part of the ear and is not visible, is in many cases difficult to treat.
And in that which is visible, you should place the patient's ear in the light and look into it: then if you see a visible blockage, open it with a delicate spatula, whose form is as follows, let its end have some small width, part of which is sharp: and the rest of the spatula be of two smooth sides: so that it does not injure the ear.
If therefore the growth is from flesh born in the ear canal: then hold it with a fine hook, and cut it with intense ease, until all the flesh is removed.
If the growth is in the depths of the ear: then take a fine, gentle probe, and heat it slightly with fire: then insert it into the ear canal.
If therefore you feel the growth with that which the patient experiences with heaviness of hearing, attempt to open it with ease: and beware lest you wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place in the ear lint according to the size of the opening which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment: do this for several days until you are sure of the wound's healing.
Or take lint, and soak it in rose water, and sprinkle ground zedoary over it, and use it.
If you see the ear already forming an abscess: then it is necessary to remove the lint, and allow it with another piece of lint that you wrap in cerote made with rose oil, until the warm abscess settles: then care for it until it heals.
If however a flow of blood should occur: then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water, and place it on the affected ear: and use the remaining treatment which stops the flow of blood as described in the chapter on distillations.
Regarding the treatment of Altheli of the eyelids.
Chapter VIII.
The injuries that occur to the eyelids, sometimes they are moist, and they are dry.
Therefore, you must hold them with forceps: or with a hook, and cut them with a spatula from their roots. Then place ground zegi on the affected areas.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lens-shaped cautery.
And to cauterize them after the incision is better. For they often return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned, and they do not return.
Regarding the treatment of warts on the eyelids.
Chapter Nine.
Often something occurs on the eyelids that resembles warts in its strength and hardness, and because of this, it is called a granum: and it is an aggregation of coarse humidity in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid.
The operation on them is to examine whether there is a granum protruding from the eyelid, which can move in all directions, and its removal is easy.
Therefore, make an incision over it lengthwise. Then remove it from all sides with ease until it comes out. Then hang her with a hook, and cut her off.
If the excision is not prepared for you unless after you penetrate the eyelid with a slight incision, then it harms the patient to do this in some cases.
If the fissure is large, then join it with stitching and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. For the ointment restores it and causes it to flesh over.
And if the stone is inclined towards the inner part of the ear towards the inner surface, then invert the eyelid and hang the stone with a hook; besides which you may need an incision and press it from all sides.
If the eyelid is extended by an incision, it does not harm in any way.
Then wash the eye after the stone is cut out with salt water: and care for the area with what causes it to flesh over, until the patient heals.
Regarding the treatment of Axirnath of the eyelids.
Chapter Ten.
Axirnath is fat that forms in the layers of the upper eyelid: and it happens most frequently to children: and it burdens their eyes, causing them to have catarrhs in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun, because tears quickly come to them, and you see them always lying on their faces, and sleeping on them, and their eyelids under the eyebrows are wet, which are already covered by swelling: and the prominence of Axirnath is apparent to the eye, and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of performing it is for the patient to place his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth, and prepare ointment on it, and make a circle out of that ointment according to the amount that Axirnath contains on all sides. Then place him on it, and press with your fingers on all sides so that Axirnath gathers in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a scalpel penetrating cracks across the width, and let not the crack be deeper than that which is made in bloodletting.
Or it is necessary to cut through the entire skin until you reach Axirnath, for in many conditions Axirnath proceeds from a crack in the shape of a fragment of white fatty tissue.
Therefore, remove it with the cloth that you have inserted between your fingers to the outside: and you turn your hand to the right and left until it disperses: and beware, lest you add to the crack, so that you do not reach the eye with the scalpel and injure it.
If Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the crack, you should extend the crack slightly with ease until Axirnath proceeds. Then remove it as we have said.
Then soak the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the area, and bind it with bandages.
And there are people who rub salt and place it in the concavity of the crack, so that what remains of that moisture may liquefy.
Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, a warm aposteme occurs in the place, then treat it with soothing plasters until it heals.
Regarding the methods for ataxmir of the eye, that is, when the eyelid softens, causing it to droop more than it should.
Chapter XI.
When additional hairs grow on the eyelids beyond the natural course and become aged: then they harm the eye and cause various illnesses to occur, such as continuous tears, softening of the eyelids, and opacities, until it becomes a cause for the destruction of the eye.
And ataxmir of the eye is treated in four ways. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization. Or ataxmir is treated by incision and suturing. Or by canes, as I will describe.
It is necessary to place the head of the patient in your lap. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it turns, that is good. And if not: insert a needle into it, at the part where there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread from above, and place it near the hairs themselves, that is, near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with a probe.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs with the spatula applied from the larger lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal.
Then extract the thread, and place a small piece of felt or cloth under the eyelid; then mark above the eyelid with wax, which should be like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it should be done according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: for it already varies among people.
For there are those who need a large quantity to be cut from the eyelid, according to the amount that is softened from the eyelid.
Then with the spatula find between the two lines you marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal, and let the cut be near the natural hairs, as thick as a rod.
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape the entire area. Then sew together the two lips with a needle and fine wool thread: and clean the blood, and make adhere what remains of the threads over the two eyebrows, with some adhesive substances, if you wish to do so: and if not, do not bother.
Then leave the suture and threads for three days, or four: afterward care for it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without suture, and care for it with something that dries and constricts. For the eyelid is raised at the sealing of the wound and its gathering together: but it will be better.
The ancients taught this method of treatment.
However, there is careful attention to the patient, and it is from good practice, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is in Ataxmir as well: and it is to mark on the eyelid a figure that resembles the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have mentioned.
Then raise the eyelid with three separate or connected hooks, according to this following shape, then cut away the excess with small scissors, according to this shape, with equal incisions.
If it is not possible for you to hold the hook and it does not align: then take a needle with thread, and insert it in the middle of the figure: and insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and a second thread near the smaller tear duct: and gather the threads between your fingers equally.
Then raise your hand with equal elevation: and raise the skin on which the comma is marked, as we have mentioned.
Then bring together the two edges of the wound with suture: and care for it until it heals.
If an abscess occurs at your incision or tear: treat the abscess with cerote, and similar substances, from soothing ointments.
And it sometimes happens to the eyelid that its hairs turn inward.
Therefore, you should use what we have said about incision in it; but On the treatment of Ataxmir with reeds.
And there is a case where you turn the eyelid and split the fissure which is inside, according to what I have narrated. Then skillfully make two reeds or two fine sticks: whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width should be less than the width of a spatula: and you now incise at the ends of each on both sides where you hold the threads.
Then carefully place each one over the excess of the eye's eyelid, and tighten two reeds on both sides with a strong binding, and leave it for several days. For skin that is tightly bound will die, and turn black, and rot, until it falls off by itself.
If it is delayed, then cut it with scissors. Then care for it until it heals.
When it therefore consolidates, the eyelid is raised: and the hairs do not pierce.
And this is the form of the two reeds that you will make according to this figure, and the size in length and width.
Chapter XII.
On the removal of piercing hairs in the eye with a needle.
The operation is to take a fine needle and insert into it a thread made of fine, soft silk. Then join the ends of it, and tie each end with a very fine knot; and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then arrange another fine thread under it briefly, and knot the ends of it if you wish.
Then let the patient put his head in your lap, and be near the sun so that the operation is clear; for it is a subtle or minute operation.
Then insert the needle with the thread into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you draw it out above the natural hair.
Then pull the hair up over the thread: and insert into the thread that hair: whether it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the thread from the eyelid with the natural hair.
If the thread is pulled and the hair does not come out with it: pull the thread downward with the thread you arranged in it until the thread comes out from the upper opening, and see it with your eyes: then pull the thread and the hair: extract both, and close the eye: leave it closed for two days or three until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then either attach to it a longer hair from the natural hairs and lift with it: or leave it until it grows longer over time, and then lift it.
Chapter XIII.
When this Alxatrati happens to the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Alxatrati is either natural or accidental.
Accidental therefore occurs from the healing of a wound, or a cut, or a cautery, and similar things.
And the method of the operation in this is to cut open that healing, and to separate its edges, and place a strip of linen between them, and bind it until it heals.
And it is not appropriate to use in its treatment things that dry and constrict: for if you do that, the Alxatrati returns worse than it was: rather use in it things that soften, such as Greek hay: and foment with water, in which marshmallow and flax seed have been cooked: and an unguent of dyaquilon, which has been melted with some oil: and wrap with it a strip of linen, and treat with it.
And the treasure of your treatment is to strive with all ingenuity that it does not heal in the same form as it was at first.
And this operation which we have described is only a correction of the Alxatrati, so that the form of the place does not return entirely as it was.
The treatment of the Alxatrati which occurs in the lower eyelid, and it is a wrinkling or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This Alxatrati which occurs below is what is truly called Alxatrati. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental one occurs from a wound, or a cut, or a cautery, and by things similar to these.
And the way of the operation in it is to take a needle, on which there is double thread, and dip it into the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upwards with the needle, and cut it with a broad spatula. If the figure of the eyelid returns as it should, it is good.
And if not, take the awl, and place it in the cut, and turn the eyelid with it: and make two cuts on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two cuts be from the two angles of the incision, until they converge and form an angle: until when they come together they form this shape, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh by the amount that its sharp side is below, from what follows the eyelid. Then join the separated parts: sew it with wool thread.
Then care for them with what we have said about soothing medicines and plasters until they heal.
And if an Alxatrati occurs from a cut, and suture, or cautery: then it is necessary to make a flat incision under the eyelash hairs, also according to what preceded. Then separate between the two lips with an ointment, as we have said.
And the sum of the discourse on the treatment of Alxatrati, whether it is above or below, is that the operation should proceed accordingly, as it is prepared according to the form of Alxatrati.
For it is indeed of many diversities in form: and the prudent craftsman prepares his method with whatever way is possible for him, until he restores the figure to its natural form, or near it, and the patient himself, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in most dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Regarding the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid becomes consolidated with the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, you must introduce the end of a probe under the eyelid and lift it up; or extend it with a hook; then cut the adherence with a blunt spatula that is not sharp like a regular spatula, but slightly dull: so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatula does not injure the eye with its sharpness: and let your incision be such that you pare away that adherence easily, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the entire adherence is healed.
Then pour salty water into the eye, wash it with water: or drip onto it from a sieve made from dissolved zinc and water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with flax oil: and place wool soaked in egg white over the eye: and after the third day use a sieve, and with plasters, until it heals.
Regarding the incision of the claw and the prominence of the flesh of the tears.
Chapter XVI.
Know that the claw is according to two methods. Or it is nervous: and it is similar to a hard, thin sieve. Or it is not nervous, similar to frozen white moisture: which when touched by hot iron, or when you try to take it with a hook, breaks apart, and the hook does not hold onto it.
And both kinds do not begin unless from the larger tear duct, extending gradually until it covers the sight and prevents light and eye movement.
And the method of operating on its incision is: that the patient places their head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and lift the eyelid with your hand. Then gather the claw with a hook of few turns, and extend it upward. Then take a needle, and insert into it a hair from horsehair, or oxhair, or cowhair: and let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle temporarily, and fix it in the middle of the claw: and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the claw with the thread, and extend it upward: and scrape with the hair the side of the claw that follows the pupil, as if you were sewing it with the hair to its end.
Then cut the remainder in the root of the lacrimal with a fine spatula, or with small scissors: and leave the natural lacrimal flesh, so that its habitual course of tears is not impeded.
And sometimes the claw is extended with a hook alone: or with a thread, as we have said. Then it should be scraped with a gentle spatula, whose form is this.
And beware that the spatula does not touch the horny membrane, and that no rupture occurs in it, and the pupil is perforated.
Then after the incision, put some ground salt into the eye, or something made from ziniar, and leave it until the next day. Then care for it with what is necessary until it heals.
If the claw is not nervous, and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor can a hook be fixed in it, then this kind of claw is often cured with medicines, and is healed as I have described in the division.
If you wish to cut it, then open the patient's eye, and take a fine, gentle spatula of weak sharpness according to this form. And scrape the claw gently from above with finesse. If you see that it becomes sparse and breaks, and the scraper impresses on it, then drip into the eye from your hour something made from ziniar, or red powder, or ground salt: and cover the eye until the next day.
Then repeat the procedure on the same operation until all of it is removed. Unless there is a warm apostema contrary to your eye: then let it be, and treat the apostema until it heals.
Then repeat the operation on it reasonably until it heals.
If the prominence of the lacrimal flesh harms the eye greatly, it should be suspended with a hook, and part of it should be cut off: and do not make the incision too deep, so as not to affect the course of the tears.
Then apply a red stillicide to the lacrimal, or one made from zinnia, until it heals.
Regarding the incision of Alguardenic, and flesh grown in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
Sometimes in the eyes of some people, red flesh is formed or positioned over them until it covers the pupil, or approaches it, or presses on the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward: and it resembles a pomegranate flower.
And the procedure for it is that the patient should place their head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and gather all that flesh with suitable hooks: and hold it with one forceps or tweezers.
Then cut the flesh initially with a scalpel until the entire thing is finished. And be careful of the eye so as not to harm it during the operation: and let your cut, whether you make it with a spatula, which we mentioned in the hoof incision, or with small scissors, with which asbel is gathered, according to how its form will come after this chapter.
When therefore your incision is complete, and all the almond is removed, then fill the eye with ground salt: or sprinkle on it red powder, and similar things from corrosive medicines: and place over the eye outward linen with egg white: so that it is secured from a warm abscess.
If any of the almond remains, and hot blood dominates you, and you fear a warm abscess: then leave the eye alone, and treat it with that which soothes the abscess.
Then repeat the procedure on it until it is healed.
And similarly treat the added flesh that occurs in the eye of this kind.
However, it is necessary to keep the treatment of any weak eye away from the natural course or the accidental course by operating with iron: and do not involve your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can tolerate that operation.
Regarding the removal of snow from the eye.
Chapter Eighteen.
Snow are the red veins that form over the eye and prevent it from functioning properly: and they weaken the eye over time.
Therefore, you must first consider whether the eye in which there is snow is strong and has no other illness besides the snow: then remove the snow from it.
And you should instruct the patient to place their head in your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one hook, or two according to your judgment: and let the hook be subtle of doubling, according to this form, or let there be two hooks set step by step in one body, according to this form.
Then gather with fine scissors those veins with subtlety, and cleanse the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins removed from the eye, and they dissolve: and beware lest you injure the eye with the ends of the spatula.
And let your operation be at noon facing the sun, and be firm in your operation very much: so that you cut only those veins.
And when you have completed, then distill into the eye sieg green or red: so that with its sharpness it corrodes what remains of sebel.
If however it is not possible for you to gather it all in that hour, then plaster the eye with something that relieves the pain of the eye: and leave it for several days, until its pain is relieved: and secure it from a warm abscess: then again proceed upon it according to the same method, until it is healed.
And this is the form of the scissors.
Regarding the reduction of Arissati to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
Physicians name Arissati as a fistula, which you treat with a cautery or with a sharp burning medicine, according to what the preceding account has stated.
And if it is not healed, then there is no efficacy in it: unless you incise above the abscess at its origin, and extract all the moisture and pus within it until the opening is exposed.
When therefore the tooth is uncovered, and you see in it corruption or blackening, then scrape it with an instrument whose form is this.
And it is called Head of Asper.
Let it be made of Indian iron, and let its head be round like an awl, which should be pointed with the sharpening of a file, or with the subtle pointing of an aliskilfer: and place it on the corrupted part of the bone.
Then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand for a moment until you know that the corruption has been scraped away: and do this several times.
Then restore the area with drying and astringent medicines.
If therefore the area is stabilized, and flesh grows there, and the course of pus is stopped: and it remains for forty days, and does not recur, and does not form an abscess, and no accident occurs in it: then you know that it is now healed.
And if not, then there is no ingenuity unless to redirect the fistula to the nasal opening, according to this form.
And it is such that you uncover the second bone with iron or with a sharp medicine: and when the bone is uncovered, then take a drill according to this form, let the iron end be triangular: and its wood should be a tapered pyramid down to the end, as you see.
Then place it on the bone itself: and let it be near the tear duct: and move your hand slightly away from the eye. Then rotate your hand with the awl until it penetrates the bone, and let the patient feel it; by this he finds air escaping from it when he holds his hand over his nose.
Then restore the area with styptic and drying medicines, as I have taught you.
When the flesh is formed and the area hardens, then the material which was flowing outward returns to the nose; therefore, this is a milder condition for the patient.
Regarding the reduction of a protrusion of the eye.
Chapter Twenty.
When the eye protrudes entirely and no harm or reduction occurs in vision: then you must loosen the patient; thereafter, bleed him; afterwards, apply cupping to the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then apply to the eye an unguent made from acacia, aloe, frankincense, and sarcocolla. Then bind the eye over the plaster with many bandages.
And the method of the bandages is as follows: take soft cloths, many of them, and fold each cloth over four times; make many of these; then place them one upon another according to the amount needed for the eye; then bind them with a strong tie using a hard cloth.
And repeat cupping with suction without scarification.
Then remove the cupping and leave the eye tightly bound day and night.
If however the ligature softens again, then it must be tightened greatly; then remove the ligature after a day and night, as we said.
If therefore you see the eye has returned to the grape skin, it is good: and if not, then apply the plaster, and the powders, and the compression, and the suction cups, until it heals.
Regarding the incision of the grape skin.
Chapter Twenty-One.
When a disruption occurs in the grape skin layer, then it protrudes and extends beyond the eyelids like a grain of a grape, and the appearance of the person is marred because of it, and you wish to cut it: then the procedure for it is as I narrate: and it is to insert a needle at the root of the grape-like protrusion from the lower to the upper part.
Then insert another needle with double thread from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate: and leave the first needle in its place.
Then cut the double thread, and tie it around the grape-like part with the needle: and tighten it greatly.
Then remove the needle, and place wool soaked in egg white on the eye: and leave it until the thread falls off with the grape-like part.
Then care for the eye with what strengthens it until the wound heals.
And sometimes the grape-like protrusion is tightened on all sides with a circle made of cloth until the eye develops a large prominence.
Then it should be pierced with a fine spatula that reaches the depth of the eye, and let the white moisture run, and the eye descend, and immediately proceed: then bind it until it heals.
On the treatment of Alcomnati.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
This ailment which is called Alcomnati is not anything but a pus that gathers in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not itself.
And the method of operating on it is to make the patient sit on a prepared seat or stand straight.
Then take his head in your hands from two sides and move it until you see the pus come to the lower parts of your eyes. Then it should be fixed, and not allowed to descend, and the light should be completed: and the patient should see things as he saw before: and if it does not descend further, you know that it is water.
If the pus does not prepare to descend with what we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a fine spatula and use it to find the area above the corneal membrane near the junction of the conjunctiva with the corneal layer in the crown, until the pus comes out.
When it comes out, then drip warm water into the eye in which you have mixed honey: or water in which you have already boiled Greek hay and honey: then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
On the treatment of water descending into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
We have already spoken about the types of water in the division, and what is suitable for piercing, declaring and explaining it, then receive the same according to health.
Then therefore you must have the patient sit between your hands, facing the light, near the sun: and bind his healthy eye tightly, and hold it very tight: then with your right hand if the eye with water is the left eye, or with your left hand if the eye is the right, hold his eyelid.
Then take with your right hand the needle if the eye is left: or with your left hand if the eye is right.
Then place the tip of the needle near the cornea at the thickness of the radius where the white of the eye is clearly visible next to the smaller lacrimal: then push the needle with force: and you turn your hand with it until it penetrates into the sclera of the eye: and you will feel that the needle has reached the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the needle's journey to the depth be the distance from the pupil to the end of the black part: and this is the cornea of the eye. For you will see it in the pupil of the eye itself, due to the clarity of the corneal membrane.
Then place the needle until it reaches the location where the water is. Then press it below with one hand after another.
If water descends immediately, then the patient sees it above where he opens his vision immediately, and the pupil in his eye.
Then rest for a little while. If water descends, then place it second, except where the pupil emerges.
When it is fixed, and does not rise: then extract the pupil with ease: and you turn your hand gradually.
Then dissolve something from clear gem salt in water: and wash the eye inside with it. Then place the entire cotton or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white outside the eye: and bandage the healthy eye with it.
We, and those of our time, put ground cumin mixed with egg white on it.
If the pupil does not obey you for entering into the eye because of its hardness, since it is from a person whose eye is very hard: then you must take a spatula, which is called Alberid, whose form is this.
Therefore, insert it only into the joint with it, and do not push your hand into the hole: and you do this only to make a path to the delicate place of the pupil.
Then insert the pupil as we have said.
And at the completion of your work, a properly made bedroom should be prepared for the patient, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark room: and he should be prohibited from all movements, and from coughing: and give him food that soothes his nature: and he should not move his head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandage be according to its arrangement up to the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark house, and test its vision: and make it see things. Then reduce the bandage up to the seventh day.
And it should not be done at the time of treatment, or immediately after the incision: rather, it should be delayed, because water rises quickly through a vehement sight.
If a hot abscess occurs, then it is necessary to treat the eye before the seventh day: and regulate it with what calms the abscess until it is calmed: then restore its sight, and place over its face a cover to regulate its sight under it for several days, while being in that dark house.
Then let him gradually go out of the house and move about in his own rooms.
And know that in zaltea the disciple is not exempt from seeing several times: then he may dare to perform the operation.
And indeed it has come to our notice from some who are from Alayrach, who said that in Alayrach a perforated vessel was made through which water is drawn.
Therefore, I have not seen anyone in your land who has done this: nor have I read it in any of the books of the ancients: and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of figures from the vessel, so that one who is ignorant may stand over them.
They shall be made of proper metal: and their ends shall be shaped with the same fineness into triangles, and the end sharp.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of flesh born in the nose.
Sometimes diverse kinds of flesh grow in the nose, among which there is something that resembles a many-footed scorpion: and from it is a cancerous, stony, brownish colored flesh: and there is also one which is soft flesh, not brownish in color.
In those among these kinds of flesh that are soft, not deceitful, nor cancerous, you must have the patient sit between your hands facing away from the sun, and open his nostrils, and throw a hook into those flesh growths: then pull them outwards, and cut with a sharp fine spatula from one side what you have grasped of them until you know that all the flesh is now removed.
If any part remains that cannot be cut off: then scrape it with one of the fine instruments easily, until nothing of it remains. If blood dominates you, or a warm abscess occurs: then oppose it with what is appropriate; or if it is one of the malignant abscesses, then quickly cauterize it until the blood is severed and all the flesh is removed.
Then after the incision, vinegar, and water, or wine should be thrown into the nose. If the nose is opened and moisture proceeds from it to the palate, then you know that he is now healthy.
If moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that flesh has grown within the upper nasal bones to which the instrument does not reach with the incision.
Then it is necessary to introduce a linen thread which has some thickness, and many knots on it: place the length of a finger, or less, between each knot: the patient should be instructed to insert one end of the thread into his nose with a probe, or whatever is possible for him after he makes it similar to azer: and he should pull it, drawing its smell until it reaches the throat and comes out above his throat.
And indeed, boys in schools often do something similar to this: and it is easy for one who wants to.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one end which comes out over the nose, and the other which remains in the nose. Then with the knots on the thread, carefully cut the flesh. Do this until you know that the flesh is now with the knots of the thread.
Then withdraw the thread: and place in the nose after wiping the blood a lint that you have soaked in Egyptian ointment: do this for three days, or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
Then place a lead tube at the end of the nose for several days until it heals.
If however it needs a treatment which dries, use that one.
For making a head purgation device, through which oils and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it of silver or bronze: let it be like a small lamp, open like a shell: and its spout similarly.
And if you want to make a closed tube, like a cane.
And the shell of the instrument for making head purgation should be full, open: to which there is a handle at the end of it, with which you hold it when you heat oil or any juice and liquid substances in it.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
Often a polyp grows at the end of the nose, and it enlarges and increases with days until its appearance becomes ugly.
And because of this, it is necessary to cut it down at the beginning of its appearance and root out all of it. Then place on the area either a cautery or a burning medicine that serves in its place.
If the cutting is delayed until it enlarges, then consider if it is stony, hard, of a dark color, and has little sensation: then do not touch it with iron, for it is a cancerous abscess.
For I have often seen that cutting into such an abscess caused great harm to the person who had it.
And if the aposteme is of mild touch, not of dark color, and you see that a cut is possible in its entirety, then evacuate the diseased area, and cut it without fear, without dread: and treat the place with that which dries and binds until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
On sewing the nose, lip, and ear.
Know that when there is a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilages, the operation is of little benefit, unless in certain individuals.
Therefore, when something like that happens to someone, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood: then bring together the edges of the wound with stitching: then treat it until it heals.
And if the edges of the ruptured continuity are already separated and each part has become healed: then it is necessary to scrape off all the part from its visible skin until it bleeds. Then bring together the two edges with stitching and bind them tightly, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and crushed frankincense over it: then place a piece of diaphoretic plaster over the powders, and another consolidating plaster: and leave it bound for two or three days. Then loosen it, and change the medicine: and leave it until the threads fall off by themselves. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
The method of stitching is to bring together the rupture of continuity either with needles, as we have mentioned in sewing the abdomen: or bring together the rupture with thread, as I have made you know.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of lip knots.
Many men suffer from hard swellings similar to grains of a herb usually on the inner parts of their lips: and some of them are smaller, and others larger.
Therefore, you must turn the lip inside out, and cut above every knot, and suspend it with a hook, and cut it from all sides.
Then fill the place after the incision with ground zegi until the blood is stopped.
Then it should be treated with vinegar, and the area where there is astringency should be cured with it until the wounds heal.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the incision of the flesh growth above the gum.
Often flesh grows above the gum, which the ancients call abuluss.
Therefore, you must suspend it with a hook: or hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the pus flow, or the blood.
Then place ground zegi or other astringent, drying powders on the area.
If that flesh returns after the treatment, for it often returns, then cut it a second time and cauterize it: for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter XXIX.
On the filing of teeth with iron.
Sometimes on the surfaces of the teeth, both from the inner and outer part, and between the gums, rough, ugly crusts form, and they sometimes blacken and turn yellow and green until corruption from that reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul because of it.
Therefore, you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head in your lap, and scrape the mill tooth and the tooth where the crusts appear, until nothing of them remains, and similarly do for the blackness, greenness, and yellowness, and others until they are cleaned.
If therefore what is in them from the beginning of the scraping is removed, it is good: and if not, then repeat the scraping on them another day, a second, and a third, until ultimately your effort achieves what you wish.
And you should know that a tooth requires scrapers of various forms and many shapes: according to how they are prepared for your operation: therefore, the scraper with which the tooth is scraped from the lower part is different from the scraper with which it is scraped between the teeth, according to different forms.
And these forms of scrapers should be prepared and available to you, as you see.
Chapter XXX.
Chapter on the Extraction of Tooth Pain.
You must treat the tooth for its pain with all ingenuity and delay in its extraction. For there is nothing to replace it when it is extracted, since it is of a noble substance; until there is no excuse for its extraction, then you must extract it when the patient is compelled, so that the painful tooth may be secured and confirmed by you.
For often the pain deceives the sick person, and they think that it is in a sound tooth and extract it; then the pain does not abate until the diseased tooth is extracted.
For we have now seen that from the operation of the bloodletters.
When therefore it is confirmed with you that the painful tooth itself is the cause, then you must scarify around the tooth with a spatula, which has some efficacy, until the gum loosens from all sides; then move it with your fingers or with delicate forceps first gradually, until you shake it.
Then place large forceps firmly on it, and position the head of the patient between your knees; hold it well so that it does not move; then pull the tooth straight out so that you do not break it.
If therefore it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under it on all sides with ease, and attempt to move it as you did at first.
If however the tooth is perforated or corroded: then you must fill that hole with a cloth: and grasp it with the tip of a slender probe, so that it does not break when you constrict it with forceps.
And you must carefully perform the scarification around the gum on all sides extensively.
And guard your strength so that you do not break it, leaving a part behind, which may return to the patient with an even worse maliciousness than the original pain.
And beware, lest you do what ignorant bloodletters do in their haste and boldness in extracting it, besides administering what we have mentioned.
For many times they cause great illnesses to occur in people, whose roots are very difficult to break and remain all of them or some of them: or to extract it along with some bones of the jaw; as we have testified many times.
Then it should be treated after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If a flow of blood occurs from the places (for it often happens), then grind something from spigelia, and fill the area with it: and if not, cauterize it if spigelia is not available to you.
The forms of delicate forceps with which the tooth is moved should have long ends, a short handle, and be thick so that they do not double when pressed on the tooth: the handles should be thick as you see, so that when you grip with them, they do not bend or double: the ends should be short and made of Indian iron or properly made steel, with straight ends: and at their ends there should be teeth, some of which enter others and grip firmly with a proper constriction.
And sometimes the ends are made in the shape of the mouth of a bird called a stork, and they have a strong grip.
Chapter Thirty-One.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of broken jaw bones.
When something remains after the removal of a tooth that is broken, then it is necessary to place fat with butter on the area for one day or two days until the area softens: then insert algasti or forceps into it, whose ends resemble the mouth of a bird called a stork. This is the form of the forceps.
Let their ends be made like a file inside: or like an aliskilfegi.
If therefore it does not obey you to come out with these forceps, then you must make a cavity above the root, and expose all the flesh, and introduce an instrument which is called a small lever, whose form is this.
Let the end be short and somewhat thick: and let it not be brittle, so that it does not break.
If therefore the root comes out through that, it is good: and if not, assistance must be given with these other instruments whose forms are these.
The form of the first triangular end, in which there is some thickness.
The form of the delicate triangular end.
And with other instruments and tools which have been mentioned previously in the reasoning of teeth.
It is also assisted with this instrument which resembles a large hook, of this form, a twisted triangular end, in which there is some thickness, so that it does not break: and let it not be brittle.
And know that the instruments of teeth are many: and similarly other instruments are not counted, and a wise craftsman, subtle in his art, finds the instrument by himself according to what the operation and the diseases themselves signify.
For there are sharp instruments to which the ancients did not speak, due to the diversity of their kinds.
If the bone of the jaw is fractured or any other bones of the mouth are broken or become putrefied: then examine it in its place with what is suitable to it from the instruments and forceps which I mentioned for the extraction of roots, and assist with levers, whose form is this.
Let it have something thick gradually so that it may be grasped or held firmly with the bone, and does not slip away, until the bone comes out: and restore the place with medicines suitable for it.
If there is a small putrefaction in the bone, then scrape it from its putrefaction and care for it until it heals.
Chapter XXXII.
On filing teeth that protrude over others.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural course, the appearance is marred by this: and especially when it happens to women and girls, that is, those who are for sale.
Therefore, you must consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth and does not fit, or its filing or smoothing is not possible: then extract it. And if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose form is this.
It is similar to a small beak and is made of hardened iron with a very sharp end.
And let your incision be made over it for many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that another of the teeth is not moved.
If it is protruding and needs filing: then file it with an Indian file, whose shape is this.
Let the entire file be from India, and its handle of strong metal points, like the file with which needles are made: with which the tooth is gradually filed over many days with ease, so that the tooth is not moved and falls out: then smooth it, at the end scrape it with some razors.
If there is a tooth from which a part is broken and it hurts the tongue: then it must be filed until the roughness of that break is removed, and it is evened out: and flattened, so that it does not hurt the tongue or impair speech.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
About the rotation of teeth with gold wires.
When the front teeth are shaken or jarred by a blow or fall: and the patient cannot hold what he eats so that it does not fall out: and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but the treatment was ineffective: then the method is to bind them with gold wire: because silver turns green and rots after days: but gold never changes.
And let the wire be of medium thickness according to the size that fits between the teeth.
And the form of the rotation is to take the wire and insert its doubled end between two healthy teeth: then weave with the two ends of the wire between the loose teeth, whether one or more, until you reach with the thread all the way to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then again weave the thread up to the part from which you started: and hold your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it is not completely removed: and let your constriction as you pull the thread be at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not escape.
Then cut the excess ends of the thread with scissors: and bring together both, and turn them with a gesture: and hide them between the healthy tooth and the loose tooth, so that they do not hurt the tongue: then leave it tightened as such while remaining.
If it loosens or is cut, tie them with another thread, and it will remain stable in this way for the entire time.
And this is the form of the teeth, and the figure of binding two healthy teeth and two loose teeth, as you see.
And it sometimes happens that one or two teeth return to their places after falling out and are retained as we have described and remain: and only a wise and experienced craftsman can do this.
And sometimes a piece of cow's bone is adapted: and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in the position where the tooth is secured and tightened, as we have said: and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which a person is born, or accidental, from an injury that has already healed.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient on his head in your hand, and lift his tongue: then cut that nervous ligament across until the tongue is loosened from its restraint.
And if there is something hard and knotted, and it is from the healing of the wound: then apply a hook to it, and cut it across until you sever the ligament and loosen the knot.
And beware that the cut is not deep in the flesh, and do not cut the artery there, lest a flow of blood occur.
Then it should be treated at the site of the incision with rose water, or with vinegar, or cold water.
Then place under the tongue a strip of linen that the patient should hold throughout the night: so that it does not harden again.
If a flow of blood occurs, then apply ground zeggium to the area. If the blood overcomes you, then cauterize the area with a suitable cautery: then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter XXXV.
Sometimes an abscess forms under the tongue that resembles a small frog, preventing the tongue from its natural function: and it may grow so large as to fill the mouth.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient facing the sun: and examine the abscess.
If therefore you see it of dark color or black, hard, to which the sick person does not feel: then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it inclines to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then apply a hook to it, and cut it with a fine scalpel, and free it from all sides. If the blood overpowers you during your operation, then apply ground zeggium until the bleeding stops; then return to your operation until you remove it completely.
Then it should be treated with vinegar and salt: and care for it with the appropriate further treatment until it heals.
Regarding the treatment of abscesses of the two tonsils.
Chapter XXXVI.
Sometimes there occur between the throat glands, which resemble algodad occurring externally: and they are called the two tonsils: which when you treat with what we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then consider.
If therefore it is a hard abscess, of dark color, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color, and its root is thick: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing a flow of blood, but rather leave it until it ripens. And then either you will pierce it: or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of white color, round, and its root is thin: then it must be cut open.
And the operation on it is that you consider before his operation if the warm aposteme has fully subsided or decreased somewhat: then make the patient sit facing the sun, and let his head be in your lap: and open his mouth, and let the servant take between his hands, and press his tongue below with an instrument, which has this form.
Let it be made of silver or bronze, which is fine like a little knife.
When therefore you press his tongue with it and the aposteme is shown to you and your sight falls upon it: then take a hook, and fix it in the tonsil, and draw it outward as much as you can, besides which pull out some of the tissues with it.
Then cut it with an instrument, which has the following form. It resembles scissors: however, its ends are curved so that the opening of each is directly opposite the other'salfuledNote: There seems to be a translation error or anomaly towards the end of the sentence which mentions "sharp end" in Chinese, interrupting the flow of the English translation. Also, "indo" and "alfuled" are likely mistranslations or archaic terms not directly translatable.)
And if this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula, whose form is this. Let it be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you cut one tonsil, cut the other according to this same type of incision.
Then after the incision, the patient should gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If bleeding occurs, gargle with water in which pomegranate bark has been boiled: or myrtle leaves, and similar astringents, until the bleeding is stopped: then care for it until it heals.
And at times, other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two tonsils. Cut them accordingly as I have said in the incision of the two tonsils equally.
And indeed I have treated a woman with an abscess that had arisen in her throat, which was drawing her to darkness, loss of senses, nearly closing her throat: and the woman was breathing through a narrow passage, and it had already prevented her from eating and drinking water: and she had nearly reached death, if it had lasted for one more day or two days.
And the abscess had risen so much that it had sent out two branches, extending above the two nasal openings.
I hurried quickly and attached a hook to one of them. Then I pulled it out, and a large part was pulled from it.
Then I cut it off where it was grasped from the nostril opening.
Then I did that which protruded from the other nasal opening.
Then I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue: then I fixed a hook in the apostema: then I cut off part of it, and only a little blood came out: therefore the woman's throat was healed, and she began to drink water immediately, then she took some food.
Therefore, I did not cease to cut from that apostema many times over a long period: and the apostema succeeded in place of what I was cutting, until it was extended too much and with it.
I therefore devised and cauterized the apostema in the throat.
It therefore stood from the addition: then I walked away, and I did not know what God did with her after me.
Regarding the incision of the apostema of the uvula.
Chapter XXXVII.
When the catarrh descends to the uvula and it becomes swollen, and is long: then it is called perpendicular. And if it is thick and round in the lower part, then it is called grape.
When it is treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment does not help: and you see that the warm apostema has subsided from it and is thin: then you must cut it.
And which is a rounded mass from it, and it has no length, and it is of bloody color, or brown, or black, and it has no sensation: then you must avoid cutting it. For in it there is fear over the sick.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described by its whiteness and length, make the sick person sit before the sun: and press his tongue with the instrument of which I previously spoke: then fix a hook in the uvula, and pull it down: and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for incising both tonsils.
And you must not cut from it except that which extends beyond its natural limit without addition.
For if you cut more from it, you will injure the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use what we have mentioned in the incision of both tonsils: and care for it until it heals.
If the sick person is terrified of the incision: then you must use ingenuity in cauterizing it without fear and pain.
And the method of cauterization for it is not without sharp water: and it is to place the sick person's head in your lap. Then press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned. Then take from the water I mentioned to you in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with unextinguished ash, and place it not too thick nor too thin, and fill with it the concavity of this instrument, which has this form.
Let the end on which the medicine is placed be concave, like the concavity of a spoon's radius.
And place the instrument with medicine on the ulcer itself: and let the patient lie on his side, so that saliva may run out of his mouth from the internal medicine, so that nothing descends from it to his throat and harms him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you apply it to the ulcer for a quantity of half an hour, until you see it already blackened, and the irritation of the medicine calmed.
And if you want to take a cloth, and wrap it around the end of the rod, and pour the cloth with medicine, and insert the rod with the cloth into the canal above, until the cloth adheres to the ulcer.
Do this many times until you achieve what you wish from the cauterization of the ulcer. Then leave it: for it dries up and falls off after three days, or four.
If you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it: and after the cauterization, clean around the ulcer with a cloth soaked in butter, and cleanse what remains of the medicine around it: and mix it with cold water.
And it should be treated externally with embrocations and internally with gargles until it heals.
Therefore, this method of treatment is more beneficial than incision and farther from fear.
And sometimes the uvula is also treated with something finer than cautery and incision: it is treated with fumigation, according to this method. Take calamus, hyssop, origanum, ruta, sseah, chamomile, abrotane, and similar herbs; and gather all of these or some of them in a pot, and let them be submerged in vinegar and boiled: and the pot should be sealed with suitable clay: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot on which a concave instrument is placed according to this method.
Let it be made of silver or bronze: and insert the end with the knob into the mouth of the sick person until the vapor rises to the uvula through the tube, until the uvula is greatly darkened.
Then apply it to it repeatedly until it dries out.
And beware, do not perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of the abscess. For it generally aggravates the abscess: and you should not do this unless the abscess is turning away from its hot state.
If this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed, and attach a piece of onion skin to its end so that the mouth of the sick person is not burned: because the onion skin prevents the vapor from burning the mouth: and this is a good treatment that ensures safety.
Regarding the removal of spines and bones from the throat.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
Often a bone adheres in the throat, or a spine of a fish, or something else.
Therefore, you must extract what is apparent from them upon which sight falls, after pressing the tongue with an instrument near the mouth, and it is made clear to you what is in the throat.
And what is not apparent to you and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. For perhaps the attached object will be expelled by vomiting.
Or let the patient swallow a piece of onion, or a root of lettuce, or swallow a piece of dry bread: or take a piece of soft dry sponge: and tie it to a string, then swallow it. When it reaches the place where the spines or bones are, and is pulled out, then it comes out.
If it does not come out with what we have said, then use an instrument made of lead according to this shape.
Let it be thicker than the radius slightly, and at its end let there be a curve, which can be inserted into his throat with ease: and he should hold his head raised up.
And let him be careful not to touch his epiglottis, so that he does not cause a cough, and push with it the bone, or spine, or let the physician insert it with his own hand.
But what the patient inserts is better: because of his knowledge of the location of the attached object: and push it downward, or pull his hand upward with the instrument, doing all this according to the amount prepared for him, until it comes out.
On the extraction of the leech.
Chapter XXXIX.
When the leech is treated with what I said in the division on treatment with medicines and it does not help, then examine the throat of the patient in the sunlight, or near the sun, after you press his tongue with the instrument that I described to you.
If therefore your sight falls upon the leech, extract it with a small hook, or with fine tweezers properly.
If it is not possible with them: then take a concave tube, and insert it into the throat of the patient near the throat; then insert a heated iron into the concavity of the tube. Do this many times: and let the patient abstain from water for the whole day.
Then let him take a vessel full of cold water, and open his mouth over it: and bring his mouth close to it without swallowing anything from it: and move the water with his hand every hour. For the leech immediately falls off when it feels the water.
If it does not come out with what we have mentioned, then fumigate the patient with bugs, or with ash with the instrument that I described for fumigating the uvula.
Do this many times, for it will fall off.
And the method of operation in fumigation is to take a pot in which there are burning coals with fire: and the pot should be covered with a cover, in the middle of which there is a hole: and the end of the instrument should be placed in that hole.
Then throw the fumigation, and let the sick person put his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape, until you know that the fumigation has now reached the leech. For the leech will fall immediately.
If it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the sick person bear thirst, and eat salty food, and garlic, and not drink water.
Therefore, it is necessary to proceed with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is extracted from the throat when it falls into it by sight.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which is inserted into the throat. And its end is similar to the mouth of a bird called the stork, in which there is the roughness of a file: when it grasps something, it does not release it at all.
Concerning the opening of abscesses, their incision, and general care.
Chapter XL.
There are many kinds of abscesses, of various forms, according to the recollection of them, namely, one and another in this book: and they are diverse in their puncturing and incision in two ways.
One of which is from the kind of abscess in itself, and that which it encompasses from humors.
And the second mode is due to places, in which it occurs in the body.
For an apostem occurring on the head is different from an apostem occurring on the anus: and an apostem occurring in a fleshy part is different from an apostem occurring in joints: and each of them has its own judgment based on the operation.
And among the apostems are those which should not be lanced until the pus in them is mature and complete: and among them are those which should be lanced while they are raw and do not mature according to completion.
Like the apostemata which are near the joints.
For when an apostem occurs near a joint and prolongs itself into it, until what is around it putrefies, the ligaments or nerves of that joint may be corrupted: hence it is a cause of the contraction of that member.
Or the apostem is near a principal member: for if you delay piercing it until it matures, it will harm either that member or the principal member through it.
Or it is near the anus, pierce it therefore while immature: and you should not pierce an apostem that is raw and not fully digested, unless it is near the anus, so that deep putrefaction does not occur and extend to the interior of the anus, and a fistula is formed, or something incurable results at its end.
You must know the time for piercing an apostem that has matured according to completion: and this is when there is a subsiding of pain, recession of fever, and reduction in redness, and pulsation, and sharpness at the head of the apostem: and other signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower part of the abscess, and of greater prominence: and let the perforation extend along the length of the body, if the abscesses are in parts of hands and feet, and in regions of tendons, and cords, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflection.
In those that are reflected, proceed with the perforation according to that member.
When the abscess is in fleshy parts: then it is better to leave its perforation until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to the completion.
For if you pierce it before that, the course of the pus from it is prolonged, and there is much filth and foulness, and perhaps its lips and depth harden.
And some abscesses are pierced according to the width of the body in necessity: or according to what the member requires.
And it is necessary that you administer a small perforation in small abscesses, and a large perforation in large abscesses: or many incisions according to the similarity of the size of the abscess.
And there are abscesses in which it is necessary that the skin be scooped out: and cut when it has become like cloth, and reached the point where it is already dead: such as those that occur in many, like dules and buboes.
And there are some that are cut with a three-angled incision. And from them is one by which it is cut like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
As the groin abscess.
And from them are those in which round incision and lunar incision are administered: and similar to these from the incisions.
That which does not have a head, like mild superficial abscesses, should be pierced with a superficial puncture, or only flat.
And it is necessary, when the abscess is large, and has already collected much pus, and you pierce it, that you should not hurry and extract all the pus at that hour: rather extract a part of it. Then clean the abscess until the next day. Then extract some of the pus again.
Do this multiple times according to progression, until it stops: especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly invalid: for the animal spirit is often exhausted from the body with the discharge of pus: and perhaps the patient dies, and you do not perceive it.
Therefore, be wary of this chapter with great caution.
And after your piercing with which you pierce these abscesses, it is necessary to clean the wound: and observe. If the wound of the abscess is small, or it is a flat incision, then apply lint from linen, or old cloth. And if there is a large abscess, and many perforating cracks are present, then you must insert linen into each crack until they meet.
And if you have cut away part of the skin in an abscess, or scraped around it: then you must fill it with old fat, or as when a cloth is stitched, or shaved with flax down without moisture: and bind it until the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals.
If a flow of blood occurs during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after the cloth has been soaked in them: and place it on the site of the bleeding multiple times.
If the flow of blood persists, then you must administer treatment, and remedies, and powders, which I have described in many places in this book, and in divisions.
If it is during the winter season, and the site of the abscess is near many nerves: then you must pour powder with warm wine and oil over the areas: and place them on the sites.
And if it is during summer, and the areas are fleshy: then you must place powder soaked in water and oil, or with wine and oil, and all of that should be cold. Until the third day arrives, as we have said, then you must open the abscess, clean it, and administer appropriate treatment for its healing until it is healed.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally.
According to the path of distinction, I have already spoken about every abscess, how the way to its cure is treated individually in chapters.
Chapter XLI.
On the incision of abscesses which occur on the scalp.
Small abscesses occur on the scalp, and they are of the species of Nodes, which are contained in the layers that serve as their sacs: they are like the fat of a hen.
And their kinds are many.
Some of them are fatty: some contain moisture similar to mud: some contain moisture similar to pus and boils: and others similar to these, and some are hard like stone.
And in the incision of all of them and their removal, there is no fear, as long as an artery does not contradict at their incision.
And the procedure for incising them is to examine them with an instrument whose form comes after this, which is called the Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then cut it with a longitudinal superficial incision: according to this form.
And begin the incision from line b to line g. When the moisture is evacuated, then remove the sac that contains the moisture, and do not leave anything of it entirely.
For it often returns if something of it remains.
Then submerge the bandage in Egyptian ointment, if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day. For it will corrode what remains from the boil.
Then apply over the bandage with Egyptian ointment a second time, and a third, and if necessary do so until you are confident that nothing remains from the boil, then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
If the aposteme contains a fatty knot: then cut it according to this shape, the incision having the form of a cross: and place hooks between the two lips of the incision, and scrape it from all sides: and endeavor with your skill in extracting the tissue that contains it.
If, however, the artery opposes you, then do what I will tell you next.
And similarly do for the aposteme, if it is stony, through cutting and treating it in the same manner as we have said.
And the incision on a stony aposteme is easier: because it contains little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are some of these apostemes that are on the head in certain individuals, which contain no moisture at all.
Which means: I cut into an aposteme on the head of an old woman, and found the aposteme like a solid, hard, rough, white stone that could not be broken: and if anyone were to strike it, it would wound them.
In other abscesses occurring in the head, apart from these abscesses which occur in the heads of children and near the roots of the ears, the incision of all of them should be superficial.
Or make the puncture from the lower part of them, so that the course of the pus may be directed downwards.
Then treat it with what is appropriate for its treatment.
About the incision of strophulas on the neck.
Chapter XLII.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, and under the jawbones, and in the groin: and sometimes they occur in the rest of the body.
And regarding those that occur in the neck, there can be one or many: and they are generated from each other: and every strophula among them is within its own proper coat, just as it is in the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have narrated.
And there are many kinds of these strophulas. And among them, some are stone-like: and some contain humors: and some are malignant, which do not obey treatment.
In that one which you see among them of good disposition to the touch, whose color is clearly near the color of the skin, and which moves in all directions, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the glands, nor to the arteries, and is not deep: it is necessary to cut it with a superficial incision from the upper part to the lower part of the body along line b. to line g., and remove its skin from all sides: and extend the two lips of the skin with a hook, or with multiple hooks if you need them, as we have said in abscesses of the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is for caution, so that a vein or nerve is not cut.
And let the scalpel not be very sharp: so that it does not add to your hand with the incision, or disturb the patient, and you cut what is not necessary.
If however you cut a vein or artery and it prevents you from the operation, then place on the wound zegi powder, or certain powders which stop the bleeding, and bind the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the inflammation subsides, and the wound softens: or it begins to turn and want to putrefy.
For the blood is stopped with a bandage. Return to your operation until you complete it.
Then probe with your index finger if any of the small Strophulus remain; then cut them and clean them.
If there is a large vein at the root of the Strophulus: then you must not cut that Strophulus from its root; rather you must tie it with a strong double thread, and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cataplasm that you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment. Then care for it.
If the entire Strophulus is cut, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound: and sew it immediately, as soon as you see that no excess remains.
If you see that excess remains due to the size of the Strophulus, then you must proceed to cut its root and remove it: and administer the suture as we have said.
And which contains moisture from the Strophuli, make a superficial puncture in it so that the site of its maturity may be apparent to you: and place the puncture below what follows next in the body, as we have said.
Then apply after the puncture a licinia with an ointment, and similar things to it, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption, until when you see the wound already cleansed: then care for it with a flesh-generating ointment, until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
On the incision of the epiglottis caused by an abscess occurring in the throat.
The ancients said this incision in the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it: and this is the writing of their words.
In those who have synanche, it is necessary to avoid incision of the epiglottis: for no benefit is gained by it: because all the veins and lungs are weakened.
In those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no illness in the canal, it is necessary to use incision of the epiglottis, to avoid destruction which occurs from obstruction.
Therefore, when we want to do it, we should cut the epiglottis below three or four circles of the epiglottis, with a small incision in width, in what is between two circles by the amount that the section is in the soft part, not in the cartilage: and this location is suitable for incision because it is devoid of flesh, and blood vessels are distant from it.
If the surgeon is timid, then it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he should incise the skin until he reaches the canal: he should avoid the blood vessels, if he sees any of them.
Then he should cut the sifac which we mentioned: it is indicated upon the cutting of the canal by the phlegm that comes out of it, along with what is ruptured, and by the cutting off of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
When the hour at which suffocation is feared has passed, bring together the two edges of the skin wound, and suture only the skin itself without the cartilage.
Then apply medicines that promote flesh growth until it heals.
Albucasis says. The summary of this discourse which we have narrated is not applicable unless they see that one of these abscesses has already burst in the throat of the sick person: and the patient is elevated above death, and wishes to cut off his breathing: they go to cut the Epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the wound with some respiration and be saved from death: and for this reason they commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed, and it lasts for three days, or about that time: then they command to suture the wound and care for it until it heals.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that one servant took a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting a part of the windpipe.
And I was called for its treatment, and I found it to be roaring like the groan of a dead person.
I uncovered the wound, and I found the blood that had come out of the wound to be small. I was relieved that she had not cut the vein, nor the gut: and air was escaping from the wound.
I hurried and treated the wound, and cared for it until it was healed: and nothing happened to the servant except hoarseness of voice: and she returned after days to a better state of health.
Therefore, I say that there is no fear in the incision of the epiglottis.
Regarding the incision of the throat hernia.
Chapter XLIV.
This swelling named throat hernia is a large swelling according to the color of the body: and it is very common in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either it is natural, or it is accidental.
In the natural case, there is certainly no ingenuity.
The accidental, however, occurs in two ways: one of which is similar to fatty knots. And the other way is similar to the swelling that occurs from the knotting of an artery. And there is fear in it, and one should not presume to approach it with iron unless it is small: and you should examine it and investigate it with an introducer. If you find it similar to a fatty knot, and it is not hanging with any veins: then cut it like knots are cut: and extract it with what it contains from the cyst, if it is in a cyst: and if not, then examine all of it. Then care for the place with what is necessary for the healing, until it is healed.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On the cutting of various types of knots.
There are many types of knots, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division: and it is necessary that I describe here the difference between a knot and an excrescence: as it may cause confusion.
I say, therefore, that with an excrescence there is heat, and fever, and severe pains, until the effervescence of the excess subsides, and putrefaction is complete: for then the fever and heat subside.
With a knot, there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and they are contained in kistis sifachin, which is their own sac, and it is according to the color of the body: and their beginning is like a chickpea, and it becomes like a batecha, and may be larger or smaller.
And they are of two types: either fatty: or containing moisture. And the colors of the moisture are many, according to what I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a knot, you should examine it and inquire about it first with an instrument called Intromissum, according to how its form will be presented in the chapter that follows this one.
And the method of investigation of abscesses and all nodules is to take this instrument and insert it into the wetter place which you find in the abscess: and you rotate your fingers with it gradually until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then move your hand according to the measurement of the size of the abscess.
Then withdraw what was inserted, and examine what comes out in its wake.
If then running moisture exits, whatever the color may be: then cut it with a superficial incision, as I have said in the case of other abscesses.
And if no moisture exits in the wake of what was inserted, then you know that it is dense: therefore cut over it with a cross-shaped incision, according to this form, as I have taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and remove the skin from all sides with ease: and keep the kistin on it if you can, to extract it along with the Node.
If, however, it is ruptured by blisters during the operation, and it is not possible to extract it whole, for this often happens, then extract it in pieces until nothing of it remains.
For if any part of it, whether small or large, remains, the Node will return in full measure.
If it overpowers you and a small part of it remains: then fill the wound at the end with some sharp corrosive powders: bind the wound, and place something warm over it where the abscess was: and care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If therefore there is a large knot, then sew its two lips, and treat it with what causes flesh to grow.
If however there is a pulsating vein opposed to you, or non-pulsating: then hurry, and fill the place with ground zegi, and leave it tight for two days, or three, until the wound becomes putrefied, and the boiling of the blood ceases: then return to cutting what remains of the knot.
Chapter XLVI.
Regarding the instruments for cutting and piercing.
From these are the forms of introducers, and they are of three kinds.
From these is the large one, and from these is the medium one, and from these is the small one.
Let them be made of square-ended alfulud iron appropriately, so that they may facilitate entry into the abscess.
And these are the forms of the experiencers, and no, that is, the perforating ones: and one of them is named beris, that is, perforating: and they are of three kinds.
From these is the large one, and the medium one, and the small one.
They are used to investigate abscesses, exiturae, fistulas, and buboes from what is between them of bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and blunt, like large needles with which chairs are sewn, from citrus wood, or from brass, or iron, or silver.
And the better ones are those made from citron.
And there is also an experience with black lead, which is used to test fistulas, whose concavities have reflections, so that they are reflected with their softness with those reflections.
And there are again three kinds. For from them there are long ones, from them medium ones, and from them short ones, according to the amount of the width of the fistula and its constriction.
The form of hooks, and they are of many kinds.
For from them there are simple ones, that is, which have one curvature: and they are of three kinds as you see, Large, Medium, and Small.
And from them there are blind hooks: and they are of three kinds.
And from them there are hooks having two curvatures, and they are of three kinds: and from them there are hooks having three curvatures, and they are of three kinds: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels, with which knots and abscesses are cut and skinned: and they are of three kinds: for from them there is a large, medium, and small one.
Their ends with which the cutting is done are sharp, other ends are not sharp: and they are not used in this manner, except to facilitate the skining of knots near the fear of cutting a vein or nerve: and so the patient may be healed and find temporary relief from the burning sensation found in the skining of abscesses.
They are made of metal and resemble a still with which alcohol is made: and at the wide end there are hidden points of spatula: and through it runs inward and outward as you wish, as you see.
The form of the spatulas which are hidden between the fingers for pricking abscesses: and the patients do not feel them: and they exist in three varieties, large, medium, and small.
The forms of air bladders with which the flow of blood is cut off: and they exist in three varieties, large, medium, and small.
They shall be made of metal or citrus wood, round, to a moderate length, as you see: and they shall be slender.
And it is necessary for you to have these varieties of air bladders, large and small, to cut off the blood quickly in an emergency, and then when medicine is not present for you.
However, do not use them to cut off blood in every part of the body, but only in fleshy areas: such as the calves of the legs, the hips, the arms, the nipples, the abdomen, the groin, and similar fleshy, moist areas.
And sometimes small instruments similar to the bark of pistachios are made from them, according to their shape: with which blood is cut off when it flows from the place of bloodletting or from a vein or artery incision: and sometimes they are made round in this form.
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of men's nipples which are similar to women's nipples.
Sometimes the nipples of some men swell at the completion of sleep (that is, when they begin to be polluted in sleep) until they resemble women's nipples: and they remain foully abscessed.
Therefore, whoever wishes to avoid this, should cut above the nipples in a crescent shape, according to this form from line b to line g. Then remove all the fat. Then fill the wound with a flesh-growing medicine. Then sew together the two lips of the wound, and care for it until it heals.
If the nipple inclines downward and softens because of its size, as happens with women: then it must be cut on both of its upper sides with two similar crescent-shaped cuts, each contained with the other at the ends of each, until there is a larger line containing a smaller one, according to this form from line b to line g. Then remove the skin that is between the two lips, and take away the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders, which is necessary for the cure, until it heals.
If you cannot complete the incision that you need to make because of the patient's restlessness or due to blood flow: then you must fill the wound with a piece of felt dipped in a corrosive ointment, and leave it until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then care for it until it heals.
On the piercing of an abscess, which occurs under the Titillico.
Chapter Forty-Eight.
These abscesses which occur under the Titillico, are of the species of hard Strophularium, which contains cysts, and from them come those that contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture must be cut with a crescent-shaped incision, according to this form, from line b to line g. When all the pus in the abscess has been evacuated, then fill it with old lint and leave it until the next day.
Then remove the lint and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
If the abscess is of the species of nodular Strophularium, then incise it as we have said in the incision over Strophulas equally.
If the wound extends to discharge pus, then apply a cautery to it as we have said in what has been mentioned before.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs due to an Artery and Vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes hardened, an abscess often results from this. And similarly, it happens to veins as well, causing an abscess and swelling in them.
And the signs by which it is known that the swelling and inflammation are due to the Artery and Vein are: for when the swelling is due to the artery, it is long, gathered in the depth of the body: and when you press the swelling with your fingers, you feel as if it were making a rustling sound.
And that which is due to the Vein, is round on the surface of the body.
And to cut upon this swelling is an error, especially when it is under the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body: and it is very large. Therefore, the care of it should be avoided with iron, and those that are even in the extremities or in the head should also be avoided.
Therefore, for that which of them is due to the inflammation of the arterial orifice, find a slit in the skin in length. Then open the slit with hooks, then the artery: and free it from the tunics until it is uncovered.
Then insert a needle under it, and make it penetrate all the way to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, according to which I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples.
Then puncture the area between the two ligatures with a scalpel until all the blood within it is discharged and the swelling is resolved.
Then administer treatment that produces pus until the ligatures fall off: afterwards treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to the cutting of a vein, then you must hold with your hand as much of the abscess with the skin as you can. Then insert the needle under the place you are holding with your hand, and make it penetrate: and let there be double thread in it until you draw it out from the other side. Then tie it with the abscess with a good ligature: according to what I told you about the ligature of the grape, from both sides with both ends of the thread.
If you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert another needle with another thread under the entire abscess at the site of the needle's incision: press and gather your threads at four places.
Then cut the abscess in its middle until what is inside comes out: then cut off the excess skin, and release what was tied from it.
Then place on it the poultice which you have submerged in wine and oil. Then administer the treatment which is done with plasters and ointments until it heals.
Chapter L.
Regarding the abscess that occurs from the twisting of nerves.
Just as an abscess occurs in arteries and veins, so too can an abscess occur in nerves: which happens due to a blow, or from excessive labor, and similar causes: and it most often occurs in the areas of the helpers, or heel, and in any place where joints are moved: and this abscess is severe.
Its color resembles the rest of the body, and it is in most conditions without pain: and when it is squeezed with vehemence, the patient feels a sensation like stupefaction.
And it is not a collection of pus gathered deep within the body, but rather it is beneath the skin, and it can be moved in all directions, and it does not move forward or to the front, nor backward to the rear.
Therefore, what is present at the joints should not be penetrated with iron. For perhaps contraction may occur.
In those cases where it is on the head or on the forehead, incise the skin with a scalpel. If it is a small collection of pus, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and scrape it: then remove it, and close the wound with stitches: and care for it until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-One.
Regarding the incision of an abscess that occurs in the abdomen.
Certain individuals frequently develop growths in their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, which are called Fungalia, by analogy to fungi.
Their root is subtle, and their head is large, and their lips are inverted. And some of them are small: and some of them become greatly enlarged.
And indeed I have seen a man, and in his stomach were two thelil, which were more like mushrooms than other things: there was no difference between them, white, small roots, and their lips were turned inside out, and they ended, and moisture always flowed from them.
So I cut them, and found one weighing almost ten and eight ounces and the other almost six ounces. The operation for cutting them is such that you should then consider if the patient is moist, and the color of the thelil is white, moist, fine roots: then cut it with a broad spatula, and have cauteriums ready in fire.
For often much blood is expelled at the cutting of it: therefore hurry if the blood overcomes you, then cauterize it.
If you see the patient fearful and timid about the cutting with iron, then take a properly made lead thread, and bind it to the athelul: whose size is as we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then add to the lead binding. Therefore, do not stop binding the lead whenever it impresses on the thelil, until it is severed and falls off by itself without effort.
If however the thelil has a thick root, then there is something to fear and be wary of in its cutting, especially if it is in the stomach.
However, it is possible to cut through the middle of it. Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then care for it until the wound heals.
And be careful not to presume to cut the tumor which is of a dark color, has little sensation, and an ugly appearance: for it is indeed a cancerous abscess: and I will come with a reminder of Cancer after this.
Chapter LII.
On the treatment of the navel prominence.
The navel prominence occurs for many reasons. Or from splits in the sifac, which is above the belly: and althub or intestine protrudes from it, according to what happens in other hernias. Or from the blood that flows from a vein or an artery, according to what has been mentioned. Or from wind confined in it.
If it is due to a split in the sifac and protrusion of thirbi: then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body: and it is soft, without pain: and its position varies. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its position is much more diverse than what we have mentioned. When you press it with your fingers, it is hidden: then it returns, and there may be a sound with it: and it swells greatly at the entrance of the bath, and causes great labor.
If it is due to moisture, then it is soft and does not disappear when you press it with your hand, nor does it shrink or increase.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess appears blackish from the swelling.
If it is due to flesh formed: then the abscess is heavy, thick, hard, and fixed according to a single quantity.
If it is due to flatulence, then its touch is gentle.
And the procedure in this case is to determine if the prominence of the navel is due to blood from arteries, veins, or flatulence: then you must refrain from treating it. For in this there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter where I said about abscesses due to arteries and veins.
If the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia: then you must advise the patient to hold their breath and stand stretched out. Then mark with cautery around the entire navel. Then instruct him to lie down on his back between your hands. Then circle with a broad spatula around the navel on the area you marked with cautery. Then extend the middle of the abscess upward with a large hook. Then bind it firmly around with thread or with silk cord: and let the knot of the binding be strong.
Then open the extended middle of the abscess above the binding. If you find it already caught by the ligament: then extract the hernia, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine into the abdomen: and if you find a cicatrix, then take hold of it with a hook, and cut off its excess.
If, however, the artery or vein is opposite you: then tie it tightly around. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and insert two strong threads into them: and insert the two needles into the circle you made around the abscess in the shape of a cross, which you make to penetrate.
Then grip the abscess at four places above the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the area until the extended flesh putrefies: and it falls off by itself: or cut it when it thins out and putrefies.
Then treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to hardened flesh in it or moisture: then it is necessary to hollow out the abscess as we have said. And extract the blood or moisture that you find in it.
Then treat it with what strengthens the area.
Chapter LIII.
Regarding the treatment of CANCER.
We have already spoken about the classification of types of cancer and how to treat it with medicines: and we must be cautious when treating it with surgery so that it does not ulcerate: and we have discussed cancer generated in the uterus and precautions for its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where its removal is possible: such as cancer which is in the breasts, or in the thigh, and those similar, from members located for extracting all of it: especially when it is a small beginning.
When however it becomes old, and is large, you should not approach it.
For I was not able to heal anyone from it: nor did I see anyone before me who reached that.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we have said, is to proceed and release the patient from black bile several times. Then bleed it if you find it with obvious fullness.
Then prepare the patient for the preparation in which he is placed with the operation.
Then throw into the cancer hooks that are suitable for it. Then scoop it from all sides with the skin, according to examination, until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, but press the areas, and wipe off all the thick blood with your hand, or with whatever is possible there from instruments.
If, however, the flow of thick blood from the incision of an artery or vein opposes you, then cauterize the vein until the blood is stopped. Then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
Regarding the treatment of dropsy.
Chapter XLIV. We have already discussed in the division of the types of Hydropsis, and how the aggregation of water occurs: and the signs of every type, and its cure with medicines.
And that which is treated with iron is only the asclitis type alone: and it is not approached with iron in the timpanitis type: nor thoroughly in the hyposarcae type: for that is deadly.
When you have already treated this type of Hydropsis timpanitis with medicines, and your treatment has not helped: then consider. For if the weakness has already overcome the patient, or there is another illness with him besides Hydropsis: such as if he has a cough, or diarrhea, and similar conditions: then beware of treating him with iron: for there is fear in that.
But if you see a patient of abundant strength, and there is no illness with him besides Hydropsis alone: and he is neither a child nor an elderly person: then the method of treatment for him is that you lift the patient standing between your hands, and a helper behind him should press his belly with his hand to drive the water down to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a sharp instrument with spikes according to this shape. It should have two sharp points, long, with sharp ends like a spatula. However, it should have a gradual narrowing so that you do not penetrate through to the intestine with it during the procedure and injure it.
Then consider. For if the generation of hydropisis is from the intestines, then it is necessary to extend with a cut from the navel by the length of three fingers, downwards directly over the pecten.
But if the generation of hydropisis is due to disease of the liver: then let your cut be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
And if its generation is due to the spleen, then the incision should be on the right side: and it is also not appropriate for the incision to be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie, so that the excess fluids do not flow to that weak spot.
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument. Then insert into that incision, and lift your hand with the spatula between the skin and sifac, as if you are removing the outer layer: and the amount to be removed should be the size of a fingernail, or around that.
Then pierce the sifac until the spatula reaches the empty space: and that is the location of the water. Then extract it, and insert into the opening an instrument, which has this form. And it is similar to a cannula: made of silver, or brass, or bronze, smooth, polished: at its lower part there is a small opening, and on its sides there are three openings, two from one side, and one from the other side: and the edge is the cut end according to the manner of cutting a reed, as you see: at its upper end there is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it descends immediately on the instrument, therefore evacuate from water in an hour a medium quantity.
For if you evacuate more than is necessary from it, perhaps the sick person will die within an hour by the resolution of his animal spirit: or he may suffer a syncope that approaches death.
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of its power, and according to how the dispositions of the sick person signify to you from the strength of his pulse, and from his good condition.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water.
Which is because it is retained immediately due to the skin which holds the hole that is on the siphon: of which I have spoken, so that you may pierce it according to that method.
Then repeat the procedure the next day, if you see the sick person tolerate it: and also evacuate a small quantity from the water.
Do this for several days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there is only a little water left.
If you are afraid for the sick person and leave much water remaining: then treat him with burial in warm sand, and much sweating in a bath and sun, and expectorate upon thirst: and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed: and cauterize over the stomach, spleen, and liver, after the extraction of water: as I have narrated in what precedes.
Regarding the care of infants who are born with their urinary passages not perforated.
Chapter LV.
When one of the infants exits the womb of his mother, and his urethra is not perforated, or there is a narrow opening, or it is not in its proper place.
Therefore, it is necessary to intervene with its perforation immediately upon birth with a very fine spatula, according to this form.
Then place a thin pin made of lead in the opening and tie it: and keep it there for three days, or four.
When he wants to release urine, it should be removed, and he may urinate. Then replace it.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area may prevent it from closing.
He whose opening is narrow is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it is enlarged.
Those in whom the opening is not in its proper place are injured. This is because, in those who are born, the opening is at the end of the penis: therefore, they cannot urinate forward until they lift the penis upward with their hand. Nor can he procreate because the sperm cannot reach the womb properly: and it is a very foul disease.
And the method of the operation is to have the patient lie on his back. Then extend the head of the rod with your left hand forcefully, and cut off the head of the rod from the priapi location, with a sharp point or a sharp spatula: as is the cutting of a reed, or as you root something, so that its middle comes like the head of the rod: and so that a hole falls in the middle as it should.
And be careful at your operation from blood flow. For it often happens. Therefore, apply to it something that stops the blood, and treat the wound until it heals.
Concerning the conditions that occur in the foreskin and head of the penis, and regarding corruption, blackening, and adherence.
Chapter LVI.
These conditions often occur in the penis, and they are protrusions of foul flesh.
And from it, some are malignant, and some are not malignant.
Therefore, the non-malignant one should be suspended with a fine hook and cut off until you clean it all. Then place on it a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then treat it after that with dyafinicon ointment until it heals.
If the condition is malignant and of a foul color, then it is necessary to apply cauterization after its incision and treatment.
If however Albather is on the foreskin of a captive, not circumcised, and there is part of Albather between the foreskin, and part of it outside: then you must remove Albather which is inside first, until when it solidifies, then care for it externally: because when you care for it at the same time, the foreskin does not heal but becomes worse.
And it also happens that in the testicles and foreskin there is blackening and corruption. Therefore, you must hollow out all that is already blackened, and what is about to be corrupted, or is already corrupted.
Then apply on it after that honey which is already mixed with the flour of pomegranate rind, and crushed sieve herbs.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
If however a blood flow occurs, then apply the cautery with a crescent-shaped cautery, according to this form.
For cautery is beneficial for two conditions simultaneously, namely for blood flow and a wound when it becomes corrupted.
If the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed entirely within an hour: then you must insert a lead tube into the urethra so that the patient may urinate over it.
In cases where the foreskin adheres to the head of the penis, and this adherence does not occur unless in one whose foreskin is healthy and does not require circumcision: and sometimes it occurs due to a wound or an abscess: therefore you must scrape it with a blunt spatula until the bond is loosened and the head of the penis is freed on all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish them precisely, then it is necessary to remove some from the head of the rod, and from the foreskin. Which is because the foreskin, when it is thin, perhaps is pierced quickly due to its thinness.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the rod with a fine linen cloth that is already moistened in cold water, so that they do not stick together again.
Then it should be treated with astringent wine until it is healed.
Chapter LVII.
On the cleansing of infants, and the treatment of errors that befall them.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other wounds; however, since it is by our operation, by our will, and its use is properly for children, it is necessary that we mark in it a better operation and a lighter way leading to healing.
I say therefore that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
Which is because I found the majority of artisans and phlebotomists to use cleansing by circumcision with a lancet and scissors; and they use cautery, binding with thread, and incision with a knife.
And indeed I have already tested all these methods and have not found a better one than cleansing with scissors and binding with thread.
For in the cleaning with the lancet, the skin often escapes. For the skin of the foreskin has two layers: therefore perhaps the upper skin is cut, and the lower layer remains: thus it is necessary to make another incision to cut the other, causing future pain. And with the cleaning which is done by alfecti, that is, awls, which tailors use, it does not cut the extremity of the male member: because it might enter its opening.
In cleaning with the hoof, the iron might slip and ruin your operation: and the skin of a boy is short by nature, and often they are born in such a way that they do not need cleaning: and I have already seen this.
However, the cleaning with scissors and binding with thread has proven to be a good experiment for me: because the scissors are proportional in making the incision: therefore, the sharpness that is on top is like the sharpness that is on the bottom. When you press your hand, the two sharp edges are aligned, and they cut according to a single operation at the same time: and a compression of similar shape is made, holding the skin of the rod from all sides, with which there is no error at all.
And the method of the operation is to make the boy understand, especially if he is one who comprehends quickly, that you do nothing but tie a thread on his rod only: and leave him until the next day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every way that is possible for you, according to what his understanding receives. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and let him not be sitting: and hide the scissors in your sleeve, or under your foot, so that the boy sees them not at all, nor any of the instruments.
Then insert your hand to his rod, and blow on the skin, and pull it up until the head of the rod comes out. Then clean it from what filth accumulates in it.
Then bind the marked place with a double thread. Then bind below that briefly with a second bandage. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower bandage firmly, and cut between the two bandages. Then lift the skin up quickly, and extract the head of the rod. Then let the blood flow gradually (for it is better) and put powder on top: and on top of the powder a cloth in which is spread the yolk of an egg boiled in rose water, mixed with good fresh rose oil: and leave it on until the next day: and care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
The form of the scissors for cleaning is this.
Let the two ends be blunt and sloping: so that the branch of the nail does not protrude: and let the length of the two sharp edges be equal to the length of the two handles.
The error falling in cleaning is: for perhaps the inner skin altogether or part of it escapes at the incision.
Therefore you must extend it with your fingernail at your hour before the swelling of the place: and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then remove it with a hook, and cut it.
If three days have passed and what is under the nail remains swollen, having formed an abscess: then leave it until the abscess ripens and becomes warm, and remove the scab with ease, and cut it according to how it is prepared for you: and beware of the tip of the nail. For it will not harm it.
Treat it with what strengthens the wound from the powders we have mentioned in the chapter on powders: and if it is cut beyond measure through the skin and extends to deeper areas, it will not harm it either.
Treat it with what we have said until it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
Regarding the extraction of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to obstructions caused by stones, clotted blood, pus, or flesh growths, and similar things from those we have mentioned in the methods of treatment in the division.
And if the urine does not resolve and you see that its retention is due to a stone already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over on his knees. Then let his feet be placed upon his back, and let his belly be extended from the upper part of his back, and let the patient hold his breath as much as possible. Therefore, it is drawn with the neck of the bladder for the expulsion of the stone to the back: hence the urine is discharged.
If it does not resolve with what we have said and the condition is severely affecting the patient: then you must administer its extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver, and be delicate, soft, hollow like the quill of a bird's feather in thinness, long like the length of one and a half palms; it should have a fine tube at its head.
And the method of urine exiting through it is to take a doubled thread, and tie wool or cotton at its end with a good knot: and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and cut with scissors if there is any excess wool, but insert it into the tube forcefully, like an awl.
Then anoint the syringe with oil or butter, and egg white: and have the patient sit on a seat, and pierce the bladder, and his rod with moist oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the rod easily until it reaches the root of the rod.
Then double it above the navel.
Then push the syringe inside until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel that it has reached the empty space: and this is not done according to this order unless because the passage through which it goes is twisted.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. For Vrina will follow the wool.
Then withdraw it, and make Vrina run through the urine passage: and repeat the syringe, and do not cease to do this until the bladder is emptied, and the patient finds relief.
Regarding the quality of cystoclysm with a clepsydra.
Chapter LIX.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or blood congeals in it, or pus is confined in it, and you wish to distill into it waters and medicines: then it should be done with an instrument which is called a clepsydra, and this is its form.
For it is closed, that is, sealed. And in it there are three holes, two on one side, and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave area, in which is what pushes, should be according to the size that fits it without addition, until when something is drawn with it, moisture is attracted: and when it is pushed, it is expelled far away: as a clepsydra does, with which naphtha, that is, Greek fire, is projected in battles.
When you wish to project moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clepsydra into the moisture, and draw with it what pushes upward, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clepsydra.
Then insert its extremity into a rod, as we have narrated in the syringe. Then push the moisture with that which pushes it, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, so that the patient feels it.
The form of a subtle clyster with which the bladder is cleansed.
Let it be made of silver or brass, whose head should be higher and similar to a small alcamah, and below it there should be a groove in which the ligament falls.
Then take the bladder of a ram and put the moisture in it with which you wish to cleanse the bladder. Then tie it between two grooves with a strong ligature using double thread: and warm that moisture slightly over the fire.
Then insert the extremity of the clyster into the rod, then press your hand over the bladder with a proper tightness along with the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder available, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle out of it, and pierce it entirely around its circumference. Then insert a strong thread into those holes as they revolve. Then assemble the circle as you would assemble a container: after which you place in it what you wish from moisture, oils, and waters.
Then tie it to the instrument: and do with it as you did with the bladder by expressing it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
On the extraction of the stone.
We have already discussed the classification of stone types and their treatment with medicines. I mentioned the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and bladder, and the signs of each. I also talked about the stone on which manual operation and incision are performed, which is properly generated in the bladder, and that which attaches to the penis. And I am narrating this with clear explanation and abbreviation.
I say therefore, that the stone generated in the bladder most often occurs in boys.
And among its signs is that urine exits the bladder similar to water in its fineness, and white sand appears in it, and the patient rubs his penis and labors with it, and hangs down frequently. Then it erects, and the anus protrudes with it in many of them.
And the healing of boys is easy up until they reach fourteen years of age. And it is difficult in the elderly. In young adults it is intermediate, between the two extremes: and for those whose stone is larger, the treatment is easier; and if smaller, the treatment is conversely more difficult.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a clyster that will expel all the feces in their intestines, for it sometimes prevents the discovery of the stone during the examination.
Then let the patient be taken with his feet and shaken, and moved downwards: so that the Stone may go down to the bottom of the bladder, or jump from a height several times.
Then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be under his hips, so that the bladder may be entirely inclined downwards.
Then examine him, and touch him from the outside.
If therefore you feel the Stone in the space, then immediately proceed with the incision over it.
If it does not fall under your touch at all, then you must clean the index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is a boy: or the middle finger if he is a full-grown youth: and insert it into his anus, and examine for the Stone until it stands under your finger: and gradually turn it toward the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger, and push it outward toward the place where you wish to make the incision: and command one attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and command another attendant to raise the testicles upward with his right hand: and with the other hand, to move away the skin which is beneath the testicles from the area where the incision is made.
Then insert the cutting spatula, which has this form. And find the area between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, but to the left side of the genitals: and make the incision over the stone, with your finger in the anus: and let the incision be transverse, so that the outer part of the incision is wider and the inner part narrower, according to the amount that the exit of the Stone from it should not be larger.
Perhaps indeed the finger compresses the stone within the anus at the incision, and it comes out without difficulty.
And you should know that from the stone which has angles and edges, its exit becomes difficult because of that.
And from it is smooth, similar to a gland, and round: and its exit becomes easy.
Therefore, for the one that has angles and edges, add to the incision.
If it does not come out thus, then you must be ingenious with it: either grasp it with forceps properly, the end of which is like a crescent, which grasps onto the stone and does not slip away: or insert under it a subtle instrument with a curved end.
If however you cannot grasp it, then enlarge the opening slightly. If anything from the blood overpowers you, cut it with a scalpel.
If however there is more than one stone, then first push the large one toward the mouth of the bladder. Then incise above it. Then push the small one after that: and do likewise if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then it is unskilled to cut it with a large incision. For it happens to the patient one of two things, either that he dies, or there is a continuous dripping of urine: because the place does not heal entirely.
But administer the expulsion of it until it comes out; or remove the pieces in its fracture with scissors until you extract it bit by bit.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with incense, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it, and place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: so that the warm pus may settle.
Then place the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. When therefore you loosen it, moisten the area with water and much oil.
Then treat it with diaphyfortium ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals.
If, however, a warm pus and corrosion and similar things happen in the wound: such as if blood congeals in the bladder and urine is prevented by it: and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine. Therefore insert your finger into the wound and draw out that blood. For if it remains, it causes the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then clean the wound with vinegar, water, and salt: and treat it with everything that is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And it is necessary during the entire course of treatment to bind the two thighs together for the purpose of the medications that are placed on the area.
If the stone is small and is in the channel of the penis and is stuck there and blocks the passage of urine: then treat it as I describe before you come to incision. For often you will be spared from incision through this treatment, for I have already proven it.
And it is that you take the perforator from Afghan iron, whose form is this, with a triangular end, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and tie the penis with it under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the perforating iron into the penis with ease until the perforator reaches the stone itself: and rotate the perforator with your hand on the stone gradually: and try to penetrate it until you make it go through the other side.
For the urine is expelled immediately.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outer part of the penis. For it breaks apart and exits with the urine, and the patient is healed.
If this treatment is not prepared for you, because of something that prohibits it: then tie a thread under the stone and another thread above the stone. Then cut above the stone on the penis between the two threads. Then extract it. Then loosen the binding and clean the clotted blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone except so that it does not return to the bladder: and another binding above, unless when the thread is loosened after the exit of the stone, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound: and for this reason you must do this when you bind the upper thread, so that you raise the skin upwards, so that it returns at the completion, and covers the wound, as we said.
Chapter LXI.
On the removal of stones in women.
A stone is rarely generated in women.
If, however, a stone should occur in any of them, then the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited due to many reasons.
One of the reasons is that the woman may be a virgin.
And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who will expose herself to a doctor when she is chaste, or among those who have husbands.
The third reason is that you do not find a woman who is well knowledgeable in this art, especially the manual procedure.
And the fourth reason is the distance from the location of the stone: therefore, it requires deep incision, and there is fear in that.
If necessity provokes to do that, then you must take a woman doctor who is well knowledgeable: and she is rarely found.
If you are deprived of that, then seek a chaste and subtle doctor, and present a well-instructed midwife in women's matters, or a woman who has some knowledge in this art: therefore, make her present, and especially let her do everything you instruct regarding the inquiry about the stone.
First of all, he should check if the woman is a virgin: then he must insert his finger into her anus and search for a stone.
If he finds it, he should press it with his finger, and then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and search for the stone, after placing her left hand on the bladder and compressing it firmly.
If he finds the stone, then he must gradually move it from the bladder's opening downward with all his strength until he reaches the root of the hip with it.
Then he should incise above it at the midpoint of the vagina near the root of the hip, on whichever side he feels the stone: and his finger should not be removed from the stone, pressing under it; and let the incision be small at first. Then he should insert a probe above that incision.
Then he should insert a probe above that incision. If he feels the stone, then he should increase the incision according to the amount proportional to how the stone exits from it.
And you should know that there are many kinds of stones. Among these, there is a small one and a large one, smooth and rough, long, and round having branches.
Know therefore its kinds, so that it may be indicated to you by this concerning what you desire.
If blood overpowers you, then apply ground zego to the area and keep it for one hour until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out: and do so that you prepare with you from the instruments which I said in the extraction of the stone in men, to assist you through them in your operation.
If the flow of blood overcomes you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery which has been cut: then put powder on the place, and bind it with bandages tightly: and do not change it: and leave the stone, and do not extract it. For perhaps the weak woman will die. Then care for the wound.
Therefore, when the sharpness of the blood is calmed after days, and the place becomes putrid, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter LXII.
Regarding the incision of a watery hernia.
Watery ramex is not present unless there is an aggregation of moisture in the sifac alb, which is beneath the skin of the testicle containing the ovum: and it is called sifac.
And sometimes it is in its own pouch, which nature has prepared for it in the part of the ovum until it is ripened: which is another ovum, and it is the skin of the testicle between the sifac alb, which we mentioned: and that does not occur except rarely.
And the generation of this ramica is from the weakness that befalls the testicles: therefore this material is discharged to them. And sometimes it happens from a blow on the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. For its color either tends towards yellowness, or is blood red, or feculent black, or is water white, and that which is more is like that.
And the signs by which it is known where the aggregation of water is, are these. For if there is in the white scrotum that we mentioned, then the abscess is round in length somewhat like the figure of an egg: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in its own little pouch, then the abscess is round like a part of an egg, and because of this, a person thinks that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white scrotum, then it falls under sensation.
When therefore you wish to know the color of the moisture, then test the color of the moisture in the abscess with a square probe, whose form preceded. According to what emerges in the track of the probe, judge of that which is within it.
When therefore we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to advise the patient to be bled if it is possible for him, and you see his body full.
Then he should lie on his back on something slightly elevated, and place many cloths under him.
Then sit you on his left, and command the servant to sit at his right, who extends the rod to one of the two sides of the scrotal skin, and to the pubic region of the abdomen.
Then take the broad scalpel and cut the scrotal skin lengthwise in the middle, almost to the pecten: and let the incision be made according to a straight equidistant line that divides the scrotal skin until it reaches the white sifac covering: and peel it off, and beware from this, so as not to cut it: and let your peeling be on the part that hangs more with the egg: and carefully examine with the peeling according to what is possible for you.
Then pierce the water-filled sifac with a wide puncture, and draw out all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the sifac upwards, and do not touch the scrotal skin that covers it: and cut the sifac however it is possible for you to cut it, either in its entirety or piece by piece, especially the thin side of it. For if you do not examine it thoroughly, security is not achieved in its incision, lest the water return.
If the egg protrudes outside its skin during your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the sifac, reduce it back. Then bring together the two lips of the scrotal skin with sutures.
Then care for it like other wounds until it heals.
If you find an egg corrupted by other blackness, then it is necessary to tie the vessels which are the suspenders, fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with the suspender, and extract the egg: then treat it as we have said.
If water has gathered in two parts, then you know that there are two branches: therefore cut the other part equally as you did with the other.
And if it seems to you that the operation is one, then do as follows: afterwards clean the blood. And insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil, or in rose oil: and place outside another piece of wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles, and around the belly: and place on top doubled cloths, and they are poultices: and bind them with a bandage that has six according to this form.
Then let two cloths be taken, and sweated, and filled with ground laudanum according to this pattern: and the ends by which it is pressed should be made of chamois or wet wool: and gathered together with a binding around the waistband of the breeches: and one end should cover from the anus up to the back, and the second should cover towards the hip area: and two ends above the two thighs below, and the other two ends over the two groins, and let the entire binding gather at the waistband of the breeches.
And sometimes this branch is treated artificially with a cautery instead of incision with an iron: and it is that you take a fine knife cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles with it: and it is ignited as we have described: until when the white membrane containing water is revealed: then take the cautery according to this form.
It is assimilated to the Greek letter.
Then pierce it with that heated iron until all the moisture comes out.
Then extend the scalpel with hooks, and remove the surface with a fine heated cautery, and cut it as much as you can until you root out all of it.
And be careful with the egg, lest the fire touch it.
And you should know that this operation is safer, farther from blood flow, and better than the operation with incision.
If however something opposes you at the time of incision, or at the time of cauterization, such as a warm aposteme, or blood flow, or anything else: then you must treat what opposes you with the cure that is appropriate to it, according to what has been stated.
If however the patient is timid and does not bear this operation due to its horror: then administer the piercing as I describe it, and it is done.
When it is confirmed to you by what we have said about the signs that the ramex is watery, then it is necessary to make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then pierce the aposteme on its lower part with a broad spatula: and make the piercing according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until all the water flows out.
Then place a poultice on the area, and bind it, and leave it until all the remaining water flows out: then treat it until the wound heals.
If however the opposition is to the flow of water when you pierce it: and this is not due to anything but that the white membrane causes opposition at the opening of the wound, and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary to insert a pen into the wound, or an instrument with which water is extracted from dropsical patients, whose form has been mentioned previously: or add in the operation of the wound for a moment.
And you should know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, or around that time. When it therefore accumulates, then it should be punctured according to the same method, and the patient will spend his days.
Chapter LXIII.
Regarding the treatment of fleshy rami.
Know that in the cutting of this ramus, there is great fear leading to peril in many conditions. Therefore, it seems to me that its dismissal is salvaging from it.
And I am recalling the procedure on it and the appearance of the abscess.
I say therefore, that many abscesses occur in the bodies from which the testicles are composed: and it happens for various reasons, namely.
Or from acute or sharp excess that is discharged toward the testicles. Or from percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found in it: and it is a heavy abscess.
And perhaps it is a stony abscess, whose color is dark, and it has no sensation.
And sometimes it occurs from the knotting of the arteries and their swelling: as has already been mentioned beforehand: or from the swelling of the veins.
That which is among them due to the swelling of the arteries is recognized by the nature of the abscess when you press it with your fingers. And you should not touch it at all.
That which occurs from the swelling of the veins does not disperse anything upon compression with the fingers.
And now it is possible that a section may be made on this type and on the other flesh: and it is as if you were to cut the skin of the testicles. Then extend the egg upward, and extract it with a white ligature: and free the suspensory ligament from the vessels, and tie the vessels: and cut the suspensory ligament after you free it from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is solidly attached to the flesh that has grown, then you must pull the egg and cut it.
And if there is an adhesion between some part of the ligature or what is between the vessels: then you must free that entire adhesion and cut it with a circular incision.
If there is flesh growth in the area of adhesion that is behind: then you must cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said.
When therefore your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine: then care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
Chapter LXIIII.
On the care of shoots, which is with vines.
It is a swelling of the testicles enclosed by a kind of folding, similar to a bag, with softening of the testicles: and it makes movement, exercise, and walking difficult for the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, there is fear, because of what has been previously mentioned.
However, we must speak of the treatment for it according to what the first practitioners did.
I say, therefore, that the patient should be made to sit on an elevated seat. Then push the suspensory ligament of the testicles downward. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, near the roots: and let another assistant hold and stretch them forcefully.
Then make a transverse incision with a broad and sharp scalpel directly on the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
Then scrape from all sides as we have told you in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert a needle with double thread into them, and tie it at the first place where the vines are affected: and tie it again at the last place. Then cut it in a straight section through the middle according to the length of the body, and extract what accumulates from corrupted feculent humidities.
Then treat the wound with the treatment of other wounds, in which pus is generated, so that the vessels nourishing one of the testicles fall. For it is not evil through that.
If, however, the Vitis affects all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove the testicles along with the vessels: so that the egg is not deprived of nourishment due to the incision, and waste away or dry up, and not be beneficial with them.
Chapter LXV.
Regarding the treatment of intestinal branches.
The outcome of this branching is from the incision that occurs in the sifach extended over the abdomen in the groin area from the mirach of the belly.
Therefore, the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture is either from the sifach or its extension.
And these two types occur from many causes: either from a blow, or jumping, or shouting, or lifting a heavy object, and similar actions.
And the sign is when it is from the extension of the sifach. It occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly: and it is an abscess equal toward the depths: therefore, the sifach compresses the intestine.
And its sign when it is from the cutting of the intestine, because it causes to happen from the beginning of itself a sudden intense pain: and it is a different abscess, appearing under the skin nearby: and that is due to the exit of the intestines, and their course to the exterior of the intestine.
And sometimes it exits with the intestine twisted: and this is called Intestinal Ramex, and twisting: and sometimes it occurs with gas.
And sometimes the feces run into the intestine and are retained there: and it is harmful to the patient: for it causes a bad pain, especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this type of illness with iron there is fear: therefore one must be careful of accidents in it.
And the method of the operation is to instruct the patient to return the intestine with his own hand to the inner cavity, if it obeys the return. Then he should lie on his back between your hands: and raise his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows up to the higher area, and cut all the skin of the testicles along their length. Then insert hooks into the two lips of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with them: and the incision should be of such quantity that it is possible for the egg to come out of it.
Then remove the outer layer of sifak and what is under the skin of the testicles until the white, hard sifak is revealed on all sides: then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, between the white sifak that is under the egg's skin, and between the second sifak, and separate with it the adhesion that is at the back part of the egg.
Then move with the right hand the skin of the testicles towards the inside: and at the same time extend the white saph with the left hand upwards: and lift up the egg with the saph to the cutting part: and command the assistant to extend the egg upwards: and you release the adherence which is behind after complete separation.
And feel with your fingers that there is nothing there of the intestine wrapped in the hard white saph. If you find anything of it: then push it down towards the abdomen.
Then take a needle with thick thread, made of linen from ten threads: and insert it through the last saph, that is, the tunic, which is under the skin of the testicles following the cut: then cut the ends that protrude from the thread until there are four strands. Then arrange some of them over some in the shape of a cross: and tie them with the saph we mentioned, which is under the skin of the testicles with a very strong ligament, until none of the vessels that nourish them can send anything to them: so that a warm aposteme does not result from it. And place another ligature outside the first ligature, less than two fingers away from it. And after these two ligatures, release from the saph which is under the skin of the testicles a quantity equal to the size of a finger: and cut the rest entirely following the round shape, and remove the egg from it.
Then cut in the lower part of the testicles' skin where blood and pus flow, as we have mentioned before.
Then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound: and apply the bandage which we mentioned. And sometimes the white sifach that we mentioned is cauterized after its incision, fearing the flow of blood. For it often happens. And remove the bandage, until it falls off by itself.
If however its falling off is delayed, then it should be soaked with warm water: and place on it what we said, until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with the rest of the treatment for wounds, until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
Regarding the windy arm.
In this windy arm, I have not seen anyone who dared to attempt its treatment with iron.
And the first ones said that it occurs as we have mentioned in the arm that is with the vine. Which is to bind the vessels after cutting and easily apply something over them: then cut in the middle, and finally treat it with what opens it, until the vessels fall off: and treat the wound as we have said, until it heals.
Chapter LXVII.
Regarding the rupture that occurs in the groin.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and the area protrudes, and nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, it is only a little and returns at all times: but if time is prolonged with it, a fissure is added in the sifach, until the intestines descend into the sifach.
And it happens from the stretching of the sifach, which is in the groin, as we said. Which is because the sifach is stretched; then it softens, and the area becomes inflamed and protrudes.
And its treatment is with cautery, as was previously narrated.
And sometimes it is treated with an iron, according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on their back under your hands. Then cut the swollen and protruding area of the rupture with a horizontal cut, according to the width of three fingers.
Then grasp the alsifak and what is beneath the skin until the white sifach is revealed, which is under the skin that follows it.
Then take the probe and place it on the protruding area of the sifach, and press it deeply into the abdomen.
Then sew the two protruding areas on the end of the probe from the sifach together with a suture; then remove the end of the probe.
And do not cut the alsifach at all, nor stretch the egg, nor anything else, as I made you know in the treatment of intestinal ramus.
Then treat it with the treatment for wounds. Therefore, when you cut the threads, clean it and heal the wound until it is healed.
For the sifach contracts, and does not add to the protrusion of the rupture.
And the cautery is better in this place: for it is nearer to safety.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in some men, because of which the flesh between them is also softened, and its appearance is marred.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat it to make the patient lie on his back and cut away all the softened skin down to the natural skin.
Then bring together the two lips with a suture: and if you wish, first remove the excess of the softened skin with three or four stitches, and secure the suture firmly.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then treat it as you would other wounds until it heals, and the threads fall out.
Chapter LXIX.
On Castration.
Know that castration is excommunicated in our law: and because of this, it would be permissible for me not to mention it in my book: and there is no need to mention it, except for two methods.
One of which is that it should be known by the doctor when asked about it: and so that he may know its treatment if it happens to someone.
The other reason is that we often need the castration of certain animals for our benefit through it, such as rams, goats, and cats, and similar animals.
I say therefore, that castration is done in two ways. Or by rubbing. Or by incision and cutting.
In that which is done by rubbing, the way of the operation is: that we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and relax and hang down; then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and do not appear under touch.
In castration by incision and cutting, it is necessary to hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then ligate the suspensorium, and cut above all the egg with one cut, until when two eggs come out: then incise them after you have defleshed each, and do not leave anything on them except a fine suture over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than the one done by rubbing: because rubbing may leave some part of the testicles, whereby the animal lacks desire for copulation.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter LXX.
Regarding the treatment of hermaphrodites in two methods.
Hermaphroditism in males occurs in two ways. One of them is that there appears between the testicles or on the skin of the testicles, in the area between the two testicles, a figure like the vulva of a woman, with hair: and sometimes urine flows from that which is on the skin of the testicles.
In women, however, there is one type, and it is the woman's womb above the comb like the small male testicles, protruding to the outside: of which one is like the male priapus, and two like the two testicles.
And the treatment for the three types, two from men, and one type from women, is: because it is necessary to cut the added flesh until the impression of them disappears. Then treat them with the treatment of other wounds.
In the second type of men, from which urine exits, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment for it at all.
Chapter LXXI.
Regarding the incision of tentigine, and the protruding flesh in women's wounds.
Tentigo perhaps is added above the natural part, until it becomes disfigured and its appearance is ugly: and sometimes it is enlarged in some women so much that it expands like in men, and extends to the act of intercourse.
Therefore, you should hold the excess of the tentigo with your hand or with a hook, and cut it: and do not be hasty in the incision, especially at the root: so that blood flow does not occur.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds until it heals.
The arisen flesh is the flesh that grows in the opening of the womb until it fills it: and it perhaps extends to the outside resembling a tail: and because of this, some first call the ailment tailed. Therefore, we must incise it as we incise a tentigo, and treat it until it heals.
On the treatment of Alratica, which is an unperforated female ulcer.
Chapter LXXII.
Alratica is an unperforated female ulcer, or a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental ulcers arise from a preceding illness: they may form either from added flesh growth, or if fine and thin, or thick: they can occur either in the depth of the matrix, or on its sides, or on its upper part, or lower part: and they prevent intercourse and impregnation, and childbirth, and may also prevent menstruation.
And its diagnosis is made by the observation of the midwife, if evident swelling is nearby.
If it is not apparent, then seek it with your fingers, or with a probe.
If the swelling is from a fine substance and is close to the two lips, then act quickly and rupture it.
And it is done by placing small particles on the two lips.
Then place the index fingers of both your hands simultaneously, and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread apart. Then extend the two lips with force until the fine substance is ruptured and the swelling is opened.
Then take wool, and soak it in oil, and place it on the area: and the woman should come every day, so that the area does not become solidified by something else.
If however the sifach is thick, dense: then it is necessary to cut it with a broad spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
If however the excrescence is from flesh grown, then suspend it with hooks, and cut it: and let there be with you medicines that stop the flow of blood without clotting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and frankincense compounded with egg white.
Then administer a large cannula of lead, so that the wound does not solidify quickly, keep it for several days: and apply lint from dry linen, then treat with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And sometimes other flesh growths originate in the womb: therefore they must be cut according to this method: for it is not a cancerous abscess; no opposition should be made with iron at all for a cancerous abscess that is in the womb.
Chapter LXXIII.
Concerning the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and red Bothor in women's wounds.
Hemorrhoids are the opening of vein orifices, through which a great deal of blood flows continuously.
When therefore hemorrhoids become old, they turn into thelil: and I have already spoken about their types and signs in the division: and here I will say which of them receive healing, and which do not.
I say therefore, that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb, and do not appear to the sense: then there is no treatment for them with iron.
But those which are in the opening of the womb, on which the sense falls, are those that can be treated.
Therefore, it is necessary to put the woman in a cold house. Then extend the athehelil with scissors, or with a coarse cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then powder over them at the flow of blood from one of the powders of lancing without mordancy: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and frankincense, and similar to them.
Then push her feet against the wall for one hour. Then place her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then have her sit in a decoction of sumac, and pomegranate peel, and gallnuts, and similar items.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back.
If therefore the blood is constricted with it, it is good: and if not, make blisters adhere to the back without scarification.
Then take wool, and soak it in the juice of tarathit, or the juice of arnoglossae, or the juice of alaulat branches, that is, agrimony, with Pontic wine, and make it adhere to the site.
When therefore the abscess rests, then treat the place with ointments, until it is healed.
Albart however is similar to the heads of alhass, and it has a rough appearance.
Therefore, you must cut what appears from it, according to what I said in thethil equally: and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
Regarding the perforation of the uterus that occurs in the matrix.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the uterus, such as cancer, and stone abscess, and ulcers, and adubelati, and alekilati, that is, herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and ragadiae, and thelil, and hot abscess.
And I have indeed already spoken of all these diseases and their kinds, and their signs, and their cures in the division: it is necessary that I speak in this treatise of the hot abscess which occurs in the uterus, when it is among those abscesses which collect pus, and you wish to know how its opening is made with an iron.
Therefore, you must consider. Then if the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with its throbbing, and flame, and fever: and you see it redden: if sensation falls upon it, then do not hasten with its perforation: and treat it with what aids maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a seat that has two supports, and let her recline, or lie down on her back, and gather her feet toward the lower part of her belly: and her thighs should be spread apart, and she places her arms under her knees, and bind each with a suitable ligature.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the womb is widened.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument, that you insert with the sound the depth of the woman's womb: so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the womb, and injure the patient.
If the instrument is longer than the depth, then it is necessary to place small objects on the covering of the womb's depth: so that the entire instrument is prevented from entering into the depth of the womb: and it is necessary to place the spiral, which runs in the instrument, from the upper side: and to hold the instrument, and for the assistant to turn the spiral until the depth of the womb is opened.
When therefore the exitura appears and is touched by hand, and it is soft and tender: then it is necessary to cut it at its head with a broad spatula.
When therefore the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary to place on the wound a lint that has been soaked in rose oil: or green oil, which has some astringency: and place the lint, and remove the section from the depth of the womb.
And place externally on the womb, and on the comb clean wool soaked in water, in which sloes have been boiled.
Then it should be treated after two days with an ointment that is suitable for it, until it heals.
And sometimes the womb and the wound are washed by being irrigated with water and honey: then with water in which the root of lily or long aristolochia has been boiled: then return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden inside the womb, then you must abstain from treating it with iron, but rather treat it with what we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXIV.
Teaching on obstetrics, how to treat live embryos that have been expelled in an unnatural form.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know first the natural form of childbirth.
The signs of this are that when you see a woman compressed in the lower parts, and she desires to breathe air, and is relieved by what is on her from the labor, and the exit of the embryo is hastened: then you know that this birth is according to the natural form, and its exit is head first, with the afterbirth following; or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
Therefore, when you see these signs, then it is necessary to compress her belly so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when it descends head first, the afterbirth descends with it, and it is cleansed of those excesses by good cleansing.
Whoever is beyond this birth is unnatural, praiseworthy not.
For sometimes the fetus exits over its feet, and its body comes out before its head, and one of its feet or hand; or its head and hand come out; or it exits as a breech: and it may turn onto its neck, and similar praiseworthy figures.
It is therefore necessary for the obstetrician to be wise and subtle in all these matters and beware of error and deception: and I am showing every figure among them, and how the method in it is, and what it signifies, and stand by it.
When the fetus exits with its head in its natural exit, and it becomes severe for the woman, and the labor becomes difficult for her, and you see that her strength is now weakened: then make her sit on a seat, or let women hold her: and fumigate her vagina with fenugreek decoction, and with moist oils.
Then the midwife should insert a small spatula between her fingers, and tear open the amnion with it, and cut it with her nail until the moisture inside flows out: and press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then the woman must be purged with a mucilage of fenugreek and with sesame oil.
Then command her after the purge to be compressed: and make her sneeze with spices, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour. For the fetus will exit immediately.
If two hands of the fetus come out first, you must gradually and easily return them. If it does not obey at the entrance, then place the woman on a seat and lift her feet upwards: then shake the seat on the ground: and the woman should be held so she does not fall during the shaking.
If therefore the hands do not come out and the fetus dies: then cut them and extract the remainder of the fetus: and tie its hand with a cloth, and extract it evenly: for it will come out.
The exit of the embryo over its feet. When the fetus comes out feet first, then it is necessary to push them upwards: then gradually turn the fetus: then align it.
Then take one of its feet and gradually extend it.
When they come out up to the thighs, then command her to compress and make her sneeze with condiments: for it will come out, if God wills.
And if it does not come out with what we have mentioned, then gradually return the fetus until you place it according to its natural form. For it will then come out with an easy exit.
If it is prevented despite all that we have mentioned: then take some marshmallow mucilage, linseed oil, and dissolved gum: and pound everything well in a mortar: then anoint her womb and the lower part of her abdomen with it. Then make her sit in warm water until she achieves hypochondria.
When therefore you see that her lower parts are heated, then make for her a sieve of myrrh: and place it. When therefore she holds the sieve for one hour, then make her sit on the seat. Then make her sneeze: and hold her mouth and nose: and press the lower part of the abdomen with a gentle pressure. For the fetus will come out immediately.
The exit of the fetus is over the thighs and hands. When it exits in this manner, then she will gradually introduce her hands. Then the woman should lie back on her neck, and let her feet hang down below: and she should be lying on the bed, and fold her hands. Then press on her abdomen gradually. Then remove what is under her feet from the pillows until she is prepared on the lower part. If the fetus does not come out, then take her feet, and move them with a vigorous motion. Then press what is above the hypochondrium gradually until the fetus ascends to the upper parts. Then she should insert her hands and gradually adjust the fetus: and instruct the woman to compress herself until the fetus exits.
The fetus hanging transversely exiting from the hands. He will devise in the reduction of his hand. If he cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed and shake her legs violently.
Then apply the liniment that you have prepared from emollients.
If labor begins for her, then make her sit on a seat. Then attend to the reduction of the hand, and align the fetus according to its natural position: and make the woman sneeze, and command her to compress herself until it exits.
The fetus exiting over its neck, with hands spread out, and its face is toward the back of its mother. The midwife must hold the hand of the fetus, then gradually revolve it and align it with ease.
When it is aligned, then place on its mouth what we have mentioned made from oil and emollients.
Then command her to move gradually. When you have done that, then make her sit on a seat and command her to lean to the right side. Then command her to compress herself and make her sneeze with you preparing.
The prepared fetus is removed onto the side. When it descends to the opening of the matrix in this way with the afterbirth, then tear the afterbirth with your nail until it is emptied of moisture.
If it is suspended over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the navel so that it does not remain and cause death.
Then push the fetus inward until you place it as is proper: and instruct the woman to bear down several times: for it will come out with a slight effort.
The delivery of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born: and sometimes three, and four are born. However, that is unusual, and rarely happens.
Five is beyond nature, and they do not live at all: and a single afterbirth contains them, although they multiply, and are separated by a siphon, distinguishing the tied cord of each of them at the navel.
And sometimes they exit like a single fetus does in a natural, easy delivery: and they exit in an undesirable manner, as we have described.
If some of them are difficult during childbirth and come to what we have mentioned about unnatural positions, then care for them as we have described: and let a skilled midwife be present, who acts with ease and caution, and adapts herself to every position according to the skill that leads to their safety.
A reminder of what is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Sometimes one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and it has already been verified by me that a woman aborted and expelled seven, and another fifteen, all fully formed.
Which was done by the measurement of the glorious wise man.
Therefore, all of this must be known by the obstetrician. For perhaps it may come to her like that case; therefore, she should apply what is appropriate to it.
Chapter LXXVI.
Regarding the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with what I have said in the division on medication, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use manual operation, then you must take care.
If therefore the woman is of sound health, and is not affected by any accidents from which danger to her is feared: then it is necessary that the woman lie on her back on a bed, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised: and an attendant should hold her on both sides, or she should be tied to the bed, so that her body is not pulled out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the womb with moist oils and with the mucilage of althea, fenugreek, and flaxseed.
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and jellies; then she should insert it into the womb with ease. Then she should seek with it the place where she can fix the hooks to the fetus and suitable places for that.
Consider then if the fetus is prepared to descend head first: then fix the hooks in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its chin, or in its clavicle, or in places close to the ribs, and under the hypochondria.
If, however, the descent is feet first, then in its pubic region and in its middle ribs.
And it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand: and place its curvature between the fingers of her left hand: and insert it with ease, and fix the hook in one of those places we mentioned, until she reaches the empty space.
Then she should fix another hook opposite it, or a third if needed: so that the contraction is equal, and does not lean to one side.
Then it should be extended with equal extension, and the extension should not be only straight, but moved in all directions to ease its exit: as is done with a tooth during its extraction.
And it is necessary that between those parts, the extension be softened. If a part is retained, then the midwife should anoint some fingers with oil and insert them from one side to turn back what is retained.
If therefore a part of the fetus comes out, then change the hooks to a higher place: do this until the entire fetus comes out.
If therefore the hand comes out first and it is not possible to reduce it due to its constriction: then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped over it. Then extract it until it comes out entirely, cut it either at the ankle joint or at the elbow: and so you must do for the other hand, and for both feet.
If however the fetus's head is large, or it encounters constriction upon exit, or there is water gathered in its head: then it is necessary to insert a spathile with spikes between the fingers, and split the head with it, and extract the water: or break it with an instrument called Almisdac: whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
Similarly do if the fetus is of a large head nature, then it is necessary to cut with an algengematu: or extract it with a misdach, as we have said. Then attract the bones with forceps.
If the head comes out and is constricted at the fork: then it should be split until the moisture in the chest is released.
If however it does not untangle and does not obey the exit: then cut the head piece by piece, according to what is possible for you.
If the lower part of the belly is abscessed, or there is dropsy in it: then it is necessary to pierce it until the moisture runs out.
If however the fetus is on its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its direction to the maternal orifice is light.
If however it is constricted at the abdomen or chest, then you must extract it with a cloth which you have wrapped over your hand, and cut open the abdomen or chest until what is inside comes out.
If however the other limbs are removed and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If therefore the maternal orifice is open, then she should insert her hand deeply into the womb and seek with it the head, and pull it with her fingers up to the maternal orifice: then insert one hook or two hooks into it, and pull it with them.
If the maternal orifice is constricted due to a warm swelling that has occurred in it, then one should not labor over it; rather, at that time, one should apply liquid and fatty substances, and administer plasters: and sit in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it is possible for it to be aligned: then what we have said for a living fetus should be administered.
If it is not possible to do that, then it should be cut piece by piece and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave anything of the afterbirth inside at all.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said for warm swellings that occur in the wombs.
If there is a flow of blood, then bathe in astringent waters and administer the rest of the treatment.
And indeed I have seen a woman whose womb contained a dead fetus; then she conceived another one over it, and later another fetus also died. It happened to her after a long time that an abscess formed on her navel, and it swelled until it opened, and began to discharge pus.
I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time: and the wound did not heal.
I therefore applied to it some strongly attractive plasters: and the bone came out from the site. Then after a few days, another bone came out. I was therefore amazed by this, since there is no bone in the belly.
I then thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
I therefore examined the wound and extracted many bones, with the woman being in better condition: and she has lived thus for a long time, and now discharges only a little pus from the site.
And I did not include this foreign matter here unless there is knowledge in it, and assistance for what the skilled physician administers with his hand in treatment.
Chapter LXXVII.
Regarding the forms of necessary instruments for the extraction of a fetus.
The form of the end by which the matrix is opened.
Here is the form of the book binder, with which books are bound, having two equal ends at the extremities of two pieces of wood. However, this end should be finer than the binder: and it is made either from ebony or from boxwood.
And the width of the entire wood should be about two fingers: and the edge of each of both is about one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half: and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two additional pieces of the same kind of wood, which are already fixed in both, whose length is half a palm and a little more: and the width of each is about two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additional pieces are inserted into the mouth of the matrix, so that it opens with them when you turn the two ends.
Another form similar to that one, finer and lighter.
It should be made from ebony wood or boxwood, in the shape of tongs. However, at the end of it there should be two additional pieces, as you see here above: and the length of each entire additional piece is about a palm: and the width of each is two fingers.
When you wish to open the matrix with it, then have the woman sit on the bed with her feet hanging down and what is between her legs open. Then insert those two connected additional pieces into the matrix: and you hold the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with scissors, equally according to the amount you wish from the opening of the mother's mouth, until the midwife does what she wants.
The other form of vertigo, which the ancients called the form of the driver, by which the fetus is driven.
The form of Almisdac, by which the large head is crushed: and it is compared to a forceps, which has teeth at the end, as you see.
And sometimes it is made elongated, like forceps according to this form, as you see, which has teeth like a saw's teeth, by which it cuts and crushes.
The form of the hook having one spine.
The form of the hook having two spines.
The form of the spatula having two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two broad spatulas.
All these instruments are used, and the more their kinds are multiplied, and prepared by the craftsman, the faster they are for their operation, and more esteemed among people because of their quantity.
Therefore, do not disdain any of them so that it may be prepared for you. For their necessity is inexcusable.
Chapter LXXVIII.
On the extraction of the afterbirth.
When the afterbirth is retained at birth, then you must instruct the patient to hold her breath. Then make her sneeze with condisi: and place your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If it exits through this method, it is good.
If not: then take a pot and pierce a hole in the cover. Place herbs that open the womb in it, such as reed, rue, dill, chamomile, fennel, lignum aloes, and centaury. Take all these herbs or some of them, submerge them with water, and place them on fire.
Then place a reed tube over the hole in the pot's cover, and put the other end into the womb opening: and hold it until the vapor reaches the cavity of the womb.
Then make her sneeze, as we said. For the afterbirth will exit with ease.
If it remains after this treatment and does not exit: then instruct the midwife to dip her hand in sesame oil or coltsfoot mucilage. Then insert it into the womb and search for the afterbirth with it. When therefore he finds it, then let him take it and stretch it gradually.
If however it is attached deep in the womb, then let him insert his hand as we have described, until he finds the Secundina, and extract it gradually straight, so that the womb does not fall due to strong pulling: rather it must be changed with ease to the right and left sides; then add to the amount of pulling. For it obeys then, and is preserved, and escapes from adhering.
If the mouth of the womb is constricted, as we have already mentioned: treat it with sneezing and with a medicine pot with herbs.
If however it does not come out with all that we have mentioned, then beware lest you tire yourself in repeating the extraction.
But it is necessary that what comes out to the mouth of the womb from it, you tie to the woman's thigh. Then cleanse her with an ointment of tetrapharmacum. For it will
However when it putrefies, a bad smell rises to the stomach and head, and it harms the weak one. Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be administered for that.
Some of the ancients have already experienced the fumigation of mustard and dried figs.
The form of the instrument used for fumigating a woman during the retention of afterbirth and menses.
Let it be made from a container similar to alcama, or from horn: and let the wider end be placed over fire: and the fumigation should be positioned over coals: hold it until that fumigation is consumed: and repeat with another.
Chapter LXXIX.
Regarding the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many children are born with their anus not perforated, which has already been covered by a thin membrane. Therefore, the midwife should pierce it with her finger: and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula: and she should be careful of the muscle, so as not to touch it.
Then place wool soaked in wine and oil on it. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If you fear it may close up, then place a lead tube in the opening for many days, and remove it when the child needs to defecate.
And it also happens that the anus becomes obstructed due to the healing of a wound or an abscess. Therefore, that consolidation must be cut, then it should be treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
Chapter LXXX.
On the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are Nodulation and Swelling that happen near the anus externally: or in the space of one region: and it is one Fistula or multiple.
When that nodulation becomes old, it opens, and a watery white moisture or fine pus runs from it.
And sometimes these fistulas are penetrating. Therefore, penetrating fistulas are recognized by what exits with discharge and flatulence when the patient has a bowel movement: and perhaps worms may exit from them.
And there are fistulas among them when they are in the space penetrating all the way to the bladder and to the urethra. And there are those that penetrate all the way to the hip joint and to the coccyx.
From which it is known that a penetrating fistula extends to the anus, as opposed to a non-penetrating one, is by inserting your index finger into the anus and inserting a thin probe made of air or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
If there is a twist in it, then insert into it a thin lead probe or a hair from horse's tail until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
If you do not feel it thoroughly, and nothing comes out of the opening from discharge, nor gas, nor worm as I said: then know that it is not penetrable: therefore hurry to the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates to the bladder or to the urethra: then its indication is the discharge of urine from it, and the prevention of consolidation of the area with medicines.
If it penetrates to the hip joint or to the hip bone: then its sign is that the probe reaches there, if there is no twist until the bone: and the discovery of pain around the part, and that pus comes out of it always: and that treatment is not effective, nor does it consolidate with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all: and the treatment of them is labor and vanity for him, by foolish doctors, upon whom it is formed.
In that which is not penetrable and not old, healing is hoped for with a scalpel: according to what I narrate to you, and I have already tested: and it is that the patient lies in your hands on his back: and raise his legs up above his hips, and his hips are inclined towards his abdomen. Then insert a probe of lead or brass, if there is a twist in the fistula, until you know where the probe reaches.
And if the patient feels it around the anus, then you must insert your index finger into the anus.
If you feel that the worm has already penetrated on its own through the detected area, besides what you feel between your finger and the surface or the flesh itself, then you can be sure that it is penetrating. Therefore, do not labor over it, for there is no cure for it, as we have said.
They said, however, that the flesh is healed in some men and through the treatment in which help is hoped for, it is to ignite a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before, and insert the ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches near the anus. Then do this twice or three times until you know that all those added filtered flesh, which resembles the tube of a bird's feather, have been burned.
Then treat it with linen wrapped in butter until the burned flesh comes out; then treat it with ointments that generate flesh and strengthen.
If it is healed, it is good.
And if not, then it will never be healed with any other treatment.
And if the worm comes out and does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and there is a thick veil of flesh or membrane between it and the worm: and you see the fistula following the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you go cutting with the worm that is in the fistula until the incision reaches where the end of the worm is, and the worm is freed and falls out.
Then clean those filtered meats which resemble a bird's feather tube so that nothing remains from them.
If however the blood overcomes you and separates you from your operation so that you cut those meats: then it is better and quicker to heal by cauterizing it with fire or with sharp medicine.
For the cautery with fire brings good effects, the burning of those added meats, and the cutting off of blood, and the drying of moistures.
Then treat it with linen wrapped in butter, or crushed fat, until the place emits pus, and those burned meats come out in pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments, which generate hard flesh: and there are medicines that have astringency and drying properties.
For when they are restored, then it is already healed: and you do not fear repetition.
If however the fistula has already reached deep into the anus, and extends from the excess of the body: then insert your finger into the anus, and explore with it.
If therefore you feel a tent, and between you and it there is a veil of sinew or flesh, and it is close to penetration: then there is no operation in that place unless according to the way of confidence and hope.
Which means that one of the three methods is applied to it: either you cauterize it as we have said: or you cut it until you reach its concavity, so that it is possible for you to insert a thread and perform treatment nearby. And do not proceed much with the cutting, so as not to cut the tendon containing the anus, and involuntary discharge may occur in the patient. Then treat it with what we have said.
For it may be healed: or you may retract the membrane itself, and clean it after you cut it up to near the anus, as we have said, using a probe or another instrument with a sharp end. Then clean the filtered flesh that is in the incision as far as you can with examination.
Then attempt the restoration of the entire wound with the incision, and the upper opening where it is consolidated: and the fistula remains open on the inner part of the anus, and it will be milder for the patient.
And sometimes the fistula is sewn in this manner: it is when you insert a probe into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with the skin and the edge of the anus: then take a probe with a perforated end, which is like a leather worker's needle, that is, of those who prepare hides, in this form. And insert into it a thread made from five threads wound together, and around it. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
If it penetrates into the inner edge of the anus nearby, then withdraw the thread from that opening: so that you insert your finger into the anus and pull out the end of the thread, and bring both ends together: and hold both tightly, and leave it for one day or two days: and the more the thread cuts into the flesh, hold it firmly until the flesh between the two ends of the thread is cut and falls off: then treat the wound until it heals and consolidates.
If however the opening of the fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate by whichever method is prepared for you, unless it is very deep. For it is not within you to do that because of the flap, so as not to cut it.
Then do with it as we have said, until it heals.
The form of the spatumilis spinosi with which the fistula is split, whose curvature is very sharp, and the other part is not sharp, so as not to cut what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter LXXXI.
About the suturing of hemorrhoids, from which blood runs from their incision: and the treatment of fissures.
There are hemorrhoids according to two ways. For either they are inside the anus, similar to coal sacs or ember sacs: or they are like grains of a grape. And among them there are small ones and large ones: and blood runs from them always, and there is one, and there are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those which are outside the anus, are mostly lacking in moisture, from which yellow water or a little blood runs continuously: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is inside the anus is to advise the patient to sit: and to be expressed until the anus protrudes, and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Therefore hang with hooks: or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
If however the hooks do not hold in them because of their moisture and softness: then take them with a coarse cloth, or with woolen mittens made of felted wool, and extract them with your fingers. Then cut them, and sprinkle on them after the cutting certain hot powders, so that they may serve as a substitute for cauterization. Or cauterize them according to what was precedented in the chapter on cauterizing. Then care for them with the rest of the treatment until they heal.
If the anus does not obey the call to evacuate, then give the patient an enema that contains a slight irritant, so that it cleanses what is inside the anus and obeys the call to evacuate quickly when the patient exerts himself.
If however the growths are external to the anus, then their treatment is easy and simple: it is as you take them with your nail, or you take them with a hook, and cut them. Then care for them with what we have said until they heal.
And for those who shrink from cutting with iron, then it is necessary to administer their stitching according to this method. Take the wrapped thread and insert it into the needle. Then pull the growth upward, and make it penetrate with the needle at its root from the other side: and wrap both ends of the thread around the lower part of the needle, and let them be horizontal: and bind the growth with a strong tie. Then tie the thread, and draw out the needle.
Do this with all the athelil, and leave one of them untouched: do not sew it up, so that the excess blood may flow out from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote over the anus, and put it on the anus: and instruct the patient to rest. Then leave it until it falls off.
When the athelil fall off, care for them with ointments and the rest of the treatment until they heal.
On the Treatment of Fissures. For they often occur from the dryness of the stool and the constriction of the bowels.
When they become old and medicine does not heal them, then it is necessary to scrape them with the point of a spatula or with your nail until they become moist, and remove the outer layer that prevents their healing. Then care for them until they heal as necessary.
If they do not heal, then scrape them more forcefully than before until they bleed significantly, and remove the outer layer; then care for them until they heal.
On the Treatment of Inverted and Non-inverted Almirmar, and Dry Athelil, and Ants.
Chapter LXXXII.
You know that Almirmar is nothing but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a nail: and it occurs throughout the whole body, especially in the lower parts of the feet, and the digits: and pain occurs from them during walking.
Therefore, what is around the nail should be cut, and it should be held with scissors, or with a hook, and pulled out from its root.
Then care for it: and if you wish, cauterize it according to what was precedented in its chapter.
From dry athelil, however, there is a small prominence, rough, filtered, round on the surface of the body. And they often occur in the hands of children.
And the treatment of it is to stretch the athelil, and cut it: or bind it with silk thread: or with hair, until it falls out. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what was mentioned with fire, or with sharp medicine: and now the athelil are extracted, both inverted and not inverted, with an instrument that I shall describe.
Formica is also a small, filtered, thick prominence on the surface of the body, going very deep: and when cold encounters it, it feels like an ant bite, and it occurs throughout the whole body: and most often it appears on the hands.
And the treatment of it is to take a tube from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather: and place that tube over the Formica, until the circle of the tube contains parts of it. Then turn your hand with the cannula until you cut what is around the Ant: and place it in the depth of the flesh, and root out the Ant from its root.
And if you wish, do it with a cannula of brass or iron, according to this form.
Let the upper part of the cannula be drawn out to a hollow point, so that the grasp upon the finger and its turning may be easier.
And if you wish to cauterize the Ant, do it according to what has been mentioned regarding the cauterization of Athelil in the chapter on the cautery.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Concerning the forms of instruments used for enemas in illnesses of the anus, and for relieving the bowels, and colic.
Sometimes an enema is made of silver, or brass, or cast metal, or hammered metal.
And sometimes these instruments are made small and large according to their use.
Therefore, that which is used in the treatment of small children should be small: and for those whose anuses are weak or painful, their enemas should be so as well.
Large enema.
Its tube, that is, the upper head where the bag is tied, should be wide according to this manner: and it should have a separation so that the bag can be tied as you see, and its lower end which is inserted into the anus should be closed, that is, not open, very soft, drawing to fineness: and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And let the width of the hole be according to the thickness of the rays, and a little thicker, and let there be a container in which medicines are placed from an animal's bladder: or from sheep's parchment, which should be in the form of a small asofrati: whose root is one palm.
And let it be pierced with many holes as it revolves, and let the space which is between each hole be the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes strong thread made of raw fiber, which should be from ten threads, or around that number, and attach it to the container like a small asofrati. When the container is placed in it, it should be tied tightly at the head of the enema between two distinguishing constrictions. Then administer the enema with it.
And this is the form of the circle and the holes of the container depicted here.
The quality of administering the enema with it is: to fill the container or bladder with medicine that is warmed according to the quantity tolerable by the patient: and be careful that it is not too hot or too cold.
Then the patient should lie on their back, and raise their legs upwards: and place under them a mattress, that is, skin or cloth on which people lie, or a linen sheet.
Then anoint the end of the enema with oil, or with sheep's fat, or with fenugreek mucilage, or similar substances. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then let the assistant take the bag with both his hands at once, and squeeze it vigorously until he empties everything that is in the clyster into the intestine.
Then remove the clyster, and let the patient raise his legs to the wall.
If the medicine forces it to exit, then he should hold as much as he can. And if he sleeps with it all night, it is more ultimate in healing.
If you give him a clyster for diarrhea-related illnesses and its discharge is rapid: then repeat the clyster until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then let the clyster be very fine and mild, such as those with which children are given clysters.
And this should be the form of a fine clyster for which the skin is tight.
Chapter LXXXIV.
I have already said in the division about the treatment of wounds what was appropriate for the book, and I will now speak here about their treatment with manual methods and with medicines according to completeness.
I say therefore that wounds differ according to the instrument by which they are inflicted, and according to the place on which the wound falls.
The things by which wounds are inflicted are often, for example, the throwing of a stone, or the cutting of a sword or dagger, or the striking with a lance, wood, or arrow, and similar things from many other objects.
Wounds however that are made according to the places of the body are, such as a wound that falls upon the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or spleen: and similar from those members.
And I am narrating the treatments of some wounds, so that I may set down that reasoning and rule for other wounds.
And I will begin with simple wounds of the head: because the discussion of compound wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
I therefore say. When a simple wound occurs on the head, and there is no fracture of the bone: then consider if it is from the And let the bloodletting be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the bloodletting be from the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the patient beware of excess, and wine, and heavy foods.
If however something prohibits bloodletting, then let it be reduced by food, and do not approach meats, nor wines.
And place on the wound, if a hot abscess occurs, a cloth soaked in rose oil alone, or with wine that has astringent properties.
If however you are safe from a warm abscess then place upon the wound if it is new with its own blood and has not changed it by air the powder which I will tell about shortly and if it has already changed by air then place upon it some ointments until it heals.
If however the wound is large or is from a sword cut and similar: and its lips do not come together with small pins then bring them together with stitches according to what I will tell about in wounds of the belly concerning their stitching.
If however the wound is already separated from the bone and hangs and there is no retention of it except with a small suspension then cut it. Then treat the wound with medicines and restore hard flesh in place of skin and instruct the patient to nourish themselves with foods that are thick such as heads and cooked wheat until it is like porridge and things similar to these.
If you find putrefaction in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut out all the putrefied part and discard it: then treat it.
If however in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows: and it is not stopped by medicines, then apply something over the artery. If therefore you find it uncut, then cut it with a scalpel, or tie it off. If necessity requires it and what we have said does not work, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped.
If however these wounds are small, simple, then their matter is easy, light: so that you powder on them this powder: because it strengthens them before the air changes them.
Method of the flesh-forming powder. Take one part of frankincense, and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of non-extinguished lime: grind all thoroughly, and sieve it: and fill the wound with it, and bind it tightly, until it adheres well to it, and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it above with bandages, and leave it, and do not loosen it as long as it remains, so that it does not become inflamed. For the medicine should not be removed until it is healed.
And sometimes lime alone does this, when you do not have frankincense present, and dragon's blood also performs the same operation on many large wounds, when it is appropriate to place it on them and bind them, and the wounds are fresh with their own blood, which has not been altered by the air.
If the air has already altered them in some way, especially when it is during the summer season, then this powder's purpose is not applicable: therefore, care for it with what we have said, so that you place some digestive ointments on them: or place upon them poultices made from barley flour, made with water and honey, until they discharge pus. Then care for it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
If however a fracture in the bone occurs with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with plasters: and I will now speak of the treatment of head fractures in what is to come.
Of wounds to the neck.
If a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a head wound when it is simple.
If however the nerve of the neck is already cut, or an artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no remedy for it except to treat it with things that cause strong styptic effect, such as ziniar, and zegi, and similar substances. For they harm the nerves and contract them.
And you shall not apply anything cold at all on the wound: for the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is higher than other members: and let that with which it is cured be mild from medicines, such as lime washed several times with sweet water and mixed with oil, or with rose oil, and tutia, when it is also washed with sweet water: and other mineral stones in this manner, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, then administer sutures: or bind its edges with linen bands. Then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has depth, or a sinus has formed in its lower part where pus has already collected, then pierce it at the most depressed place in it.
If an artery has already been cut in the wound and its flow of blood has begun: then separate or cut it, and ligate it: or cauterize it, if necessity requires it.
If however the thyroid cartilage has already been cut, either entirely, and the vocal cords are saved: then approximate the skin edges with sutures over the windpipe, and do not touch the trachea, rather level it off, and return it to its natural shape. Then bind it with a suitable bandage, and leave it for several days. Then treat it with ointments that have astringent and drying properties until it heals.
If however the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then probe it: then if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all of them, or as many as you can: and what does not prepare, leave it until the wound putrefies, and separates and its discharge is alleviated.
If the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on it the powder I have mentioned. If however bone appears in the wound and a fistula forms: then treat it with what is mentioned in its respective chapter.
Regarding wounds on spatulas.
If there is a piercing from a lance or a knife: and you see its depth, then assess. If wind or air escapes from the wound when the patient breathes heavily from it, then you know that the wound is mortal.
If it is not deep and is fresh with its blood: then do not apply powder to it from the first hour, nor bind it, so that blood does not remain in its depth and return to the heart, killing the patient: but apply a drawing ointment to it, and undo it twice a day.
If however the ointment is not present for you, then place on the wound opening an old cot, so that it may draw out what exits from its moisture: and make it so that the sick person sleeps upon the wound, so that what gathers in it may run.
If however more than three days have passed since the wound, or even more, and spasms do not occur to the sick person, nor bad palpitations of the heart, nor difficulty in breathing, and you see other conditions of theirs good: then you know that the wound is healing. Treat it therefore with licinius and the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
If however the healing of it is delayed, and it is now always open, then you know that it has become a fistula. Treat it therefore according to its chapter.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat it with what precedes from suturing, if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
If however it has already made an impression on the bone, and fragments have come from it: then examine the wound, and hurry to remove those fragments, if they are separated. If however they are not separated, then leave them until the wound becomes putrid, for their extraction is eased.
The judgment in the treatment of other wounds occurring in other limbs is the same as what we have said.
Of wounds of the belly, and the protrusion of the intestines, and their treatment.
A rupture that occurs in the belly is major, medium, and minor.
From the major rupture, sometimes an intestine or a number of intestines protrude.
Therefore, their insertion and their suture is more forceful and difficult.
And the minor rupture also becomes difficult in another way. It follows, therefore, that their reduction is more difficult if you do not promptly return them to their place immediately: because they swell, open up, and become thickened: hence their insertion becomes difficult.
Therefore, the medium rupture is better: because with it, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike in those two types.
Know that the suture of the belly is according to four methods.
Two common sutures are used for the suture of the belly and for the suture of other wounds of the body: and two other sutures are specifically used for the other wounds. However, they are more specific to the suture of the belly: and I will tell you each one with explanation and clarification.
I say, therefore, that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine protrudes from it, and it becomes difficult to reduce it: then this is because of one of two methods. Or because of the smallness of the rupture, as we said: Or because there is swelling in the intestine due to cold air.
When therefore it is thus, then you must heat it, so that you submerge a sponge or a wet cloth in warm water alone. Or boil in water squills, and cyperus, and spike, and apply the mixture to the intestine until the swelling dissolves.
Sometimes it does that with wine which has astringency: and it is better than water alone for dissolving the swelling.
When therefore you see the swelling already dissolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which alum or mallows have been boiled. For by this its entrance is widened with a small object.
If however the return of it occurs after this treatment, then find and remove a little at the site of the rupture, with the instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when prepared than surgery: and there should be no coercion to cut after necessity and lack of instruments.
Let one part of it be twisted, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the extremity should not be as fine as that of a spatula, but rather slightly blunt: and it is that which resembles a probe, as you see.
When therefore the wound enlarges and enters the intestine, then it is necessary to reduce it to its natural form in its proper place if possible: for that is better.
When indeed there is a large rupture in the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly if there is a rupture in one of the two parts of the belly, then direct your attention and your consideration always to this, that the part in which the wound is should be higher than the other part.
And thus it is necessary that you administer this in large wounds and in medium wounds.
In small wounds, place it according to how it is prepared for you.
Then make sure that a faithful servant is present at your hands, who holds the entire rupture with his hand: and bring together its lips. Then reveal to the one who follows the suture bit by bit: and this is the method of a common suture.
And it is that you take a needle, or a number of needles according to the quantity of the wound's width. Then leave a distance of one finger's width from the end of the rupture, that is, the doctor's: and insert one needle along with threading it with a string at both ends of the skin, piercing through to the underlying layers with both ends until it penetrates from the other side, and you have now brought together both ends of the skin and both ends of the underlying tissue: and four rows are formed.
Then tie with a double thread around the wound several times from both sides at once until the two lips of the wound are joined by a suitable approximation.
Then measure the thickness of the finger as well, and insert another needle; then sew it with thread, just as you did with the first needle. Therefore, do not stop doing this with the needles you need until you complete the constriction of the entire wound.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between thick and thin: because very thin needles quickly penetrate the flesh: and thick ones have difficult entry into the skin: for this reason they ought to be of medium thickness.
And it should not be that the needle is fixed at both ends of the skin that are very close: so that the flesh is not cut quickly, and the wound is opened before its consolidation, and they are not stretched even with the suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
Then cut the tips of the needles so they do not harm the patient during their sleep: and place small pieces of cloth from clothes on all sides that hold the tips of the needles: and leave them until you know that the wound is now consolidated.
And this kind of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds. Because one needle, or two, or about that number is sufficient for their suture.
The second common suture is to join with the suture the four ends: two of the skin and two of the sifac together, with a needle on which is wound thread equal in thinness and thickness.
Then when you have penetrated with the needle these four ends, withdraw the needle from the side from which you started in the same way, so that the woven thread falls from the upper part of the wound: so it is a suture, just like the suture of cloth by which cloths are joined, and place between each suture the thickness of a little finger.
But men know this suture.
And with this suture I sewed the wound that had occurred to a man in his abdomen, who had been wounded with a dagger, and the tear of the wound was more than one palm: and about two palms had come out from the middle intestine, and there was a tear in the middle of the abdomen.
I therefore replaced it after his intestine had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound healed in about fifteen days: and I cared for him, and he was healed: and he lived many years after that, continuing in his usual activities.
And the doctors had judged that he would not be healed.
And it was a miracle that I did not cure it with an ointment. For I was in a place where no ointment could be found, nor any of the medicines. I therefore placed an old cottoneous cloth on the wound twice a day, and continuously cleansed it with honey water until it was healed.
But I shall call two kinds of sutures proper according to the
And it is that you begin with a sharp suture: and insert the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When therefore the needle penetrates the skin, and goes into the flesh according to the length and breadth of the whole body: leave the end that you inserted the needle on one side, and make it penetrate to the other end from the inner part to the outer part at the other end.
When therefore you make it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this at the same end from the outer part to the inner: and leave the end that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate to the other end from the inner part to the outer part: and make it penetrate with your penetration as you make it penetrate in the end of the side, which is in its part, until it penetrates the whole.
Then begin again from this same side, and sew it with the end that is from the side on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the skin which it penetrated.
Then bring it back into that skin, and sew the end of the side that is on the other side with this end: and withdraw it from the skin which is on its part, and do this alternately, one after another: and do this turn by turn until you sew the entire outer part according to this example.
And the essence of this suturing is to sew the skin with a pellipariorum suture: so that you sew one side of the skin end alternately: and leave the other side alternately until you complete it.
The second type of specific suture, which Gale nus mentioned.
This his speech has been narrated, that he cuts it according to the similarity, by which some of the physicians do it, so that they join every part to its corresponding comparable part by nature: and they apply the end of the sifac to its other end, and the end of the mirach to its other end. And this is done according to what I tell you.
You must fix the needle in the end of the mirach nearest to you from the outer side, and make it penetrate to the inner side at that spot: and leave the two ends of the sifac. Then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outer side to the inner side at both ends of the sifac, that is, on both sides.
Then turn both, also make both penetrate from the inner to the outer side at the two ends of the mirach which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is better than the common easy suturing, and it is a suturing that has been previously mentioned.
This is therefore the teaching of Galen as well.
And certain people said. The abdominal suture is corrected with two needles. This is to insert one thread into both of them: and begin with the insertion of the needle, from the part that is nearest to you, and make it penetrate all the way to the other side, according to the suturing of those who sew skins equally.
And know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the abdomen: then its suture is more difficult than that of the other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the treatment of a wound is the judgment of the other wounds.
Which is because when you encounter a fresh wound with its blood before the air alters it: and you reduce the intestine, and you place it back in its own place, and you adjust it: then apply the powder of carnification on it.
Which if the air has already altered the wound: then apply some ointments that are available to you until they produce pus: and let the threads fall out, and the tissue consolidate and heal. Then care for it as you would the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
If the medicines are not available to you, then apply old dung on it immediately when it starts to emit pus: and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it is healed.
For you do not need other treatment in most cases when wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound communicates with the principal members in the injury, then it is necessary to soak a soft wool in oil of moderate heat, or in rose oil: and place it around the areas between the groin, and under the armpits.
If it feels pain, or pricking, or putrefaction in its intestines (for this often happens), then administer an enema with astringent, black, warm wine: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and has caused a discharge penetrating to its cavity.
And you shall know that which is from the large intestine is of easier healing: and that which is from the small intestine is of harder healing.
And the intestine which is called the jejunum does not accept healing from a wound that happens in it at all: and this is because of the multitude of its veins, and the size of them, and because of the subtlety of its body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
If what proceeds from the wound is the cecum, and you encounter it fresh: reduce it according to your method of reduction, by which you equally reduce intestines.
If however time has passed, and it has already become green or black: then it is necessary to tie it with a thread above the place which has turned black from it, so that blood flow does not occur. For in the cecum there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that the pulling of it is eased for you, and its extraction in the case of the cecum, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
Reminder of the wound that occurs in the intestine.
When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small: then it is possible for it to be restored in some people: therefore, because I have seen one who was wounded in his abdomen with a lance strike, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old: and a fistula formed, and excretions and flatulence came out from it.
I therefore applied treatment until I was not confident in his healing: nor did I cease to refine it until he was healed, and the place was strengthened.
After I saw the place already strengthened, I was afraid for the patient, that a harmful accident might occur in his stomach: and that harmful accident did not happen to him. And he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking, and having intercourse, and he entered the bath, and exercised in his diets.
And some of the experiencers have already said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it must be tied according to this method. And it is that you take ants with large heads. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, and place one of the ants that have an open mouth over the two lips of the wound. When it bites on them and closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and does not loosen.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease to do this with each ant after the other according to the size of the entire wound.
Then reduce it, and sew the wound. For those heads remain attached to the intestine until the intestine is fed and healed, and no harm occurs to the patient thoroughly.
And it is now possible to suture the intestine even with a fine thread: which is taken from the intestine of an animal, attached to it after being inserted into a needle.
And it is that you take the end of this thread from the intestine, and it should be cleaned a lot. Then tie a fine linen thread wound around its end. Then insert that thread into the needle, and sew with it the intestine. Then replace it in the incision.
And this method of suturing with ants and intestine is not unless according to the way of confidence and hope.
Know, a wound that is large, wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines: then there is no remedy except for thinning, nor is its healing at all.
Regarding the treatment of Zenichen and fistulas.
Know, that any wound or abscess when it becomes old and antiquated, and turns into an ulcer, and does not consolidate, and always emits pus, and does not heal: then it is generally called a fistula wherever it may be in the body, and we name it Zuchemen.
And the fistula indeed is according to truth a filtered knot, hard, white: with which there is no pain, and it has the concavity of a bird's feather: and because of this some name it Risati, that is, feather.
And at certain times it is moist, emitting pus. And perhaps the moisture splits at certain times. And sometimes this moisture is much, and it is little: and it is thick, and it is thin.
And I have already premised in the division, then when I said wounds, that any ulcer which does not heal, nor flesh is born in it, is not so except for one of nine causes.
One of which is either due to the lack of blood in the body: or due to its malignancy: or because there is hard flesh between it and its lips, preventing the birth of flesh: or because it is full of filth and dirtiness: or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter discharged by it is of bad quality: or because the medicine used for its cure is inappropriate: or because the corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence, or due to the nature of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta: where the digestion of illnesses is difficult, and the healing of abscesses is delayed by nature: or because there is one bone or a number of bones in it.
And I have already shown all these causes and their signs, and their cures with medicines in the division: and it is necessary here that I make you know the cure of Fistula and Zen, which is done by way of operation with the hand.
Know therefore, that Fistula occurs in all parts of the body. For from these are the Fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or liver: or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs: or to any of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the composite joints: such as the hand, and foot: and from these are those that go to the proximity of the main member, and similars.
Which therefore of these Fistulas is according to this method, is among diseases difficult to heal, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
If there is any Fistula whose depth does not reach the places I mentioned: and you hope, and trust in its cure, and wish to understand it, then take a probe of metal or iron, if the Fistula extends straight, and explore it with it.
If there is tortuosity in the Fistula, then investigate it with a fine lead probe. Because lead, with the softness of its body, is lightened and curved around the tortuosity.
If the Fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate on it with a probe. Therefore, irrigate one of its openings from its openings.
For the moisture with which you irrigate it goes towards the other openings and runs out from them.
Then carefully inquire according to the way that is possible for you: to know whether there is a bone or nerve, and whether the Fistula's depth is far or near: or whether it is one Fistula with many openings, and examine all of it with your utmost strength: with your questioning of the patient, and by finding pain upon pressing with your hand on the area, and similar indications and causes resulting in abscess.
Therefore, when you have stood on all those true examinations, then proceed to the cure with confidence: and it is, that you should consider then if the Fistula is near and apparent, or in a safe place far from the joint, or from the nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places I mentioned to you: then cut the Fistula according to what has been previously stated in my narration, and remove what is in it from filtration, and corrupted flesh, which grows at its opening from the flesh, or gland, and similar things: and cure it until it heals.
If however the fistula is of great depth, and is straight: then it is necessary to cut it deeply as much as possible for you. Then clean it from all its corrupted flesh.
Then apply licinia wrapped in sharp medicines: and insert it until the depth of the fistula which you identified with the iron: do this several times with it, until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the depth of the fistula from the corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If however it does not heal by this method, then cauterize it as we have described.
If therefore the cause of the fistula is a bone, and it is confirmed to you: then investigate it, and cut it as I have told you: unless something prohibits you from doing so by a vein, or nerve, or principal member, as we have said.
If therefore the bone is revealed to you, and there is something of corruption and blackness in it: then scrape it until all its corruption is removed. Then treat it with what causes it to flesh over, until it is healed.
If it does not heal, and discharges pus as it did before: then you know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption.
Reveal it again, and thoroughly examine it, and clean it with all your strength.
Then restore it. If it is healed, that is good: and if not, then you know that that corruption is in a deep part of the body, which you have not reached. Therefore, you have no ingenuity in it, unless to leave it to nature.
If a small bone is corrupted and it is possible for you, draw it out with fine forceps that are suitable for it.
If there are many bones, then carefully make the extraction of all of them, and do not leave anything of them with your strength.
If something from the humors opposes you, and there is no fear or mistake in cutting them: then cut those humors and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If you do not have the preparation for removing bones at your time, then apply something to the wound that will cause it to rot: and leave it until what surrounds those bones from flesh and humors putrefies.
And guard the wound so that it does not heal over. And let the incision which you made in your operation be constricted. Rather place on it, if you fear, tow soaked in ground sulfur with oil: or tow soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some green ointments.
For when those humors rot and the bones separate from them, the removal of them is alleviated, and their extraction is eased.
If however it is one large bone, like the bone of the leg, or the bone of the hip, and similar to those, and what is corrupted from it, is a large part: then scrape it thoroughly until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
If however what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it, and cut it entirely until the place where the corruption reaches: then care for it until it consolidates.
And I tell you of an example that happened to a man in his leg: so that you may set it as an example and aid for your operation.
There was a man of about thirty years of age, to whom pain occurred in his leg, caused by something that moved inside his body, that is, from within, until the matter reached the leg and swelled into a large abscess: and he did not have an external cause.
Therefore, time was wasted with the errors of the physicians until the abscess was opened, and a great deal of matter came out with it. And his treatment was delayed until the leg became fistulated, and many openings were formed in it: which all discharged pus and bodily fluids.
Therefore, he was treated by a multitude of physicians for about two years, and there was no skilled hand in the art until I was called, and I saw his leg, and the matter flowing from those openings in great abundance: moreover, the whole body of the man had already wasted away, and his color was yellow.
I inserted the probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached the mouth.
Then I examined all the openings: and I found them leading to each other from all parts of the leg.
I hurried and cut above one of those openings until I exposed part of the bone: and I found it corrupted: already corroded, blackened, rotten, and perforated, until it had penetrated through to the marrow.
I removed what was exposed to me and prepared from the corrupted bone.
And I ensured that there was no corruption left in the bone other than what I cut and removed. And I had already eradicated it.
Then I placed the wound's restoration with consolidating medicines for a long period. And it was not consolidated.
Then I examined and exposed above the bone a second time beyond the first exposure: and I found continuous corruption with the bone: and I removed what appeared to me also from that corruption.
Then I attempted its restoration. And it was not restored.
I exposed it again and did not cease to cut the bone bit by bit, and attempted its restoration: and it was not restored, until I cut about one palm's width from the bone, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored him with medicines, and it was consolidated quickly, and healed: and this repetition was not necessary in his operation, and his cutting, unless because of the disposition of the patient's weakness, and the paucity of his tolerance, and my fear over him of death: for it happened to him at all hours from the superfluity of evacuation evil swoons.
He was therefore healed with a complete healing: and hard flesh was born in the place of the bone, and his condition was made good in his body, and his strength returned: and he moved about in his conditions: and walking did not harm him at all contrary to his state.
If however a prominent bone in the body is already fractured: then it is necessary to suture it, according to this method: and it is: to take a bandage, and bind it at the end of the prominent bone: and command someone who stretches it upwards: and place another bandage from wool thicker than the first bandage. Then bind it over the flesh that is on the bone: and extend its end so that you pull the flesh downwards: and you cover the flesh over the place you wish to saw, so that the saw does not harm the flesh.
Place wood or a board under the lower bone appropriately: for when you do this, it does not prevent cutting the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the sawing be on the corrupted place for a while, so that there is no corruption in the concavity of the bone: and it does not appear to the sense in its appearance, and another is compelled to take its place in sawing.
If the bone is corrupted and not prominent, but rather its part is continuous with another part: and the corruption is in its middle or in a part of it: then uncover the flesh from all sides entirely. Then place the wood below.
Then cut it from the first side where there is corruption until the cutting continues from the other side: and let the cutting be according to the length from the corruption somewhat, as we have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, cut the corrupted joint itself, and saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
If however the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no remedy for it except scraping.
If the corruption is in the carpal bones of the hand or in the tarsal bones of the foot: then the matter is exceedingly difficult. But it is necessary that you inquire how the corruption appears to you. And scrape it, and clean it according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and with whatever method is corrected for you: when the Vein or Nerve does not contradict you.
And know that the cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their fineness, and their size, and their smallness, and their hardness, and their rarity. Therefore, it is necessary that you prepare every kind of instrument suitable for that operation.
And know that these operations indicate to you the kind of instrument you need when you have long study with you. And the knowledge of the methods of this art is testimony to the methods of diseases: then you will find by yourself that which is suitable for it from the instruments for every illness.
And I am confirming for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use as examples on which you will cut, and the test with which you will experiment on others.
Form of another Saw.
Form of the Joint Scraper. Let the head of this scraper be in the shape of a star-shaped nail head: and its points should be in the shape of the points of elischetfegi.
And it is not suitable unless the heads of the joints are rubbed with it when they are corrupted, or if there is a wide and large opening.
Form of the Larger Scraper.
Form of the Wide Scraper.
Form of the Scraper with a Concavity.
Form of another Fine Scraper.
Form of another Scraper with a Curved End.
The form of a small, subtle probe.
This resembles a probe, and the end is like a saw: it is used in many places according to the reason of the bones.
The form of the saw that is suitable for the purpose of what is pierced in bones.
Its end is triangular, with sharp points.
It is made from steel. And similarly, all the things we have mentioned should be made from saws, and cutting instruments, and blades.
Regarding the incision of extremities, and the sawing of bones.
Extremities become putrefied, either from an external cause or an internal cause.
When you have treated that corruption with medical treatment and the cure does not help, and you see the corruption spreading to the limb, which nothing can reverse: then it is necessary to cut off that limb up to where the corruption follows, so that the patient may be saved from death or a worse malice than the loss of the limb.
And the sign that this has happened to someone is that the limb turns black until it rots: whether fire has burned it or it has rotted after turning black: until that rot spreads throughout the body, creeping into the entire limb.
Hurry therefore with its incision, and likewise if the cause of corruption is from the strike of some venomous creatures: such as the sea scorpion, and viper, and toad, and similar.
If therefore the corruption or strike is at the end of a finger, then cut off the finger, and do not give space to the corruption so that it may advance to the rest of the hand.
And likewise if it occurs in the hand, then cut it from the root of the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold of the arm's wrist.
And if it invades it, then cut the arm at the elbow joint.
If however the corruption spreads, and you see it around the elbow: then in that case the death of the patient is imminent. And to administer beyond this in the treatment is an excess of potency.
And likewise do for the foot when the corruption invades a toe, then cut it at one of the joints: and if it takes hold of the instep, then amputate the entire foot. If however it ascends to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
If the corruption has already advanced above the knee, then there is no remedy for it except amputation, and to leave the patient to death.
And the method of cutting off or sawing a limb is to tie a ligature below the part you wish to cut: and tie another ligature above the place. And the assistant extends one bandage to the lower parts: and the assistant extends another bandage upwards above. And you separate the flesh which is between the two bandages with a broad spatula until all the flesh is exposed. Then it shall be cut or sutured.
And it is necessary that you place linen cloth on all sides, and the blade should not touch a healthy area: and an additional injury and a hot swelling befall the patient.
If, however, internal bleeding occurs while you are operating, then cauterize the area quickly: or apply certain powders that stop the flow of blood. Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man in his foot, the same incident that I tell you about.
Which is that a blackening occurred on his foot, with a burning resembling the combustion of fire: and that corruption first happened in his toe, until it began to affect the entire foot.
Therefore, the man quickly acted for himself after he saw the corruption occurring in his limb with its severity, which he discovered from the pain and the burning: and he cut it at the joint, and was healed.
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption occurred in his index finger.
He came to me therefore, and I tried to restore that excess with what I put on his hand from medicines after the cleansing of his body; and the excess did not return, and it began to move to another finger; until corruption began in the hand.
He called upon me to amputate his hand: and I refused to do so, hoping against the return of that excess: and I also feared for him death from the cutting of his hand. For the strength of the man was above the fall.
After he had despaired of me, he returned to his own land: and I received news of him that he hurried and amputated his entire hand: and he was healed.
And I have not brought this account except to be of help regarding that which falls under this kind of illness: and to serve as an indication by which it may be known, and according to which action may be taken.
Regarding the treatment of sinuses, and the nature of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy limbs, and the area of the abscess extends until it forms a collection of pus: then it bursts or is perforated, and what is inside comes out as pus, and an empty space remains like a vessel: and the skin over it is like a cloth that has become thin: and it does not reach its ultimate corruption, nor impress upon bone, nerve, or ligament: it merits to be called a Sinus: and it is not named Fistula: however, if its area extends until the corruption affects one of these members, then it is named Fistula, or zuken.
And the care is that you cut all that skin as it rolls up: and especially when it has become thin, and made like cloth: and trust that it does not adhere to the place, because of its corruption.
And if you hope that the skin adheres, and that last corruption does not result from it: and if there is thickness in the skin from flesh, then care for it with aclyster: and it is that you should consider towards the sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus emitted from it has a foul odor: then purify it with Egyptian medicine, which is of vinegar, oil, and ziniar, equal parts received, gathered in a vessel: and decocted over fire, until the medicine turns red: and comes to the thickness of honey.
Then take what you need from it: and dissolve it with water and honey, and purify the sinus with it: and bind its opening, and leave the medicine in it for the duration of two hours.
Then extract it with pressure: do this for as many days until the sinus is cleansed and the odor is removed.
And sometimes it is purified with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you: and it is that you take the ashes of vine wood or ashes from holm oak wood: and pour water over it. Then boil it and purify with it until you trust that the sinus is cleansed.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor ashes water, then purify it with water and honey, to which some ground ziniar is already mixed. Or cleanse it with honey and wine mixed together, for it is the property of honey to purify and wash clean: and wine makes the sinew adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you do this several times and are confident that the sinew corruption has been removed, then cleanse it with something that promotes flesh growth.
And it is as follows: take some of the dyafinicon plaster and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or cleanse it with certain medicines and other ointments whose properties I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
If the sinew orifice is narrow, through which the clyster tube cannot fit: then enlarge it temporarily with iron: or place lint wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment on it until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if the orifice is also wide, then bring the edges together with a suture: and leave enough space for the clyster to enter without adding more.
And similarly, if the orifice from which pus runs is elevated towards the upper parts: then cut it at a lower place within it so that the pus may run down from it: for when pus is compressed in the depth of the sinew, it prevents flesh from generating there.
If it is not possible for you to cut the sinew around its lower part as you wish: then try to prepare the member in such a way that pus may run out easily according to how it is prepared for you. Strive so that no pus at all remains in it: and take medicines for consolidation which are placed on the wound, suitable for what you wish. And spread them over a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that it covers the entire sinus. Then cut with the scissors straight at the opening of the sinus hole, somewhat larger than the opening of the sinus. Then spread a mild ointment over another cloth according to the size of the hole: and place it on it at a distance from the opening of the sinus, so that the discharge of pus from it is relieved: and do not remove the large cloth unless after several days.
The one that is on the opening of the sinus is the one you remove every hour, so that what accumulates in it from pus may come out: and to know whether what runs out of it as virus is much or little: or digested or undigested.
And with this, examine again the site of the sinus itself, whether its owner feels pain in it or there is no pain in it, and whether there is a swelling in it or there is no swelling in it.
When therefore your treatment is extended thus, and you see the material that comes out over the opening of the sinus, then you know that the sinus has adhered or is approaching adhesion: then dissolve it in the morning or on the third day: and when you dissolve the wound, then change to another cloth and renew the ointment.
If, however, thin virus comes out of the sinus after a long period, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, because there are people who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and among them are those who act contrary to this.
If, however, undigested pus exits from the sinus after many days, then you know that the sinus does not adhere.
If, therefore, the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its condition is prolonged: then add to the drying medicines, but let the physicians make the medicines so that they are moist in their substance and dry in their power: such as diafrenicon ointment, when an excess of addition from zegi is added to it.
And from the latest method of treatment, it is to take diafrenicon ointment, and dissolve it with rose oil, and spray over it equal wine in its substance.
Then bind it with it, and use it.
And now it makes a similar action to this when you do not have diafrenicon ointment, honey, when you boil it until it thickens, and use it. Or take myrrh, and aloe, and frankincense: grind all of it, and powder it over honey while it is over the fire. Then apply it on the cloth, and bind it over the sinus: and apply with honey which you boiled until it thickened: and powder over it the spices, and place it on the cloth, and bind it.
And sometimes administered in it is aristolochia longa, and roots of the celestial lily, and it is a lily: and flour of the herb, and centaury. Use them singly or in combination, grind them, and sieve them: and powder over the honey I mentioned, and use it.
If the condition of the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment: then know that there is corruption deep within it: or it already makes an impression on the bones, or on other hard members, or ligaments: then treat it with the treatment for fistulas, according to what has been mentioned.
On the treatment of panaritium and ingrown nails, and the incision of the
Panaritium is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand or foot: and it may also arise in the other digits.
When therefore the condition is prolonged and neglected by its caregiver, and it becomes abscessed with a hot abscess: or it corrupts and emits pus, until it corrodes the root of the nail: and it may corrupt it entirely, and the corruption may reach the bone, until there is a foul odor: and the extremity of the digit becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.
When therefore you treat it with what we have said in the division, and your treatment does not help: then you must cut away with iron all the excess that remains of the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For cauterization is very beneficial.
If however the bone is sound, and the nail is also sound, and the additions of the nail already compress the flesh towards the interior, and begin to pierce it, and hurt it: then you must place a thin probe under the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and push it up: and cut that flesh with ease, and apply over what remains of the flesh some burning, corrosive medicines, until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If however the corruption has already set into the bone, then you must cut out that bone and remove it: for it will never heal as long as the corrupted bone remains.
If you see corrosion and decay spreading to the finger, then cut it at one joint, according to what has been previously mentioned. Then care for it until it heals.
If the nail is worn down or struck, and severe pain occurs in it, then it is necessary to bleed the patient first. Then cut the nail with a sharp spatula in a transverse section from top to view.
And be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for you will cause severe pain to the patient by doing so, and it will result in additional flesh growing in that place.
Then treat the area with something that relieves pain.
The additional finger that is born on some people's hands may be entirely fleshy: and some of them may have bones, and perhaps a nail is in it: and some of them are born at the base of the joint, or its birth is in some joints of the finger. The one that is born on some joints of the finger does not move: and the one that is born near the joint of the finger may move.
The cutting of the one that is fleshy among them is easy. Which means you should cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
The treatment of the one whose birth is at the base of the joint is difficult. Therefore abstain from cutting it.
In the one who is born on a finger at the last joint, then it is necessary to first cut the flesh with a circular incision up to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those saws suitable for it. Then care for it until it heals.
A consolidation which occurs in the fingers firmly, often happens either from the birth of the person, that is, it is born with it, or from the consolidation of a wound, or from burning by fire, and similar causes.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form. Then place between them cloths, or fabrics soaked in rose oil: so that they do not consolidate quickly, and separate them; or place between them a thin lead plate until the area consolidates as it should.
And similarly, if a consolidation occurs between certain fingers and the palm, then cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
Regarding the incision for Vitium.
Warts are twisted veins, thick, filled with melancholic humors which occur in many parts of the body: and they most frequently appear on the legs, especially on the legs of travelers and laborers, and those who carry loads.
Therefore, you must administer shaking of the body from black bile several times with strong shaking.
Then apply the phlebotomy to the patient's basilica vein.
The cure of them with iron is according to two methods. One of them is to cut and extract the black blood. And the other method is to raise the vein and extract it entirely.
The cutting of it is according to this method. Wash the leg first with hot water abundantly until the thick, feculent blood is dissolved. Then bind the leg of the patient from the upper part of the thigh down to the lower part of the knee with a bandage. Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three places with a wide incision.
Then raise, that is, extract the blood in your hand from the lower part of the leg up, and it is necessary to phlebotomize the patient first from the upper part. Then cut down to the nail: until the amount of blood that you see is sufficient and which the patient's strength can tolerate comes out.
Then bind it and instruct him to abstain from foods that produce black bile. Repeat the evacuation and phlebotomy when the veins are full and it is harmful to the patient.
Its elevation is according to this method. Bind the sick person's leg if there are many hairs on it. Then introduce him to the bath: or anoint him on his leg with warm water until it turns red, and the veins swell; or exercise him with strenuous exercise, if a bath is not available to him, until the limb becomes warm.
Then cut the skin directly along the vein's length: either at its end near the knee, or in the lower part of it near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks, and scrape the vein from all sides until it appears to the sense: and it is at its appearance, which you see it turn from red to a blackish color. When it comes out of the skin, you see it white like a string.
Then insert a probe under it until it is raised and comes out of the skin: suspend it with a blunt hook gently.
Then make another cut near that cut, about three fingers away. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then raise it with probes as you did, and suspend it with another hook, as you did at first.
Then make another cut, or multiple cuts, if needed. Then raise it and cut it at the final cut near the heel.
Then extract it for the section which is above it.
And do this until you extract it from the upper section, or higher than all sections, until when it exits entirely: then cut it.
If it does not obey you for extracting and elevating: then insert a needle with a strong double thread, and tie it, and extract it: or insert under it a lever: and revolve your hand in all directions until it exits. And beware that it is not cut. For if it is cut, it becomes very difficult for you to elevate it, and great harm enters the patient from it.
Therefore, when you have extracted it entirely: then place wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil, on the wound site: and care for it until it heals.
If the vein is contracted, having a curvature that coils to parts, and is not straight as we have said: then it is necessary to incise along all parts of its curvature, and at the points where it coils.
Then suspend it with hooks until you elevate it entirely: and beware at your cut on it that you do not cut the vein or wound it: for it will be difficult for you to elevate or extract it. Therefore, keep your caution.
Form of the Incision by Which the Vein is Healed.
Form of the Blind Hook.
It is not curved like other hooks, nor does it have a sharp end so as not to wound the vein: and it has a thick flexibility, gentle: for if it were thin, it would cut the vein with its thinness: rather let there be an excess of thickness, as we said.
On the drawing of blood from the leg vein.
This vein is found in the legs in warm lands, such as Algeria, and the land of Arabs, and in dry, warm lands, lacking tenderness, that is, where no grass or tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from the putrefaction which occurs under the skin, like worms and ascarids generated within bodies, and worms generated between the skin and the flesh.
And the sign of the onset of this vein's event is that there occurs a violent inflammation in the leg. Then the area becomes blistered. Then the vein begins to emerge from that blistered area, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When therefore its end appears, then you must wrap a piece of lead over it, whose weight is from one drachm to two drachms, and bind it to the knot itself: and leave the lead hanging from the leg.
Whenever anything emerges from it to the outside, wrap that in lead, and bind it. If it is prolonged greatly, then cut part of it, and wrap the remainder. And do not cut it at the root before it comes out entirely. For if you cut, it contracts and goes into the flesh: and causes an abscess to occur, and rot in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it must be handled gently and extracted gradually until it comes out from the end of itself, and nothing remains of it in the body: and in some men, this vein comes out to a length of five palms and ten. And it has now come to me that it came out of a man for twenty palms.
If it is cut during your treatment: then insert a probe into its opening and pierce it with a long hole, along with the body, until all the matter inside is evacuated: and apply remedies to prevent rotting of the area for several days. Then treat it with the treatment for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the ankle joint or on the foot itself: and it has many openings, and a branch comes out of each opening.
Treat it, therefore, as we have said in the division, and with what has been mentioned.
Regarding the incision for worms generated under the skin, and it is called Bouina disease.
This sickness is called in some land among us Bovine Sickness: therefore, because it often happens to oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and the flesh.
And it goes throughout the whole body, ascending and descending: and it is felt during its movement from one limb to another, until it breaks through the skin wherever it breaks out and exits.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. As worms and snakes occur, that is, earthworms, and roundworms in the stomach.
And it is feared for its maliciousness. Because when it moves in the body, and rises to the head, and reaches a place: then perhaps it opens in it, and exits, and destroys the eye: and this happens often.
Therefore, when you wish to cure it and extract it, then it is not done except during its movement and its appearance to the senses.
Therefore, it is necessary to bind tightly above and below it with a strong constricting bandage. Then cut above it and extract it.
If it is deep in the flesh and you do not find it: then place a cautery with fire on the spot until it dies.
And what is more feared is its corruption, by which it corrupts the eye, as we have said.
And if you see it has already reached the head near the eye, then grasp the eyebrow above it with a good clamp. Then cut above it, and remove it.
And it is necessary for the sick person to purify their body with medicines that dissolve bad putrid humors.
And let him be cautious of foods that cause putrefaction.
Regarding the incision for the Nakir disease.
This disease is called Nakir in our land: and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs: then it shifts from one limb to another.
And I have indeed seen it myself, as I tell you. I was called to an ill woman in some villas. And she exposed her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the rope-like vein of the arm.
And after I stayed for one hour, I saw a swelling moving with pulsation, like a worm moves, ascending to her shoulder faster than it could be: so that it is like quicksilver when it runs from place to place.
Therefore, the pain retreated from that place and fixed on the shoulder.
Then I waited for one hour, and it ran through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
Then he told me that he was turning throughout his whole body, as I saw.
I marveled at the speed of the change from one member to another. And indeed, before that, I had not seen this disease with my eyes in such a manner according to this way. However, I have seen many who find the pain changing from one member to another: and I did not see it with my eyes as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think it is anything else but that the woman was one of those who have dry bodies with exposed veins: hence this change in windiness is apparent to the senses.
And it is necessary that they do not appear in this manner in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
Therefore, when you wish to treat it and the patient feels that pain: then if it is apparent to your eye as we said, then bind above it and below it quickly: and cut above it until the constrained windiness exits: and cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your own eyes: then treat it with shaking of the body, and with what expels windiness, and drives it out with foul pills, and pills of serpentaria, and similar remedies.
Regarding the extraction of arrowheads.
Arrows are differentiated according to their types, and according to the places into which they fall from the body.
Their diversity is as follows: some have large points, and small ones: and concave, and deaf. And among them are those which have three angles. And among them are those which have tongues. And among them are those which have barbs.
Those, however, that fall according to the members into which they fall, are according to two modes. For either the members are concave principal parts, such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and those similar to them. When therefore it falls into any of these members, and signs of death, which I tell you about later, become apparent to you, then you must avoid extracting that arrow from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in most cases. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it, and treat the wound.
For the signs of the brain when an arrow falls into it and penetrates the bone, and exits through the siphac which is above the brain, are: for there occur from it violent foaming, blindness, dizziness, redness in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasms, confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile. And perhaps blood comes out from the nostrils, or ears. And perhaps speech is severed, and voice is destroyed. And a white moist substance like pus comes out from the wound site. And there exits from it something resembling a watery substance of flesh.
If these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not come out.
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left nipple: and one feels with it as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not in an empty space. And perhaps the arrow has a movement similar to the movement of a pulse: and black blood runs from the wound. And following that is the coldness of the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore that death comes undoubtedly.
And the sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung is the exit of foamy blood from the wound: and the vessels that follow the neck swell, and the color of the patient changes. And he exhales a great, deep breath: and seeks the attraction of cold air.
If the arrow falls into the membrane that is in the chest: then it is near the ribs: and a great breathing with intense pain occurs with sighing: and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
And if an arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps some undigested food comes out from the wound.
And if an arrow falls into the stomach and is fixed in it: some waste comes out from the wound, or gall, or intestine which is already torn. Therefore, there is no hope for its cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
If an arrow falls into the bladder and urine comes out: and something from it proceeds to the outer parts, and the pain is stronger on the patient: then you know that it is mortal.
The other members, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and shoulder blade, and helper, and spine of the back, and collarbone, and thigh, and shin, and similar parts are treated according to many arrangements: when the arrow does not find an artery or nerve: and the arrow is not venomous.
And I tell you what I have seen of these arrows, so that you may signify through it concerning your treatment.
This is because an arrow fell into a man's tear duct, at the root of his nose. I therefore extracted it from the other side, beneath the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted an arrow from a Jew, which fell into the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I could only reach a small part of it, with which it adheres to its wood: and it was a large arrow among the arrows of Turkish bows, with soft iron, in which there are no ears.
The Jew was healed, and no harmful accident happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the Christian's throat.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one that has ears. I sewed over it between two fingers: and it was already submerged in his throat. I therefore maneuvered carefully with it until I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from the man which had fallen into his abdomen: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed and nothing had changed in his condition, I sewed over the arrow: and I worked on it, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no harmful accident happened to him.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound had healed over it. After seven years had passed, the arrow emerged at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow had fallen into her abdomen, and the wound had healed over it, and the arrow remained inside her: and nothing changed in her condition, and the woman did not find any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow had fallen on his face: and the wound had healed, and it remained, not causing him much pain: and there are many similar cases to these.
And I extracted an arrow from a man who was one of the chief men of the King, which had fallen to the middle of his nose, and it had already inclined slightly to the right side: and the entire arrow was hidden.
I was called to his treatment three days after the arrow struck him. I found therefore the arrow wound very tight.
I examined it with a fine probe, and did not feel it: but he himself felt a sting and pain near his right ear. I suspected, therefore, that it was a pricking from the tip of the arrow.
I applied a plaster to the area containing attractive and digestive properties, confident that the spot would suppurate and reveal a sign of the arrow so I could cut above it: but no occurrence happened in the place indicating that the arrow had reached its location.
I attended to it with a plaster for many days: and no incident occurred, and the wound healed over time: and he remained weak from its extraction for a period of days, until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose. And he reported that to me.
And he reported that to me. I applied a sharp, corrosive medicine to that wound for many days until it opened: and I probed it with a probe, and felt the fine tip of the arrowhead adhering to the wood.
Then I continued to apply the sharp medicine to the wound opening until the tip of the arrow became visibly apparent: and I spent with him a period of time about four months.
Then after the wound was enlarged and it became possible for me to introduce forceps into it and move it, and it did not obey to come out: then I did not cease to refine and devise upon it with methods of ingenuity until one day I succeeded with properly made forceps, according to which their form will appear at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And physicians do judge that the cartilage of the nose does not restore itself. I therefore restored it, and the wound was healed, and the illness was cured with complete health; nor did anything harm him at all.
And I tell you the nature of extracting certain arrows: that you may set it as a rule and interpretation on what I have not said.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended in the narration: nor does the book comprehend it, and a wise craftsman compares little with much: and what is present with what is absent: and finds a new operation and a new instrument among the descents of foreign matters of this art when they occur.
I say therefore that arrows do not exit from the members in which they are fixed, except by two methods. Or by attraction from the place whence it entered. Or to the opposite part.
And that which exits where it entered is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place: and it is attracted and exits.
If it does not obey and exit from the time when it falls: then you must leave it for some days, until the flesh which is around it becomes putrid: and its attraction is lessened, and its exit.
And similarly if it is fixed in the bone and does not obey you to exit, then leave it for several days: and iterate it with attraction and motion every day until it exits.
If it does not obey you to exit after days, then you must pierce around the arrow in the bone itself on all sides with a fine drill, until the arrow is loosened. Then pull it, and extract it.
If the arrow is already hidden in a part of the body and is concealed and hidden from perception: then seek it with probes. If however you feel it, then draw it out with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
If however you cannot reach it, because of the constriction of the wound, and because of the length of the arrow being deep inside: and there is no opening, nor nerve, nor vein: then incise over it until the wound enlarges, and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
If it has ears by which it can be held, then free the flesh fixed to them on all sides with every skill you can apply, and use various methods if you cannot release the flesh due to the breaking of the ears and their twisting until it comes out.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow, wherever it is, then use the twisting of your hand, with scissors to all sides, until you make it come out: and be very precise in the finest detail, so that the arrow does not break, and its extraction becomes difficult for you.
If you cannot reach it at once, then leave it for several days until what is around it becomes putrid. Then attempt it again: for the skin will be alleviated. If however the flow of blood opposes you, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter: and beware that your action does not lead to cutting a vein, or nerve, or tendon.
And employ every skill possible for the extraction of the arrow: and let it be done with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness, as I have told you.
And it is necessary that when you pull out the arrow, the patient be positioned according to the shape in which they were at the time of the arrow's impact. For it is more beneficial. If you cannot do that, then administer what is possible for you from the figures.
The arrow which exits from the opposite part of the other side, or already proceeds from it to the outer areas: or the tip of the arrow makes a bulge through the skin of the nearby upper part, and you see it protruding: therefore cut above it, and let the incision be according to the amount that the forceps can grasp in it.
Then pull it out: for it becomes easy to remove.
If it is retained in the bone, then rotate your hand around the circumference until the arrow impresses itself into the bone and enlarges its own path: then pull it out.
And if not: leave it for several days: then try it again until it comes out.
If the arrow is made of wood, then push it out with it.
If the wood has broken off and you wish to apply pressure: then insert a concave instrument into it so that its concavity enters the tail of the arrow: then push it out with it.
If the arrow is concave, then push it out with an instrument inserted into it. For the arrow is lightened by that.
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut out all the flesh where the poison is: if you can do that. Then treat it with what is suitable for that.
If the arrow is lodged in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side: and it is close enough to be touched with a probe, and you are able to cut over it: then cut, and beware of cutting into a vein or nerve, and extract it.
Then sew the wound, if you see it, and treat it until it heals.
And this is the form of the forceps with which arrows are extracted.
Let the ends be similar to a bird's beak, which are made like blades: when they grasp the arrow, they do not release it.
And various types are made, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrow's magnitude, its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its tightness.
The form of the concave pusher.
And the form of the deaf pusher.
This is the end of the deaf instrument like a rod, so that its entry into the concave arrow is eased, and it can be pushed with it.
About the bloodletting of veins.
The veins to be opened, whose custom has run through the body, are thirty.
Of these, in the head there are sixteen: two Pulsating Veins, which are behind the ears, called the two Herbs: and two Arteries, which are visible on both temples: and two Veins which are in the tear ducts of both eyes, which are called Aspicientes: and a Prepared Vein in the middle of the forehead: and the vein which is at the tip of the nose. And two Guidegi, which are in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. And these are the veins which are called Algecherich. And two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins which are opened in the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalic, and it is on the outer side: and the common people call it the head vein. And the Brown one. And it is the Median vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilic and a branch of the Cephalic: and the common people call it the body vein. And the Basilic, and it is located on the inner side: and it is also called Titillicaris. And the common people call it the vein of the belly. And the cord of the arm, which is placed above the elbow: and it is the one that is bled from, and it is the one that appears above the thumb clearly visible.
And Salvatella: and it is the vein which is between the ring finger and the little finger: and it has two branches.
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins. One of them is the one that is beneath the curvature of the thumb on the ulnar side. And the second is the Saphena: and its location is near the heel on the inner side. And the vein Nesse: and its location is near the heel on the outer side.
And in the other leg there are three similar veins.
About the bloodletting of two veins behind the ears.
The bloodletting of the two veins which are behind the ears is beneficial for old catarrhs, hemiplegia, epilepsy, and old bad sores of the head.
And the method of bloodletting from it is as I describe. And it is done by shaving the head of the patient: and rubbing their occipital area where the two veins are with a coarse cloth thoroughly. Then the patient should constrict their neck with a ligature until the two veins appear. And their places are behind the ears in two depressed areas of the head. So seek them with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, mark there with encaustic.
Then take the blade scalpel, and that is called the Incider. Then insert it under the vein into the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut the vein with the skin using an incising cut. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two joined fingers, or about that; and let as much blood flow as you wish.
Then bind it with bandages, and leave it until it heals.
And already in the beginning of the book, the incision of them and their cauterization have been discussed.
The benefit of the phlebotomy of the two arteries which are in the two temples is for ancient hemigranea: and for sodam prauam, and persistent ophthalmia: and for the course of sharp humors flowing to the eyes.
And the method of phlebotomy for them is as I narrate to you. Let the patient tighten his neck greatly until two veins appear clearly to the sight: and their pulse is felt under your finger. Then indeed with signs with encaustic.
Then lift the skin over the vein upwards with your index finger, and insert the flebotomy knife underneath, and lift the vein upwards. And cut it as you did with the other two veins: and let the blood flow according to the quantity necessary for your need.
Then release the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for one hour. Then place a poultice and powder on it, and bind it tightly with a strong constriction: and leave it until it heals.
And already the recall of them, and their cutting, and their extraction at the beginning of the book has preceded.
The benefit of the flebotomy of the frontal vein after the flebotomy of the cephalic vein is for chronic facial illnesses: and for hemipity, and redness: and foul ulcers.
And the nature of its flebotomy is as I narrate to you. Let the patient constrict his neck with a cord until the vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called the Fossorium.
Place the prominent point that is on the head of the Fossorium on the vein, and strike it with a comb or with another instrument in its manner: and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire. Then heal the perforation of the patient, and bind it until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide lancet. However, it should not have a sharp end like other lancets, but rather a broad end. And cut it with the lancet transversely: because the mouth is nearby: and perhaps the lancet may break there when it is thin.
The benefit of the two veins which are near the two tear ducts of both eyes is for the eye from scab and redness: and gravel in the eye, and ailments of the face.
And the method of bloodletting from them is that the patient should compress his neck with a band. Then lancet them: and you shall stand above his head.
And the bloodletting should be done transversely to a small length with a small, somewhat broad lancet, for there is no flesh in that place. For if the lancet has a thin end, it may break.
Then let as much blood flow as you deem necessary. And place a bandage over them, and bind them for one night, then release them.
Bloodletting from the nasal veins is beneficial for acute fever and severe headache, and facial ailments such as hemangioma, and the redness that occurs on the face: especially when it is old.
And the quality of its bloodletting is such that the patient should compress his neck. Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a thin, long bloodletting instrument, and insert it in the middle of the nasal septum, between the parts that divide the nose straight. Because the vein does not appear there to the sense, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you quickly withdraw your hand with the bloodletting instrument: and let the blood flow according to your need. Then bind it for one night. For it is restored quickly.
The benefit of bloodletting from the two Guidegi veins is for constricted breathing, early stages of leprosy, melancholic ailments, impetigo, and bad sores, and corrosive ulcers, that is, snake-like herpes.
And the quality of bloodletting from them is such that the patient should compress under both sides of his neck with a bandage: and the practitioner should stand above the patient's head, and the patient should be sitting on a seat.
Then the vein for bleeding should be broadly prepared to the length of the bleed. Then extract a moderate amount of blood, or according to what you see is necessary for that case. Then do the same for another vein.
Then loosen the ligature, and bind the two veins with a moderate constriction: so that the patient is not choked. And leave it until morning. For the wound is healed.
Regarding the bloodletting of veins by Albucasis. The bloodletting of veins by Albucasis is beneficial: because it helps with alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums: and bad sores: and cracks in the lips, and bad ulcers, even those which are in the nose, and around it.
And the method of bloodletting is to have the patient sit in front of you: and bind his neck with a cord. Then turn his lip and look for two veins: one is on the right side of the lip, and the second on the left side: and they are identified by their darkness. And this is true: because around them are small, black veins. Cut both with a penetrating incision.
If there is doubt and you do not know which one to choose: then aim for the larger and more noticeable of them.
And similarly do with the two veins which are in the upper lip: and indeed the habit runs very much with it: and cut the two veins which are in the lower lip.
On bloodletting The vein under the tongue after cephalic bloodletting. The benefit of bloodletting from the two veins under the tongue is that cephalic bloodletting is for obstructions in the throat, and sickness of the uvula, and illnesses of the mouth.
And the manner of bloodletting from them is that the patient should sit before you facing the sun: and lift his tongue, and look under the tongue on one side for a vein, and on the other side for a vein: and the color of both tends towards blackness.
Bloodlet from both veins: and be careful not to hesitate when bloodletting from them. For beneath them are arteries, and perhaps a flow of blood from those arteries may occur.
The three veins that are bloodlet from in the elbow are those from which bloodletting has become customary in all people.
And their bloodletting is done in two ways. Either by pricking with a broad myrtle lancet: or by using an olive-shaped fine lancet: or by cutting with a knife-like lancet, and this is called Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from them are the broad and thin types according to the width of the veins and their tightness. The form of the myrtle phlebotomy is broad, as you see. And it is suitable for opening concave veins, full, protruding, visible, thick, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and finer at the extremities.
And it is suitable for the phlebotomy of thin veins which contain fine yellow blood.
But the basilica, which is one of these three veins, is beneficial for phlebotomy. Because it draws blood from illnesses that are under the throat and neck, from what follows the chest, and the abdomen: and it is suitable for the phlebotomist to be cautious when phlebotomizing it, to be in fear of it, for an artery is beneath it. If he errs, and adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will hit that artery, and a flow of blood will result. Therefore, it is necessary that he not puncture her with the phlebotomy; rather, he should cut with Alnesil.
If the basilic vein does not appear clearly visible, then you must move away from it and switch to another, or seek some branch of it; or bloodlet at its place in the arm. For it is clear, and cut it with the bloodletter Anesil, as we said.
If you wish to bloodlet from it, then before tightening the arm, you must touch the place until you recognize the pulse location. Then mark the place with cautery, then bind the arm, and cut the vein with a concave incision using the bloodletter Alnesil, as we said. And be careful that the incision does not fall away from the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the band, swelling at the place you marked with cautery, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery: avoid it.
If you see the blood at the bloodletting leap like a boy's urine, and it is fine, red blood: then you know that it is from the artery's blood. Then hurry, and place your finger on it for a long space, then remove your finger. If the blood is interrupted (for it is often interrupted), then bind the arm and release it: and let the patient avoid moving it: and let it be covered with fear.
And let him not move it for several days until it is healed.
If however the blood is not severed and overcomes you: and your medicine is not present at your moment then cut the artery if it appears to you. For its extremities contract, and the blood is severed.
Or take the bark of the fig, and dry it: take one half, and bind it over the place of the vein's constriction properly, with a bandage and poultices until the next day.
Then if the blood is severed, it is good. And if not: then treat it with that which precedes the memory from the place of powders severing the flow of blood: and the severing of its blood is not difficult in most conditions, because of the small place of the wound, and the possibility of binding from the arm.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the Fuscae vein is that it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body: for this reason, because it is composed of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalica, as we have said.
And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist to be fearful of it, because there is a nerve beneath it. If therefore the phlebotomist adds pressure at the puncture and finds a nerve, numbness occurs in it, healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it is not fully healed.
And this nerve often appears to the sense. If however it is hidden in some men, and is subtle, and is not shown: then you must place your vein-opening with which you open the vein, a cut with Alnesil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein along its length.
About the cephalic vein. Opening the cephalic vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and helps with eye diseases.
And you must properly in this vein, if you wish, open it by pricking with an olive lancet or with a myrtle lancet: for it is safer than all other veins, for there is no artery or nerve beneath it.
However, it is fitting for you when opening veins, to avoid the armpit with the lancet and seek a softer spot: and it does no harm if it is not found on the first attempt, so that it may be tried over again with the lancet several times.
However, it may possibly swell in some men when it is not opened on the first attempt, but that swelling does no harm.
About the usefulness of bloodletting and the precautions to be observed in it. The nature of bloodletting and its effects must be considered by you for its proper execution.
Therefore, the first thing you should know is that bloodletting is not administered except for the preservation of health, its continuance, and as a precaution against the onset of illnesses.
And so that bloodletting may be done on one of three veins which are in the elbow, namely Cephalica, and Fusca, and Basilica. And so that bloodletting may be done at the beginning of spring on an empty stomach, in spring and summer: and in autumn, and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
And bloodletting shall be done on the first day, or on the third, after three hours have passed since the day began.
Bloodletting which is administered in illnesses does not have a fixed time: but when circumstances and necessity call for it, whether at night or day, and at any hour, and at any time.
And it should not be that children be bled until they come to fourteen years of age. Nor should a pregnant woman be bled, except from the fourth month up to the seventh. Nor should seniors be bled who have already passed sixty years.
Therefore, when someone wishes to be bled for whatever reason: it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines before bloodletting with a mild enema, if there is much retained feces in them: so that the veins around the bloodletting do not attract putrid and harmful superfluities from the intestines to the principal members.
Nor should a patient be bled who is suffering from toctina, that is, nausea-inducing fullness: nor when drunken, nor when recovering from intoxication, until these conditions are removed from them. Neither the patient with dropsy.
And let bloodletting be avoided after colic pain, and vomiting, and flux of the bowels, and multiplication of coitus, and labor, and exercise, and vigils, and fasting, and everything which dissipates strength from the body or animal.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before that, if the blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medicines: if possible, do that for him.
Then let him enter the bath, if nothing prohibits it: or let him be exercised in some exercise, so that the blood may be refined.
And place his bloodletting on the chest, around the third hour of the day, as we have said: and endeavor that his chest be evacuated that day from all harmful animal accidents: such as distress, anger, and fear: and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, pain, and excess, and those similar to these.
And let there be present with his seat things with which human custom has run from their aromatics, and fragrances, and entertainments and similar things according to the extent of possibility.
Then let the bloodletter sit on a pillow that is higher than the pillow for bloodletting: afterwards, he should extend his arm and the bloodletter shall rub it twice or thrice with his hand. Then bind the ligature with a bandage, and wrap it twice.
And let the binding be moderate, for when the binding is unequal, whether by excess in tightness, then it impedes the flow of blood: or in looseness, then it also impedes the flow of blood.
Then after binding it is necessary that the one to be bled should rub his hands together vigorously until the veins swell and are made clear to the sense.
Then the phlebotomist should cleanse the vein with a little oil, in the old proper way.
Then he should place his left index finger on the vein itself at the spot where he wants the phlebotomy to be done, slightly: so that the vein does not flee, and the strike is successful. For the veins are like a fleeing string during phlebotomy: and there is one which is full of air: and when you place the lancet on it, it contracts under the lancet, and the phlebotomist is deceived, and the lancet does not open the vein: and if it opens it, it is constricted: therefore, the phlebotomist must be firm and careful in all these matters.
Then he should put down the lancet. If therefore the vein is opened at once, then it is good. And if not, then do it again at another spot nearby, or above it quickly: provided the area is not inflamed.
If it is inflamed, or the patient becomes swollen, then leave it for a day or two days: and do not bind the ligature. For it may draw the inflammation to a warm area. Nor should he enter the bath.
Then repeat bloodletting, if he wishes.
If the opening is small, or blood flows thinly: and you fear that the quantity of blood you wish will not emerge: then repeat the bloodletting in the same hole straightly, and add a little to the procedure.
And do it with haste before the place becomes abscessed, for an abscessed place is in many people a minor operation.
If you see it already abscessed, then do not repeat anything on it at all, for nothing excuses it to you. And put something from the dregs of oil on it: for it alleviates the flow of blood. And it is better in this place than the oil itself, and than other oils.
And similarly administer the dregs of oil in all your bloodletting, where you bloodlet veins to prohibit the flow of blood: and they do this with mithridate, alfarak, and sage, when one of them is placed on the spot.
For blood is thinned and dissolved when it is thick.
If a large abscess occurs at the site of bloodletting, for it often happens, especially to one who is not blooded except that once, or the vein opening is small, then hurry and place on the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, heated slightly: and bind it for one hour: for it dissolves.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has exited from the vein itself, with its completion, or from another vein.
If something of blackness or greenness remains in the place after days, it does not harm that: and if you wish, put over it something of dissolved aloe or myrrh: or something from the juice of menthastri, that is, calamus or similar to that.
And indeed, swellings and protrusions often occur around the phlebotomy at the Basilica.
Place therefore your hand upon it, then if you find softness at your compression upon it, then that swelling is bad. Beware therefore, to put upon it something of what we have said. For perhaps blood from an artery may flow from it.
But make a poultice for it with something that has astringency, so that the area may harden. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And it is necessary to withdraw blood from every person according to the measure of their strength. And what appears from the dominating color over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it turns red: and similarly if you see it thick: then let it flow until it becomes thin: and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for one who is full, strong, and in need of bloodletting once, to enlarge the vein incision, and let the incision be broad: and for one who is weak, it should be the opposite of that.
And it is necessary that he pulls it out in places, and that the hole is narrow: and better than what is administered in bloodletting of veins is a transverse cut, not a puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from blood flow, and from nerve cutting: and it is more praiseworthy, and safer than bloodletting through breadth and length.
And for one who is accustomed to faint at bloodletting, it is necessary that they eat before bloodletting a little bread soaked in pomegranate juice musli: or secaniabin, if it is heated: and you should draw from their blood in three places, or four.
And if it is of a chilled complexion, then let them take before bloodletting bread soaked in honey syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, or in aromatic fragrant syrup.
If fainting occurs during bloodletting, and the cause is a large loss of blood: then it is necessary that they drink water with meat and subtle fragrant syrup: and use aromatics with algalia, and anoint their chest with it: and use the other things we mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting from evacuation.
Who wishes to bleed his arm and release his blood a second time: it is necessary for the one who undergoes bloodletting because of much evacuation, and whose strength is weak, to release blood gradually according to the amount of strength over consecutive days.
Who wishes to bleed his arm and release his blood a second time, and his body is strong: then let him do it after seven or nine hours from his first bloodletting.
Whoever wants to draw blood from his body to the opposite part from which it declines: it must happen to him on the second day, or on the third.
In whose body there is already a lot of heated blood, and it sharpens, and causes fever to occur: it must be that blood exits from him in one vein, and a great quantity is extracted from him: and the opening is enlarged until syncope occurs: after you have been preserving all the conditions of bloodletting: and placing your hand on his pulse at the course of the blood, so death does not occur instead of syncope. For that often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant, and negligence occurs.
And it is not appropriate when you want to release the arm, and release blood second time, after the vein's orifice is already closed, and the exit of blood becomes difficult, to press on it with violence, and quickly extend it while bent. For that is very bad, indeed leave it until it is bled a second time.
Or remove with the sharpness of the phlebotomist what has coagulated from blood in the vein's orifice, and place something dissolved salt in water on it. And place on it something from theriac alfarabi, or sagzenea, and place it with gentle compression until blood flows out.
If the vein has already become apstedematous, then leave it uncovered until the aposteme subsides.
If necessity provokes to release blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then either apply phlebotomy above that place or in the other arm in another vein.
The rope of the arm is phlebotomized at the place of the Fuscae and the Basilicae, when they are not found and are hidden, because it is composed of them.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that the patient should insert his hand into warm water until the vein becomes red and appears clearly.
Then it should be bound above it with a bandage with slight constriction in the middle. Then phlebotomize gradually across, not widthwise, nor lengthwise: and let the opening be wide, and let your phlebotomy of how you phlebotomize be at the joint of the hand for a moment.
If the flow of blood is prevented, then dip the hand in warm water again, and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
If, however, you are in the summer days, then you are excused from dipping the hand in warm water again. And it is placed that the flow of blood in warm water occurs most frequently in winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there is no pulsating vein or nerve beneath it.
The phlebotomy of the Saluatellae of the right hand is beneficial for ailments of the liver.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is such that you should bind the vein of the hand with a ligature or your own hand after you introduce it into warm water until the vein swells and is very noticeable to the sense. Then puncture it transversely. And if you cut it entirely, it will not harm her in any way.
And be careful not to leave your hand with the phlebotomizer at the end. For beneath it the nerves of the fingers are exposed without flesh.
Then return the hand to warm water, and let the blood flow into it. For if you do not return it to warm water, the blood will clot at the vein's opening and be prevented from flowing.
Therefore, when you have extracted the necessary amount of blood, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not clot quickly.
And similarly, you should do this with every tight branch.
The benefit of its phlebotomy from the left hand is that it is beneficial for spleen ailments; and similarly perform its phlebotomy as you did in the second equally.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the saphenous vein is for ailments in the lower part of the body, such as ailments of the wombs, retention of menses, infirmities of the kidneys, and old sores of the thighs and legs, and similar ailments.
And the quality of bloodletting is such that the sick person should insert his foot into warm water: and he should make friction upon it until the veins swell: and bind above the joint of the foot with a strap. And the place of the veins is near the heel, appearing towards the big toe: and many branches branch out from it on the surface of the foot.
Therefore, bloodletting should be done in the larger branch of it, or near the heel at its collection: for it is better and safer.
If you bloodlet from it on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves which are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And place your bloodletting instrument across where you bloodlet it, as if you want to cut it: and the bloodletter should be Nesil.
If however the flow of blood is prevented, then soak his foot again in warm water: and allow the blood to flow into it until it is evacuated.
If the bloodletter misses the vein on the first attempt, then repeat the bloodletting slightly higher up, for the area is safe, and you need not fear any harm from it when you are careful of the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly with the Saphena of the other foot equally.
The location of the Sciatic veins, as we have said, is near the heel on the outer side.
And the benefit of bloodletting is for the pain of gout, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient should enter the bath and hurry: and bind his leg on the side of the anchor up to four digits above the heel with a thin long string: for it does not appear except for that reason.
When therefore it appears, then bloodlet from it according to whatever method is possible for you, or according to the crosswise manner: and this is better, or cut it with an incision, or cut it with a section. For its location is safer, and it is very hidden in most people.
For its location is safer, and it is very hidden in most people. If you do not find it and it does not appear at all to the sense: then bloodlet from one of its branches, and that is the one which appears on the back of the foot, towards the little toe: and be careful of the nerves, and let as much blood as you wish.
Then loosen the binding, and place skin over the site of bloodletting, and bind the area. For it heals quickly.
Regarding ventosation, and the quality of its use.
Wind instruments are made from horns, and from metal, and from glass.
And ventosation is performed in two ways. With scarification and extraction of blood: the other is ventosation without scarification.
And this ventosation which is without scarification is performed in two ways. For it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And for windy conditions which are treated with scarification and bloodletting, there are fourteen places on the body. Of which one is Ventosatio Alnocrati, and it is at the back of the head: and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck: and the wind vents Alhagdahim, and they are two plates on both sides of the neck simultaneously: and the wind vent of the chin, and it is below the jaw on the lower part of the mouth: and the wind vents of the two spatulas: and the wind vents Alachosos at the end of the tail: and the wind vents of the two focilium, and they are in the middle of the two arms: and the wind vents of the two thighs: and the wind vents of the two cavillarum.
And Ventosatio indeed does not draw blood from you from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and because of this, strength does not fall from them, as is the case with bloodletting. Nor should ventosatio be administered, whether with fire or without fire, in any diseases that arise from repletion, until the whole body is evacuated.
If necessity prompts ventosation due to illness or habit, we administer it at any time at the beginning of the month, at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at whatever time it may be.
This is because there are people for whom when blood multiplies within them until they need its extraction through ventosation, they find heaviness and sodahan in their head.
And among them is one who finds fullness and redness on his face, head, and neck. And among them is one who finds itching on his face, and forehead, and darkness, and dullness in his eyes.
And among them is one who scratches the place of his windiness. And among them is one whose laughter multiplies. And among them is one who finds the taste of blood in his mouth: or his tongue swells, and he spits out blood. And among them is one whose sleep multiplies. And among them is one who sees in his sleep blood and redness, and the slain, and wounds, and things similar to those.
When therefore we see any of these things, and especially if it is on the third day of the month: then we prescribe wind expulsion to be done, after two or three hours have passed.
The benefit of the windiness of the neck is that it contributes to heaviness in the head and what flows to the eyes. But it should be done after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this Ventosa is in place of cephalic bloodletting.
And it is not permissible for one of a cold temperament to use it, or for one who has catarrh. For it causes him great harm.
And for that reason, the elderly should not use it, and those whose heads suffer from cold illnesses.
Whoever becomes accustomed to it, forgetfulness is generated upon him.
And for that reason, you should instruct the cupper to temporarily place his hand with the cup towards the lower parts, fearing the onset of forgetfulness.
Cupping or Alkehel is in place of black bloodletting and basilic bloodletting, and for that reason it benefits asthma, constriction of breathing, windpipe rupture, cough, and fullness.
And it should be that the cup of Alkehel is temporarily applied higher up, because if placed lower, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
Cupping with alhagdahim, however, benefits headaches, ophthalmia, migraines, piercing pains, and toothache: and it is a substitute for basilic bloodletting.
And you should instruct the cupper not to press his hand with scarification so as not to hit an artery and cause a flow of blood.
Cupping under the chin benefits alcoholism in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and similar ailments that are in the mouth: and it serves as a substitute for bloodletting from the veins that are in both lips.
Cupping of the spatulas benefits alchafacham, which is caused by obstruction and heat.
Blowing on the inner parts of two flasks provides as much benefit as opening three veins with a lancet, the Basilica, and Fusca, and Cephalica: for it draws blood from all those tiny veins which are in the flesh: and these tiny veins draw from other thicker veins than themselves, until the drawing reaches the three veins.
And you must instruct the Ventosator not to proceed too much in scarification: for the area is stripped of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
The ventosa which is applied over alchausos provides relief to hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
And you must instruct the Ventosator to use a large ventosa, and that it be of air: for the area requires strong suction, and perhaps delicate Ventosae may break: and it should be scarified with a large incision.
Ventosae of the legs produce a noticeable reduction: for they draw blood from the whole body, and alleviate old pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder: they provoke menstruation, and help bothor and ademenul: and serve in place of opening two saphenous veins and alhorcobeni.
However, they greatly weaken the body and cause syncope to occur in many people.
And the benefit of the alhorcobeni ventosae is similar to the benefit of the ventosae of the two legs.
The quality of the placement of ventosae is to first place the ventosa empty and suck with moderate suction: and do not prolong the placement of the ventosae, but place them quickly and remove them quickly, so that the humors come to the place with an equal arrival: and do not stop iterating and continuing this until you see the place already redden and swell, and the redness of blood appear: then scarify and repeat the suction gradually. Then consider in the arrangement of bodies.
For he who is of tender flesh and sparse pores, you must scarify him once, not more: so that the place does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the bloodletter to enlarge the scarification and make it a little deep: and moderate the suction in ease, speed, and gentle motion.
If there is thickness in the blood, then you must scarify him twice. In the first juice, the way is opened for the refinement of blood and its aqueous quality: and in the second, for the thorough extraction of thick blood.
If the blood is very feculent, then let there be a third scarification: so as to achieve the ultimate.
And finally, when we want to extract blood gradually or for a short while, one scarification is sufficient for us. If we want to extract much blood, we must scarify with multiple scarifications.
And if we measure that the blood is thick: then it must be scarified with deep scarifications: and the limit in scarification is the depth of the skin.
What is to be administered from oils at the site of bloodletting, and what the person being bled should beware of.
In the case of one whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are tight, the places for bloodletting should be anointed with oils that are opening, soothing, and dissolving: if it is in the summer season, such as oil of alkeiri, or violet oil, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of pumpkin seed.
And if it is in the winter season, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or chamomile oil, or saffron: and things like these.
And if the excess is thick and cold: then the oil should be of rue, or oil of balsamite, or oil of alkanet, or oil of dill: and things like these.
And if the windiness is of large pores, tender flesh: then it should be prohibited from oil, and these places of windiness should be washed after windiness with rose water, or with cold water, or with water of solatri, or with water of cucumber, or with water of portulaca: and things like these.
He whose blood is of much moisture, should wash windiness with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and sumac: and things like these.
Whose excesses are thick, should wash his windiness with old wine, or with sage water, or dill decoction, or chamomile: and things like these.
And it should be guarded that windiness is administered in a bath, or near the bath, but rather it should be given after coming out of the bath by an hour, or by two hours.
And it should not be that someone sleeps after windiness.
What is it that should regulate windiness or bloodletting before windiness.
And after that, you should first consider: then if the windy or bloodletted person is choleric, and sharpness and inflammation overcome his blood: then they should take cooling things, such as pomegranate marmalade: and also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and chicory, and rue: and things like these.
And place his foods as chickens, and meats of sheep sekebiget, and seasoned foods with herbs: and things similar to these.
And for one whose complexion is cold, he should take in drink syrup of honey, or of almiua, or alsecaniabin made from seeds: and let him take fragrant wine that is between old and new: and let it be ordered that he use sparingly of food. And place his food as chickens, and canebir: and sparrows, that is, small birds: and chickens of doves issiadebet.
And it is necessary that the drink on the day of cupping and bloodletting be more than food: and it is necessary that in drink there be given to some men at times theriaca alfaroch, or medicine of musk, that is, muscata, or alesselithe before cupping: and before bloodletting, or after: so that the principal members are strengthened, and the blood is refined. And they should not take it in heated drink.
Regarding Windiness without Scarification. Windiness without scarification, however, is Windiness that is placed upon the liver, and spleen, and gout, and upon the stomach, navel, and areas of the kidneys, and the anchor's box: because these members do not tolerate scarification upon them.
And they are sought for only by the attraction of blood from one member to another: as we place Windiness upon the breasts in the illness of nasal bleeding. And we use them to dissolve cold indissoluble wind in the limb: just as we place wind on the belly and navel. For it rarefies the limb, and heats it, and removes pain because it dissolves that wind.
It is also placed on the kidneys when obstruction or stone occurs in them. For by the power of its attraction, it perhaps opens the obstruction or uproots the stone from its place.
And it does the same when placed on the liver and spleen for dissolving wind in both of them.
And these winds are administered empty with only cutting. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in pleurisy illnesses: and this is done by filling the ventosa with hot water alone, or water in which herbs that are suitable have been decocted.
The method of applying the ventosa with fire.
Let the diameter of its opening be two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it: and let its depth be half a palm: and let there be a small hole on its side at a place that is about the middle of it, according to the size through which a needle can enter: it should be made of copper or brass, thick-edged, smooth, equal, clean: so that it does not harm the limb when placed upon it: and let there be a transverse rod in its center made of metal or iron where a candle with fire is placed.
And now it becomes this large and hollow, larger than what we mentioned, and somewhat smaller than that, according to the illnesses and age of the one who uses it.
For the bellows of children and those who are thin are different from the bellows of men and those with thick bodies.
The quality of placing this bellows with fire on the limb is to light a strip of linen with fire properly, or a small candle from wax: and place it in the middle of the crossbar which is in the middle of the bellows: so that the fire is lit around the lower part of the bellows, so that the body of the patient is not burned.
Then it is placed on the limb: and a finger should be on the hole I mentioned, until when we hold the bellows: while we need to, remove the finger, and vapor will come out through that hole, and the bellows will immediately release.
Then ignite the strip of linen according to its manner, and repeat it, if you need to do so.
In the bellows which is used for the illness of pleurisy with water, there is no crossbar, nor a hole: and it is not used except that it is filled with water and placed on the limb only.
And this is its form.
And this bellows, the larger it is, so that it can hold much water, is better.
Concerning the hanging of bloodsuckers.
Leeches are not administered in many places, unless in those members where it is not possible to place cups, because of the smallness of them, such as the lip, and the gum, and things like them. Or on a member stripped of flesh, such as the finger, and nose, and things like them.
And the quality of using them is: to obtain leeches which are in sweet waters, clean from putrefactions.
Then let them be kept day and night in sweet water until they are hungry, and nothing remains in their stomach. Then the body should be purged first with bloodletting and with cupping. Then clean the patient's limb until it turns red. Then place them on it.
Therefore, when they are filled and fall off, and it is possible to suction the area with a cupping vessel, then it is most beneficial; and if not, then wash the area with vinegar. Then with plenty of water, it should be rubbed and squeezed.
If the flow of blood continues after the leeches fall off, and it is seeping out, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the seepage stops.
If the blood flows excessively, then powder and sprinkle ground zego, or gallnuts, and things like them that are astringent, until the bleeding stops.
Or let halves of peeled beans be placed upon the site: and leave them until the beans adhere in place, for the blood is congealed.
And it is necessary if the repetition of bloodletting is required, when possible, to change the places.
If bloodletting is prohibited due to suspension, then the area should be cleaned with fresh blood. Or pierce with a needle in the places until some blood comes out. Then let them be placed, for they themselves when they feel some of the blood, adhere immediately.
When therefore you want them to fall off, sprinkle something over them from crushed aloe, or salt, or ash: and they will fall off immediately.
This Chapter is also frequently necessary in the art of Medicine, and it is the restoration of fractured and dislocated bones.
Know, O Sons, that foolish doctors and the common folk boast about this Chapter, and those who have never examined an ancient book or read a letter from it.
And for this reason, this method is deprived from the sciences in our land. And I have never obeyed in that completely good thing, and I did not achieve from it what I achieved except through the length of reading ancient books, and studying their understanding, until I extracted that knowledge from them.
Then I adhered to experience and study throughout my life.
And now I have described to you from that in this Chapter all that my knowledge contains: and beyond what my experience has passed, after I abbreviated it for you, and freed it from the burden of lengthiness, and shortened it to the end of abbreviation, and showed it to the end of deviation: and I formed many shapes in it from the forms of instruments which are used in it, as it is with the addition of deviation, just as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
We must say in the prologue of this Chapter the summaries of the discourse and the chapters, to whose understanding the artisan is first compelled to stand upon their truth: namely, so that you and those who are eager may know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say, therefore, that when a fracture, or dislocation, or torsion, or fall happens to someone, then you must hasten first to bleed him and to relieve him, or both together: unless something prohibits it, such as weakness of strength; or the one to whom any of these happen is a child or an infirm old man; or the time is of vehement heat or extreme cold.
Then let him be content with his food, cold vegetables, and flesh of birds, and of goats: and prohibit wine, and fatty meats, and to be filled with foods and all food which fills the veins with blood. Until when you are secure from a hot abscess, and you do not fear the discharge of matter to the limb: then let the sick person return to his original diet with which he was accustomed.
When therefore the fractured bone begins to heal, then it is necessary that the sick person be fed nourishing foods with much, thick, heavy nutrition in which there is viscosity: such as food made from wheat cooked with water, and roots, and heads, and feet, and bellies of cows, and eggs, and fresh fish: and thick wine, and similar things. With this regimen, the fracture is healed faster and better.
And know that fractured bones, when they are in men who are in the early old age, and in the infirm, cannot always be joined and consolidated according to their nature because of the dryness of their limbs: and they are consolidated and joined at the end of softening, like the bones of small children.
However, nature attaches something similar to glue on all sides of the fractured bone, in which there is thickness, by which it adheres and tightens itself, until they are united with each other, and bound together, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness as it was at first, until nothing prevents it from its operations: and for this reason it is necessary to provide the sick person's nourishment with foods that have heaviness, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
And you shall know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of limbs: for the fracture of the leg is different from the fracture of the skull bone: and the fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the back bone: and similarly all the other limbs exist differently from each other: and I come with the recollection of every type of fracture exposed in its own chapter distinguished from another. And the types of bone fractures also differ among themselves.
For its fracture is arched, besides splinters occurring in it. And sometimes its fracture is along the length of the bone: and its fractures are splintered, that is, splinters, and projections proceeding, as they are in a reed, when it is cut with a knife for writing. And not proceeding: and there is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head: and there is a fracture, a small fissure.
And every type has its own method or instrument for its restoration, according to which its recollection will come, distinguished in their places.
And by which the fracture of the bone is recognized is its twisting and its prominence: and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you compress it with your hand.
When therefore there is no apparent twisting in the place, nor sound at your touch when you touch the bone with movement, nor does the patient find great pain: then there is no fracture there, but it is possible that there is a slight twist or small fissure: therefore it is not necessary to move it with hand and compression at all, but instead apply some of the medicines whose recollection comes, after the appropriate moment for the place: then bind it with a fine bandage.
And you shall know that when the place is curved and split into two, besides the pus that may occur in it, nevertheless all parts are removed from their companion: then it is necessary for you to begin at your appointed time for its correction, equalizing it before warm pus befalls it.
And if warm pus befalls it, then leave it for several days until the pus quiets down. Then equalize it according to whichever method can be done based on its tenderness and nature.
And you shall know that the restoration and equalization of it is easier than that of bone in which pus occurs.
Then bind it according to how the memory of its treatment comes to you.
If pus is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this fractured limb from both parts, if it is a hand or foot: or with your hand if the limb is small: or with two ropes, or with one rope and a hand.
And let your position be such that you place the limb on an equal ground according to its natural shape, until when the parts of the fractured limb are extended: then endeavor with all ingenuity and in whatever way you can to return those additions to their places: and beware according to your strength, lest excessive pain or injury occur through your operation: and endeavor according to your strength to apply one of the two bones with its companion in the best forms.
And it is necessary at that time for you to test and touch it with your hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it, and equalize it according to the extent of your skill.
And beware of strong extension and forceful compression, as many foolish ones do. For often they cause by their operation a hot swelling or contraction in the limb: as we have already seen many times from their operations.
Then apply after equalization, and proper treatment, and binding of that limb, and rest, and tranquility: and advise the patient about it. And make him beware not to move it during his waking hours, and in his sleep regarding his turning, and stirring, and in his excretion, and all his movements with his utmost strength. And let him beware that the position of the limb does not cause pain. Which means that when he feels pain or injury in the positioning of the limb: then it is necessary to change it to another position where he does not feel pain.
And beware that its position is equal and straight: so that no curvature occurs in the limb when it is restored.
And the quality of the binding of the fractured limb is as I narrate.
Know that fractured limbs differ in their smallness, and their magnitude, and their form.
Therefore, those among them that are small, such as the arm, and finger, and shin, and similar to them, then it is necessary that there be a wrapping of a soft, fine cloth. Which of them are thick, like the thigh and leg, should have a wide, hard wrapping.
For the wide bandage connects the large limb and tightens it on all sides with equal constriction, so that no spot enters it.
Then begin after your evacuation to apply an appropriate liniment to that, on mild tow over the site of the fracture itself. Then begin to wrap the bandage over the site of the fracture itself with three or four wrappings, according to what the limb deserves: and hold your hand firmly with the bandage.
Then proceed with it to the upper part from the site of the fracture, and hold less tightly than your previous constriction with which you constricted the fractured place. Then move away with the wrapping from the site of the fracture gradually, and loosen the constriction little by little until you reach a large part from the healthy area.
Then take another strip and wrap it again over the fractured area with more wrappings. Then proceed with the wrapping to the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be in the constriction of the wrapping and its loosening, according to what we said in the first upper wrapping.
Then place between the wrappings with mild tow or cloth, with which the curvature of the fracture is matched, if there is curvature in it: and if not, do not place anything in it.
Then wrap another strip over it. Then apply evenly over these properly made bandages, immediately if there is no swelling in the place, nor a hot abscess.
If there is swelling or an abscess, then place on it where the abscess sits to reduce the swelling; and leave it for several days. Then bind the bandages over it tightly.
And the bandages should be made from the halves of a wide, shaved, and wisely shaped cane; or they may be made from wood used for sieves, which are made from pine, or geraid, that is, palm branches, or calingi: and the width of each bandage, according to this form, should have the same shape.
However, the bandage that is placed over the traction should be thicker and somewhat wider than the other bandages: and the length of the bandage should be according to what is suitable for the member in size and smallness.
Then bind over the bandages with another strip of cloth according to the same tightness as the first. Then bind over it with threads appropriately, according to what we have said about tightness: and it is so that your binding over the fracture site should be tighter; and the farther away from the fracture it is, the looser the binding should be.
And it is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and they should be made of soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the work of foolish ones who use twisted linen chords, it is a great mistake: for the tightness with them falls outside the proper quality.
And fine threads again do not suit: because you do not achieve with them what you want through tension.
And it should not be less than a finger between the peg and the peg.
If the patient is injured by the ends of the pegs after tightening at healthy sites: then place under them soft tow or carded wool until nothing is injured from that.
When there is a fracture with a wound, and a rupture occurs in the skin, I will come to it with a recollection of its singularity in the second chapter.
And you should know that not every fractured limb must be bound with pegs on the first day. This is because when the limb is large, you should not place pegs on it until after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from the risk of hot abscess.
And this is the method of plasters with which the ancients restored fractures and dislocations.
The method of a common abbreviated plaster that restores fractures, suitable for most complexions, especially women and children: because it is such that heat does not overcome it nor cold.
And it is done by taking the millstone dust, which is the flour powder that hangs on the walls of the mill near the motion of the millstone: and prepare it as it is, except that you sieve it with egg white: and set its consistency not thick nor thin. Then use it.
Method of another plaster for healing fractures, dislocations, and torsions. Take amber, and laudanum, and acacia, and enula, and mugwort: and the juice of all  X myrrh, and aloes both  V and alcohol  XX are to be ground, sifted, and mixed with alcohol: or with egg white, if the complexion of the patient is heated. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, heals broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Method of another plaster which also benefits fractures and torsions. Take mugwort, and moss, and white hollyhock, of each  X myrrh, and aloes both  V acacia  VI Armenian bole  XX grind all thoroughly, sift, and prepare with water, or egg white: and administer.
Method of a plaster for joints and bones separated from their places: and it alleviates the pain occurring therein, and bone cutting, and fracture. Take suet wool, and soak it in vinegar and boiled oil: and place it on the area.
And in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess: and it properly relieves pain.
The method of the plaster which restores the broken bone. Take the leaves of the fig tree and the leaves of the wild poppy; and grind all, and make a plaster from both.
The method of the shortened plaster, applied for the restoration of a fractured bone: and when you wish for the resolution of remaining abscess. Take the root of althea, and chamomile, and flowers of viola, and flour of the herb, of all one part each; grind all, and prepare with wine, if the limb is not heated.
If it is heated, then prepare it with humid coriander water, or with water, and use it.
The method of another stronger plaster for resolution, than this first one, when a hard abscess occurs at the restoration of a limb. Take the root of althea, and seeds of flax, and pomegranate blossoms, and sweet clover, and marshmallow, and flowers of viola, and chamomile, of all one part each; grind all, and prepare with willow water, or with sweet water, or with wine. Use the whole according to the heat of the member, and the subsidence of its fever.
Hippocrates, however, did not say in his book that anything should be placed on a fractured limb during its restoration except plaster made from wax and oil: nothing else: and he described it to be of a middle consistency between thickness and fineness.
Galenus thought that over the fractured limb during its restoration should be placed things which have a drying heat, such as myrrh, and aloe and frankincense, and similar to them from those which we have narrated.
Method of the plaster that helps with the injury and pain. Take mugwort, and chickpeas, and human hair cuttings, or bird feathers, and coltsfoot, and salt in equal parts: they are to be ground, sieved, and prepared: and a plaster is to be made from it.
The quantity according to which it is necessary for the bandage to remain, then be loosened, is such that you should consider whether no pain, nor itching, nor movement of the fractured bone from its place has occurred: then do not loosen it for many days. If a severe itching, or disturbing pain, or swelling occurs in the place: then hurry and loosen it within an hour, and remove the plaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a soft sea sponge, wet: and submerge it in warm water, and wash the area with it until the itching ceases, and the pain subsides.
If a severe itching, or disturbing pain, or swelling occurs in the place: then hurry and loosen it within an hour, and remove the plaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a soft sea sponge, wet: and submerge it in warm water, and wash the area with it until the itching ceases, and the pain subsides. Then let the limb rest for one hour. Then place wool soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil, on it: and bandage it for one night, until you are sure there is no hot swelling, and the inflammation of the limb subsides, and its pain is relieved.
Then adjust it to a fine binding, and a small plaster: and do not bind it tightly with your first bandage, and keep it fine until it heals.
If you see that the abscess, and redness, and pain, and swelling, and all symptoms are now completely removed, and you need a plaster and binding, then treat it again as you did at first equally.
If nothing of what we have mentioned happens to the member, then do not loosen it, unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is left for twenty days, do everything according to what appears to you from loosening the member as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the coagulation of flesh approximates over it: then also add more to the binding than your whole first binding: and also increase the infirm man's food according to his previous recollection of it.
If you see the place of the fracture already drying out and becoming thinner than it should be: then know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Therefore, wash it with warm water every time you loosen it, and do this for all three days, and lighten the binding for a while.
Through this operation, nourishment flows to the member, and it heals quickly.
However, what foolish restorers do with a fractured member by using another method when it is not restored properly at first and is restored crookedly, is an error from their operation, and a great fear: and if it were correct, the ancients would have mentioned it in their books and operated accordingly.
And I did not see any trace of them doing that at all, and it is better that it not be done.
On the treatment of head injuries.
The types of fractures are diverse, and its shapes are many: and its causes are distinct.
For there is a fracture caused by a blow with a sword: and the blow removes the bone entirely until it reaches the saphac, which is under the bone, just as an axe does to wood: and because of this, this type of fracture is called Axial.
Or the sword cuts through part of the bone, and cuts its surface, but the cut does not penetrate to the end: and this type of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, Absolute Elevation.
And it is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture which is grinding or wearing: and its cause is a blow with a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also penetrating, which approaches the membrane that is under the bone: or it is on the surface of the bone: and it is a wound of these two fractures, either small or large.
And there is a fracture that is hidden in the bone like a hair's subtlety: and it is a small crack, and because of this, this type of fracture is called Capillary.
And among them is a fracture that occurs from a fall or a blow with a stone, and similar things, which cause the bone layer to intrude inward, and a concavity is formed: like what happens to bellows when they are struck and part of them intrudes inward.
And it happens mostly in the heads of humid bones, as are the heads of children.
And separate efforts are made for all these kinds of fractures, and I will come with a recollection of the whole of it in its proper place.
And we know all these kinds of fractures by examining them, and probing them with probes, and removing the corrupted flesh that is on them.
The capillary type is known by this, that it is revealed on the bone, and is cleaned, and anointed on it with encaustic: for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, first consider the symptoms of the patient: then if you see from the symptoms that it indicates clear signs of fear, such as choleric vomiting, and extension, and loss of reason, and cessation of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and protrusion of eyes, and redness of them, and similar ones among the symptoms in most dispositions, doubtless it is not cured: and if you see symptoms that do not frighten you, and hope for recovery: then begin his treatment.
Which means, if a wounded person comes to you when they are first wounded: and this is during the winter months, then it is necessary that you focus on the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is during the summer months, then it is necessary that you hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what is under the bone from the membrane becomes corrupted, and those symptoms we have mentioned occur.
If the fracture of the bone has already reached the membrane touching the brain, and it is with fragments, and there is compression: then it is necessary that you cut away the crushed and worn part, as I tell you.
And it is as if you shave the head of the wounded: and expose over the bone in whatever way is possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light over the injured area.
If during the exposure of the bone there happens to be a flow of blood or a warm abscess: then apply what is necessary to it. And it is as if you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil: and make the wound rest until the abscess settles, and be secure from the flow of blood. Then begin in the treatment of the bone, and its removal.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
One method is to cut the bone with an instrument of a sharp edge: and this is its form.
Then apply another cutter after the narrower one for a moment: and this is its form.
Then apply yet another cutter wider than the second one.
And the second method is to have a number of different cutters with you: some of which are wider than others, and some of which are shorter than others: and they should be sharp at their ends, and they should be made of iron or steel: and use them easily in striking on the cutter so that it does not shake the head and harm it.
If the bone is hard and strong: then you must pierce around it before you apply the cutting instruments with drills which are called non-penetrating drills: and they are not so named unless because they do not pass through the limit of the bony flesh to that which is behind it: therefore, the drill has a round end above that which is under its sharp head, similar to an edge, and a small circle prevents submerging and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting for you to take from these drills a great number, each of which suits the thickness of the bone, until you have a drill suitable for every skull: the sharpness of whose ends in length and brevity should be according to the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three species of drills, or trephines.
The quality of piercing around the fractured bone is: to place the drill on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then change the drill to another place, and place it so that there is the thickness of a rod or about that amount between every hole.
Then cut with the cutting instruments what is between every hole in the bone: and make it finer than you can on the lighter end, as we said, until you root out the bone, either by hand or with some other of the instruments you have prepared for this: such as forceps and delicate chisels.
And you must be cautious with all care that the drill or cutting instrument does not touch anything from the sinus.
When therefore you circle around the bone perforating, and it is separated from the siphac, if it was continuous with it, and you extract it, you must scrape, and level the end of what remains in the bone with another similar cutting instrument. However, it must be thinner and finer than other cutting instruments.
If something remains of the small bones and splinters, then remove them easily with what you have among your instruments. Then care for the wound after that with lint and the ointments we have mentioned.
And another method of the operation is easy, entirely free from fear: which Galen mentioned and praised highly: and this is his saying. It is necessary for you first to begin uncovering the part of the bone from the place where the fracture is more severe and evident: until when you have uncovered that part, and placed under it the end of this lens-shaped cutting instrument, which has this form.
And the lens-shaped part, being blunt, does not cut anything: and the sharp part of it running along the two sides in length, as you see: so that the lens-shaped part is placed against the splinter, with its sharp face facing the bone.
Then strike on the cutting instrument from one side with a small mallet until you cut through the entire bone easily, as it turns: and you shall be secure about the membrane, that no accident happens to it which you fear entirely.
And if the medic were not stupider than others and more ignorant of it, nor were asleep, then if anything of the membrane remained attached to the bone in certain places, he would cut it off with the end of the lens-shaped cutting instrument and free it easily. For it is freed from it without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the panniculus, and that which is severed from the bone is its surface, and roughnesses and fine projections remain in it: then you must scrape away that roughness, and root out those projections with subtle razors of various sizes that you have prepared in number and diversity, so that you may be able to use those that are more suitable and truer for each place according to what the operation leads you to do, and also the fractured bone itself, and its shape. And you must act according to your judgment when you first scrape the bone, using the wider of those razors. Then use the finer one after it.
And you must act according to your judgment when you first scrape the bone, using the wider of those razors. Then use the finer one after it. And do not cease to do this continuously until you reach the point of using the finest and most subtle of them all.
In each of the remaining small capillary fissures and fine fractures, you must administer care according to what leads to its correction.
And this is something that is not hidden from anyone who has any interest in this art, and who has stood over what we have written and shown in major fractures.
But if the panniculus detected is retained when you remove the bone: then you must take a piece of linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another piece of cloth, doubled or tripled, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth: and make it as light as you can on top of it so that it is not too heavy.
Then apply a broad bandage over it: and do not bind it tightly, except to the extent that it holds the wound: and leave it with this care for one day or two days, until you are secure from a hot abscess. Then loosen it, and apply after it medicines with which there is excessive dryness: such as lily roots, and flour of the herb, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar to them: and it is that you make from these medicines a powder, which is dusted over the wound like they are dry.
And universally apply to it all medicine whose property is to cleanse and not to irritate. And be careful according to your ability, that the wound in your care is clear: neither let there be any grease filth in it, nor impurities.
And be careful according to your ability, that the wound in your care is clear: neither let there be any grease filth in it, nor impurities. And do not allow pus to gather in it at all: for when pus gathers on the brain membrane, it corrupts and putrefies it, and great harm befalls the patient thereafter: and it often happens in headaches, when the bone is cleansed of it, especially when its care is neglected, a blackening appears on its surface.
Therefore, consider then, if the patient experiences the conditions we have mentioned, you shall know that it is certainly perilous.
And if blackening does not occur except from the medicine placed upon it, and it is in the power of that medicine to cause that blackening: then you must take one part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and line the cloth with them. Then place him on a shiffin: afterwards care for him with the kinds of treatment which are suitable, until he is healed.
On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
You should know that only the two upper parts of the nose, or one of them, can be fractured; because there are two bones in it: since its lower part is made of cartilage, it does not fracture, and what happens to it is only wear, distortion, and flattening.
If one of the two parts is fractured, then you must insert a small finger into the nostril and align that fracture with your index finger and thumb from the outside until the nose returns to its natural shape: and this should be done skillfully, with ease. And beware that your operation does not cause pain to the patient.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be aligned using the tip of a probe that has a small thickness.
If the fracture is in both parts, then do the same: and hurry with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day when the inflammation has subsided.
Then insert a strip of linen cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part: or insert two strips if the fracture is in both parts: and let the strip have a thickness sufficient to fill the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers said that licinia should be infused into butter, and it should be changed every day. That indeed does not seem right to me; rather, it is necessary that licinium be infused into the albumen of an egg, mixed with millstone powder. Then leave the licinium until the bone is set and the cartilage hardens.
And sometimes, instead of licinium, a goose feather is inserted into the nose, after being wrapped with a soft cloth; and it happens that it holds the nasal fracture more firmly, and does not prevent the patient from breathing.
And this thing is not necessary. If you wish, do that: and if you wish, use licinia.
And if it happens that the nose is affected again while you are treating a warm abscess, apply plasters to the nose with cerote, or with suet infused in rose oil, or a little of diachylon.
But if a warm abscess does not occur, then it is necessary to apply plasters made with sesame flour and incense powder mixed with egg white. Then place a soft cloth over it, and do not bind the nose at all.
But if the bones of the nose are slightly fractured or crushed, then it is necessary to incise over them and extract them with suitable instruments. Then sew the incision and care for it with what promotes fleshing and strengthening, using appropriate plasters or ointments.
If a wound occurs between the nose, then you must treat it with lint: and administer a lead tube until it heals.
On the restoration of the lower jaw when it is fractured.
When the lower jaw is fractured and the fracture is not accompanied by a wound: then examine if the fracture is only external and not broken into two parts, and bent inward: then its diagnosis is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert the index finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient: similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the index finger of the right hand: and push with it the bulge of the fracture from inside to the outside easily with your other hand from the inner part of the bone properly, and align it accordingly.
If the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must apply traction from both sides, according to straightness: until it is possible to align it.
If, however, the teeth have already been displaced or broken: then bind those that you hope will remain with gold thread, or silver thread, or silk. Then place wax over the fractured jaw. Then place a doubled cloth over it, and put a properly made large splint on top of the cloth: or a piece of sole leather equal in length to the jaw.
Then bind it according to how its bandage is prepared, and apply it appropriately until it is not destroyed: and instruct the patient to maintain tranquility and rest: and provide him a diet of mild liquid foods.
If however you think that something has already altered in its form in some way: then hurry and untie it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from it, and make a poultice of mill dust, with egg white, or with sesame flour, after you have removed the tumors: and place soft wool on the poultice.
Therefore, while that poultice remains on it and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it alone, do not untie it until it heals: or bind the fracture. For this fracture is often bound in three weeks.
If during this time a warm abscess occurs, then apply what we have said many times for its reduction, until that abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, take note. For if a fragment is already separated from the bone or from the soft tissue: then be subtle in this, to remove those fragments from the soft tissue with whatever suits you among the instruments for their removal.
If however the wound opening is narrow, then enlarge it with a lancet according to the amount of your need.
Then when you have removed those soft tissues and nothing of them remains, sew the wound opening if it is wide: and if not, apply a poultice suitable for it, and promote fleshing over it until it heals.
Regarding the restoration of the clavicle when it is fractured.
The collarbone is mostly fractured from the front part near the shoulder, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.
For it is either broken and separated into two parts, besides which contusions may occur: and it is easier to restore it.
Or it happens that contusions occur in the bone: and it is more difficult to restore it.
Or it occurs that there is a fracture with a wound.
And the procedure when the fracture is without a wound is to have two assistants present, so that one of them holds an aid following the broken collarbone, and the other extends the neck towards the side.
Then equalize the fracture with your fingers until its form becomes as it should be: and there should not be any prominence or concavity in it.
If you need more extension, then it is necessary to place a sphere of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit. Its size should be according to your need: extend and lift the collarbone, and compress the sphere with your hand until you equalize the fracture as it should be.
If you cannot pull the end of the collarbone outward because it has gone deep, then the patient must lie down on his neck. Place a moderately large pillow under his shoulder, and have an assistant press his shoulder downward until the end of the collarbone that is deep inside is raised upward. Then correct and equalize the fracture with your fingers.
If however you feel a splinter from the collarbone and it moves: then it is necessary to cut above it and remove the splinter with ease.
If however it is retained in the bone, then skill is needed in cutting it with one of the files you have prepared for this, after you place under the collarbone the instrument that keeps sifach: and it is an instrument made of wood or iron. And this is its form.
It resembles a spoon that does not have a concavity.
And its width should be according to what you need from the size of the bone, and its smallness. Its length should also be according to what is possible for you in the operation.
And it should have two ends, as you see: and one end should be wide, and the other narrow.
If however the disruption of the wound which you made when you extracted the splinter of the bone is wide, and it is threatened by a warm abscess: then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear a warm abscess: then fill the wound with cloths and lint according to the amount of the wound's tear.
If a warm abscess does occur, then soak a cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place it on top of it.
A narrowing of the bone which is without a wound and without a cut, is treated by placing on the bone a poultice made from mill flour with egg white. And place a soft plug on it. Then place the ball under his scrotum, if you need that. Then take the himematam, that is, the roll which the Saracens use, which should be very long: and its width should be one palm, or around that. Then place a doubled poultice on the plug and ointment. Then take a strip from a thin board, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap that cloth with the strip in place of the himematam which falls over the fracture and area. Then place the himematam over the fracture as described, and wrap it around his neck, and under his healthy scrotum, and under his injured scrotum: and bring it back over all parts, and in such a way that you see the binding holds the fracture tightly: and this is not hidden from you, and all of it so that the strip is not removed from the mouth of the fracture. And for this reason, it is necessary to look after the patient every day. Whenever the bandage softens and you see that the strip can now be removed: then set it right, and tighten the bandage.
Then place the patient's sleep on his back, and put a small pillow under his scrotum at his side during the night, so that his support is lifted from his side with it. The fracture of the fork should be raised by elevating the shoulder.
Or bind his arm to his neck: and do not loosen the bandage if no accident occurs from itching or from an abscess until the twelfth day.
Then renew the plaster if you see that it is needed. And add to the binding, and leave it until it is restored and coagulated.
And the fracture of the fork is bound and strengthened as much as possible within twenty-eight days: and sometimes it occurs in some men in a shorter time.
Regarding the restoration of the fractured spatula.
The spatula is rarely fractured, and if it is, it happens at its wide part: and from it, only its edges are fractured.
When therefore that part is fractured, and it is fractured in its middle, and it is not recognized except by touch: then according to the figure of the fracture attempt its preparation. And restore it to its natural shape by any means of ingenuity that is possible for you.
Then place flour dust with egg white on the area, and a soft tow, and put a cloth poultice over it. Then place on it a wide strip from a thin board according to the size of the entire spatula, or slightly larger than it.
If however there is a concavity in some part of the spatula's place, then equalize that concavity with soft tow until the probe descends according to equality.
Then bind over it with a long bandage, with appropriate constriction, and the firmness of the probe, until it is not moved from its place.
And consider the bandage every day. Whenever the bandage is softened, tighten it, and equalize the probe if it is moved from its place: and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When this number is complete, then loosen the bandage: and you will be in safety. For it is of bones whose union is not feared, nor their separation.
If a fragment proceeds from the bone and pricks under the skin: then cut over it, and remove it. And do what we have said in the case of a clavicle fracture from the sedation of a hot abscess, if anything should happen from it.
Regarding the restoration of a fractured rib.
The chest is sometimes fractured in the middle of it, and this rarely occurs. Its extremities are often fractured and shattered from its accidents.
When its middle is broken, which inclines toward the lower parts, and violent pain befalls him, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps he vomits blood, and a concavity is apparent in the broken bone, and it is not hidden from the senses: Its restoration is for the sick person to lie on his back: and place under his Spatulas a pillow.
Then press his shoulders, and bring the ribs together from both sides or sides with your hands: and adjust in its alignment, in every way that is possible and appropriate, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
Then place on it a poultice and tow, and put above a rod from a thin board of willow, or chalinus, and those similar in lightness, after you wrap it in cloth. Then adjust in binding it over the fractured bone, so that it does not move: and go with the bandage around to the back several times, and secure it with a proper tightness.
Then examine the bandage at all times, and whenever it loosens, tighten it: and if the necessity of the case calls for its removal due to itching, or corrosion which occurs in the area, or pain, or swelling: then hurry and remove it, and take off the poultice, and treat what happens with the method of its cure.
Then apply the poultice again if you see that it is necessary: and secure it with a bandage until it heals.
Regarding the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Know that the fracture of the ribs does not occur except in the thick parts following the back, and from their extremities on the front side. And attrition does not occur to them unless because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden to the sense during the examination with fingers.
And its restoration is done in such a way that the fracture is evenly aligned with fingers according to the possible manner, until the shape is even as it should be. Then apply plasters, and bind the fractured ends with a splint, if it requires that.
And if the fracture of the ribs inclines towards the interior: then the patient suffers severe pain and a puncture, like the puncture that occurs to one who has pleurisy: therefore, because the bone pierces the membrane, and also the patient experiences difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting much blood: and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients have devised many methods for this: some of them say that you should give the patient foods that generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the stomach becomes inflamed, expands, and pushes the fracture to the exterior.
We, however, refrain from causing a quick reason to produce a warm abscess, if it does not occur. If, however, it has already occurred, then add to it.
And some of them said: place a suction device on the area, then suck with strength, and it is similar in reasoning. However, it is feared that the suction may attract excesses to the area due to the condition of weakness.
And some of them said: the area must be covered with wool which has already been immersed in warm oil: and poultices should be placed between the ribs until it is filled: so that the bandage is even when you wrap it according to the roundness.
Then the patient should be treated for pleurisy with food and medicine.
If a violent thing constrains the patient, which the patient cannot tolerate, and the wound pierces the covering with a damaging puncture, and we are worried about the patient: then it is necessary to cut open above the area and expose the fractured rib. Then we place upon it the instrument that preserves the seam, of which the description has preceded: and cut the bone with ease, and cut into it.
Then bring together the two edges of the wound if it is large with sutures: and treat it with plasters until it heals.
If a warm abscess should occur in the meantime, then hurry and pour poultices into rose oil, and place them on the area: and treat the patient with what is appropriate for an abscess.
In the meantime, he should lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Regarding the treatment of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
The bones of the neck sometimes suffer fractures, and rarely do they experience attrition: and similarly with the vertebrae of the back. Therefore, when it happens to someone, and you wish to know whether he will be healed or not: then have confidence. For if you see his hands already softened, numb, and lifeless: and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor contract them: and when you contract them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it, and does not feel pain in them: then know that he will not be healed, and in many conditions it is mortal.
But if he moves them and feels the contraction with fingers and the pricking: then know that the nuchal bone is sound, and that the patient will be healed with treatment.
If a similar thing happens to the vertebrae of the back, and you wish to know whether he will be healed or not: then consider his feet: then if you see that they are softened, and what happened to the hands happens to them: then when he lies on his back, flatulence and excrement are discharged involuntarily: and when he is placed on his stomach, excrement is discharged involuntarily: and when he is placed on his back and wants to urinate but cannot: then know that it is mortal. Therefore, do not labor in his treatment.
If however none of that happens to him, the case is milder.
And the treatment of what happens from that is to try to reduce the heat of the abscess: thus, you place on the spine ground rose oil alone: or with eggs of a roasted egg.
Place that on it several times a day until the hot abscess is reduced; then apply one of the strengthening, drying, and binding plasters to the area and bind it with a bandage; and instruct the patient to use rest and tranquility. Nor should he sleep on the side where he finds pain until it is healed.
If it happens near the grinding of the sathaiated bone, or something that is already separated from it, then it is necessary to incise over the skin and remove it. Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture if it is large. Then treat it with some flesh-forming ointment until it is healed.
If the last bone of the alhausos is fractured, and it is the end of the tail: then it is necessary to insert the thumb of the left hand into the anus, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible, and by a second adjustment.
Then place something on it and remove it: and treat the wound with the preceding treatment until it is healed.
Regarding the restoration of the anchor.
Chapter Eleven.
The bones of the anchor rarely fracture. If they are broken, then their fracture is not complete, but rather a fragmentation at the ends of them: and they split lengthwise, and lean inward: and the sick person experiences pain in the place and a pricking sensation: and the leg that is broken becomes numb.
And the restoration of it is to extend your hand over it until you stand over the fracture and understand its configuration.
If the fracture is only at the ends of it, then equalize that fracture according to how it is prepared for you by equalization until it resembles its natural form.
If the fracture is lengthwise, or has already leaned inward: then make the sick person lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture is prepared. When therefore you have equalized it, place a poultice on it: then place a splint of wood or leather on it: and bind with a bandage on which you do not fear the displacement of the fracture nor the removal of the splint.
And equalize the concavity of them with what fills it until the bandage holds it according to equality: and instruct the sick person to sleep on their back or on their healthy side.
If a hot abscess occurs to him: then cease from extending it and its restoration until the hot abscess subsides: and place on it what causes it to subside, as previously mentioned, then return to its restoration: and bind it as appropriate.
If there is pus in the bone or if it is fragmented, remove it.
On the restoration of the fractured Adiutorium.
Adiutorium is that which is between the elbow and the head of the Spatula.
If it is fractured, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One of which is: to take a piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this form that follows.
And two bands shall be tied at the two ends.
Then it shall be suspended from an elevated place: and the patient shall sit on a seat. Then he shall throw his fractured arm over the wood until it reaches the armpit, where the curvature of the wood is attached in the middle.
Then hang something heavy above it, so that it extends the limb downward. Then the physician equalizes the fracture with his hands simultaneously, until the fracture returns to its proper position.
And the other method is to have the patient lie on their back: and suspend their arm from their neck with a band. Then command two assistants, so that one of them holds what is above the fracture with his hands: and the other holds below it, and each extends to their respective part.
And if you wish for a stronger extension, then bind below the fracture with one band, and above it with another band: and each of the two assistants shall extend them to their respective parts.
If therefore the fracture is near the extremity of the shoulder, then it is necessary that one bandage be placed under the armpit, and another under the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow: then it is necessary that a bandage be placed on that place and on the elbow itself.
Then equalize the fracture with ease without effort until when the fracture is aligned as it should be and applied properly: then bind it, if a warm abscess does not occur.
If a warm abscess occurs, then release the binding until the seventh day. And place upon it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess quiets: then bind it: and the method of binding it is to place a plaster over the fracture.
Then place a folding of new cloth over the plaster. Then let the arm be bound with support, and let his open hand be placed on his shoulder.
And place a cloth and bind the arm with support, so that the arm remains in its proper place: if nothing prohibits you from it, nor anything alters from the fractured bone.
If you fear that anything from the fractured bone may alter, then use splints: and it is done by placing a splint over the fracture itself which is wider and stronger than the other splints. And place the width of a finger between each splint: and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an additional three fingers on every side.
Then bind over the splints the binding which I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is so that your binding over the place of the fracture should be tighter. And the more the fracture is elongated, let the binding be looser.
If therefore you see the placement of the splints and the binding as we said, at the hour when you restore the limb immediately, then do this: and if you fear a warm abscess, then remove the binding and the splints until the seventh day, as we said.
Then examine the binding for all three days, so that there does not occur in the place itching, or swelling, or prevention of food reaching the limb, due to the arrangement of the excess of the binding. Therefore, correct all of that according to what we said.
If however you are confident that nothing will happen from it: then do not loosen the binding unless after three days, or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on his back, and his hand on his stomach: and place under his support a cushion full of wool evenly.
And observe at every hour of the night or day that the shape of the fractured limb is not loosened, or the binding softened. Therefore, correct all of that with your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order we have mentioned, so that the food is light at first, until the swelling begins to decrease: then it is necessary to make his food more substantial.
For the custom of aiding and the leg is to be bound for forty days: then it must be loosened, and a bath administered, and treated with ointments that correct it.
If the fracture is ugly and crushed: then do not loosen the bandage and splint from it until fifty days, and even up to two months.
On the restoration of a fractured arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two forearm bones.
Of which one is smaller: and it is the one that follows the thumb. And the other is larger, and it is the one that is placed below the smaller one on the lower part.
Perhaps only the larger forearm bone is fractured, or the smaller one: and perhaps both are fractured at the same time.
When the smaller forearm bone is fractured above, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower forearm bone is fractured, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when both bones are fractured at the same time.
If the bone that is fractured is the upper smaller forearm bone, then it is appropriate for the physician in restoring it to apply slight extension with ease until it is aligned.
If the larger forearm bone is the one that is fractured: then it must be strongly tightened greatly.
And it is necessary that he places the form of the hand at its restoration, and its extension spread out on the pillow. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers: and let the lower joint be common to all the fingers, or the rest: and the patient sitting square upon himself, and let the pillow be before him, or in line with him, in height, so that the patient does not incur labor.
Then let the minister extend the arm from the lower part, either with his hand, or with a bandage. And another minister shall extend similarly from above.
Then the doctor equalizes the bone until he restores it to the best shape possible.
If there are splinters in the fracture of the bone, then strive to replace every fragment in its place by your skill.
If there appears a separated splinter and it pierces the skin, and you have no hope of its restoration: then incise over it, and remove it according to the method we have mentioned previously.
If the fracture is with a wound, I have already made a separate chapter for that, so take the treatment from there.
If a warm abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then line cloth with cerote made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be between thick and thin: and bind the cloth tightly over it with a fine bandage until the abscess is calmed: then remove the cerote, and apply a plaster prepared from mill powder with egg white. Then place the splints, and let the splint which is placed upon the fracture itself be somewhat wider and stronger.
And you shall know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most arrangements: whether the fracture be in one shaft, or in two shafts at once.
Then place your binding over the site of the fracture stronger and more forceful, and somewhat more with the binding toward the upper part of the fracture, or towards the lower part of it: or place a milder binding similar to its binding, according to which was recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
And let the cloths which are wrapped over the fracture be soft, moist cloths: and they should not be hard, rough. And let the thread with which it is bound be of flax, properly between fine and coarse, as we have mentioned.
And consider the limb and the bandage after some days. And if something happens that requires correction, such as itching that occurs in the limb: then it is necessary to foment the limb with warm water until the itching ceases, and leave the limb unconstricted until it rests, then bind it again.
And if the binding has already been softened, and the bone has already been set, and similar things: then correct all of that with your skill, and examine it again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive binding, then it is necessary to soften it somewhat and leave it for several days until the nourishment flows to it, then bind it again.
If however none of those things which we mentioned happens to the patient, then it should not be dissolved, unless after twenty days, or around this number.
Then the patient's hand should be suspended to his neck. And let his neck be kept still, and protected by its strength from disturbing movements. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days. All of that depends on the dispositions of complexions, and the dispositions of strength.
On the restoration of fractures of the hand.
Know that fractures rarely occur in the knuckles of the hand and the joints of the fingers. And it does not happen to him, except through frequent friction.
When therefore a fracture or attrition happens to the sole, then it is necessary that the patient sit upright, and before him there be a seat according to equality. Then place his hand upon it extended.
Then let the assistant extend the fractured bones, and the doctor should align them until they are joined well together.
Then it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, if a warm abscess does not occur. Then place the splint over it according to the size of the area: and you have now wrapped it in a linen cloth.
If the fracture is around the lower part near the belly of the foot, then make something like a sphere out of cloth: and instruct the patient to press it with their fractured foot over it: then bind it with a long cloth.
And let the splint be made of leather, which should have softness, so that it can be applied with the skin to the body of the foot: and bind it according to what is necessary.
If the fracture is on the outer side, then it is necessary to place a splint on top and another splint below on the foot: and let the hand be held straight. Then place the binding as the hand is rotated: and extend it between the fingers with a bandage.
If a fracture occurs in one of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, adjust it according to what is necessary. Then bind it with the sole: and if you wish, place a straight, small splint on it: so that the fracture is raised and does not move.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle finger, and the index finger, or the little finger, and the ring finger, then align it and bind it with the healthy finger following it: or bind them all according to continuity: and this is better. Or place a small splint on it, as we said for the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after the disposition of warm poultice: and apply what is necessary when something happens to it, according to how its narration is repeated.
On the restoration of the fractured hip.
The hip bone is often fractured, and it is noticeable because it turns to the inner and posterior part.
And its restoration is done in such a way that a band is tightened above the fracture, and another band below the fracture. And the patient should lie down on his face.
Then the attendant should stretch all the band to its part according to equality: and this is done when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If the fracture is near the root of the hip bone, then the band should be placed at the part of the pecten so that the extension falls upward: and another band below the fracture.
And so similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then the band should be placed near the knee, so that the extension is downward.
Then the doctor equalizes the bone with both of his hands until he restores it according to the similarity of its natural form: and the bone is joined with a good union.
Then it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, if the member does not develop an abscess. If an abscess develops in it, then leave it for a few days until the warm abscess subsides, then return to your treatment.
The binding of it should be done thus. You must wrap a hard cloth, that is, a bandage, over the fracture; and fold it twice or three times; and let there be an excess remaining from it. Then wrap the leg until the heel reaches the root of the thigh.
And insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee to the lower part, and let the ends of the thread come from the upper part of both sides. Then wrap over the leg and thigh what remains from the extra cloth.
Then place splints on the thigh at the site of the fracture, and put one of them over the bone of the leg.
Then fill the spaces between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the binding is even.
Then begin with a strong binding from the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four wraps. And the further you extend with the bandage from the site of the fracture, let your binding be looser and softer, and gentler.
Then pull on the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and the leg. Bind therefore with both three splints which are on top. Then proceed with the two ends of the thread to the lower part until you reach the ankle. And with both, tighten also the ends of the splints from the other side so that the binding does not move from its place.
Then release the tourniquet from that area while it remains so that there does not occur in the member corrosion, nor abscess, nor swelling, and similar to these. If anything happens from that. Hurry therefore with its solution, and correct everything that happens from it, according to what we have said many times.
If however there is a fragment of bone in the bone that pains: then it is necessary to equally remove it, if it is possible for you. And if not, find it and remove it: and treat it as previously mentioned until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is bound, to which splints are added, as we have said in the case of support and arm.
However, in the restoration of such a fracture, the patient does not become lame. And if it is restored alone, without the other leg being applied to it, then it is necessary that the one to whom it belongs limps always.
And know that the hip is bound for fifty days, or a little is added or subtracted: all of this depends on the diversity of complexions and other conditions.
Regarding the restoration of the fractured kneecap.
Know that fracture of the kneecap rarely occurs, but wear often happens to it.
If however a fracture occurs to it, then not unless either a And it is with the wound, and without the wound. And it stands over the whole thing with sensation.
And the restoration is such that the disrupted parts are equalized with fingers until they come together and join as much as possible by equalization and ease, and construction.
Then apply a plaster made from sesame flour or mill flour with egg white: and place a round splint on it if you need it: and bind it securely with an appropriate bandage.
Then consider all the treatments we have described for other fractures: such as warm poultices and similar things: so that you oppose every occurrence with what is appropriate to it until it heals.
Regarding the restoration of a fractured leg.
Know that the legs consist of two bones, one of which is thick and is named the leg bone: and the other is slender, and is named the fibula.
And it happens to both types of fractures as it happens to the two bones of the arm: and because of this, its restoration is like the restoration of the arm equally, and the procedure is the same.
If both bones are fractured simultaneously, the leg turns in all directions.
And if the slender bone is fractured, the leg turns to the front part.
And if a thicker bone is fractured, you find it below: and it is one of those that are not hidden from you.
Then administer extension, and equalization, and ligation of the splints according to that equally.
However, it is necessary, if the fracture of the leg is a nasty fracture, having many sethagiae: that there be less extension, and milder alleviation by you.
And in the leg indeed there is something of an operation similar to the arm: and it is that when you equalize the splints, and complete all your operation, then take two bands from pine wood, which is used in the manufacture of coverings which is placed under boards: and they are made from palm ribs: and choose from them those which have a small thickness, and neither should they be from the thin ones: and their length should be according to the length of the leg from the knee downward.
Then wrap cloth over each one with two wrappings according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side, and the other on the other side: and let them be from the knee downward to the foot.
Then bind the two bands at three places from both ends and the middle. For when constriction is prohibited, the leg bends to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And now a cradle made of wood according to the length of the leg should be administered, and the leg should be placed in it, so that it keeps it from movement.
And it is indeed very important that you do this in a fracture when it is accompanied by a proper wound.
Then consider the leg every day, and be diligent with the same last degree of care to prevent abscess, or swelling, or other such things. If therefore any of these things happens, then apply to it what is necessary until it is healed, if God wills.
On the fracture of the bones of the foot and toes.
A complete fracture does not occur in the calcaneus.
Fractures do sometimes occur in the bones of the foot and occasionally in the toes as well; and in most cases, they only suffer abrasions.
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and you see those bones rise above their natural position, then let the patient place his foot on prepared ground, as if walking.
Then stand and place your foot on that which has risen from those bones; then press or tread on it until it is leveled and returns to its proper place.
Then apply a plaster and place some tow on top of it: and put a small board under the arch of the foot, which has two flat ends.
Then bind it to the foot with a suitable bandage after you wrap it with cloths and other necessary materials.
Therefore, when three days pass by him, or four, then loosen the bandage. For you will find the bones equal, whether they are fractured or dislocated. The operation on them is as you see.
If some fingers are fractured, then restore them and align them as I have described to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint on the finger according to the length of the finger, and let it be slightly wider than it: then place under the foot the board I have described to you, and secure it with an appropriate bandage.
If however what is fractured of the bones is two, or three, or more, then place on every finger a splint of its size, wrapped in a linen cloth: and secure the board at the bottom of the foot: and let it stand on one end of the board outside the sole of the foot, so that it holds firmly.
And it is fitting for you, so that you do not forget, to consider all that I have told you regarding other fractures from the accidents we mentioned: and address each accident with what is appropriate.
Regarding the fracture of the female vulva, and the os pubis, and the male penis.
When the vulva of a woman is fractured, then make her sit squarely. Then tilt her to the side of her back slightly, and have her held from behind.
Then the midwife should fill her vulva with fat until it is full: and let it become spherical in the vulva from it.
Then the woman should be shaken, and her back raised gradually. For that fat comes out, until it becomes spherical in front of the vulva's entrance, and the broken part returns.
Then place a poultice on her back. When she wants to urinate, she should remove the fat easily, then urinate: and insert it back in the manner you initially introduced it; then return to her original poultice.
She should do this for seven days, or so, for the opening itself is restored.
And if you wish, take the bladder of a sheep, and attach a reed tube to its opening, and insert the entire bladder into her vulva. Then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the vulva, for the fracture returns to its place.
Then it should be filled with fat and remain for several days, as we have mentioned, until it heals.
And when the opening of the Pectinus of a man or woman is fractured, then administer for its restoration and realignment what we have mentioned for the Anchae bone.
And the rectum is not concealed in these nearby fractures that slightly affect it, especially in one who has some practice or use.
And understand my book very much, for the fracture itself shows you the correct way in many arrangements for its restoration and constriction: therefore understand.
In the case of a man's penis when it is fractured, take the throat of a goose and insert the penis into it. Then place a wrapping of cloth over it, and let it be wrapped, and leave it for three days, or around that time, and it will be healed, if God wills.
On the restoration of fractured bones when there is a wound.
It is appropriate for one to whom a fracture with a wound has occurred, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone, or the scapula, or similar, that you hurry and bleed him immediately: if the conditions for bleeding are indicated to you, as we have premised.
If the wound is bleeding, then you must hurry to treat it by dusting ground zegi over it: if you have nothing else available.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day: and do not postpone it, unless an abscess occurs.
If an abscess does occur that is warm, then postpone the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you would cause harmful complications to occur.
If however a fractured bone protrudes above the skin: then it is necessary that you attempt to reduce it and equalize it with your hands using ease and slight traction.
If however the traction and its equalization with your hands are not prepared: then reduce it with this instrument. And it is an instrument that is made of iron, whose length is seven fingers, or eight: and its width is according to the size of the wound. And for this reason, it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them according to the amount needed for that cure in every kind of fracture.
And let it be round: and let it have a small thickness, so that it does not double under pressure on it during the operation: and let it have a sharp end, which has an edge at its ends. And let the upper part of it be thickened from the middle to the lower part.
And this is its form.
It is necessary in this operation to place its sharp curved end over the protruding bone end: and push it with it once, until the bone returns and is equalized by some equalization.
Therefore, attempt to equalize the ends of the fracture closely.
If the ends of it are fractured finely and the instrument cannot grasp it properly, then it is necessary to cut the end of that bone until the instrument can grasp it.
If indeed you cannot reduce them with what we have described entirely, then cut it open with whatever is suitable for it from the incisors which we mentioned: or saw it open with one of the saws in whichever way possible for you.
Then scrape what remains on the bone from roughness and small bark.
When the bone is reduced, and the patient finds severe painful damage after its reduction, then you know that the bone did not return to its natural position.
Do therefore that. For you provide great assistance to the patient when the restoration you perform on the bone is completed.
Then soak the cloth in astringent, black wine. And especially if it is in summer. And you shall not place wax on the wound, nor anything that contains oil: so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption in it.
Then apply the splints at the completion of your restoration of the bone. And leave the wound exposed: so that you cut with scissors a hole in the coverings according to the size of the wound.
And be cautious with all caution, lest you compress the wound with the fracture. For foolish doctors have often done this: and have caused death, or corruption, or pus, that is, sanies, to occur in their patients. And let your bandage be soft, gentle, different from the bandages of other fractures.
If the wound is severe, or it is a large wound, and you fear some bad occurrences related to it as we have mentioned, and you find the pain suspended in that place: then it is not appropriate to apply boards on top of it. And make involutions from hard cloths instead of boards, and bind it with them.
When it is after one day, or two days, and you see the wound beginning to generate pus: then remove the cloth you placed over it with wine. Then apply licina, and ointments with which it is our custom to treat wounds: such as the tetrapharmacum ointment, and similar ones.
And it is appropriate for you to loosen the bandage. And examine the wound every morning and evening until it is stabilized and healed.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that pus may flow downward easily.
If many days pass for the wound and it does not stabilize, nor does the pus separate from it: then you know that there are small bone splinters there. Therefore, it is necessary to examine the wound with a probe. How many of those splinters are separated, remove them, and extract them. And those among them that are not separated, and they prick the member, and cause pain to occur, endeavor to cut them, and remove them in every way that is possible for you.
If it happens that the wound suffers from gangrene, or ecchymosis, that is, discoloration, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary to oppose each one of them with what is suitable for it in treatment, of which a preceding account has been given in its chapter.
And from that in which my speech must stand, and to which you should give your present mind when a bone is fractured and protrudes over the member, such as the hip bone, and helper bones, and similar ones from large members, it is that you should not presume its attraction, for death often results from that; rather leave it until it putrefies.
For perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Then therefore treat the wound if it seems right to you: and if not, leave it.
Regarding the treatment of nodulation in the area of a fracture.
This nodulation often occurs at the site of a fracture healing. Especially those near the joints: and the figure of the member is disfigured by it. And it may prevent the member from its natural function.
Therefore, consider if the nodulation is recent: apply to it medications that have astringent properties, such as aloe, frankincense, myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar substances.
Thus, you take some of these or all of them: and finish them with astringent wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar: and place them on the knot in tow, and bind them well over it.
And leave the binding, nor loosen it for many days. Then remove it, and repeat another, until the knot is removed.
Or bind it over the sheet of lead appropriately. For lead has the property of removing everything that is feared from the members.
If however the knot has already turned to stone and is bound tightly, and necessity urgently requires its removal: then find on it from its upper part, and cut off the prominent excess: or scrape it with some scrapers until it is removed: and care for it until it heals.
Regarding the treatment when it is restored, and the member remains delicate afterwards, not according to its natural state.
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the member remains delicate and weak afterwards: then this happens only due to many causes. One of which is the frequency of loosening and binding the bandage not as it should be: or due to the excess tightness of the bindings, preventing nourishment from flowing to the member: or due to the frequent application of excessive embrocation at inappropriate times: or due to the lack of blood in the body of the patient and their weakness.
And the treatment is to feed the sick person and make his body weak until blood multiplies in him. And administer a bath. And bring joy and happiness to him.
Then place pitch on the limb: so that the pitch may attract much nourishment to it. And repeatedly rub it with warm water until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
On the treatment of fractured bones when they heal crookedly.
When it happens that after the restoration and healing of a limb, there is crookedness, prominence of the fractured bone, or knotting, and the form of the member is marred by this, yet the limb is not hindered in its natural function, then you should not accept the advice of him who thinks the limb should be broken again.
And there have been many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land.
And this operation is indeed highly disgraceful, leading to death or great fear, so that it may be mortal.
But if the limping and knotting are recent, then it is necessary to rub it with warm water in which softening herbs have been decocted, such as the leaves of marshmallow and its root, and sweet clover, and things like these. And a poultice should be made for it with a softening plaster, such as properly made diachylon.
Either take the mucilage of the root of althea, and mix it with chicken fat, or sesamin oil: and plaster with it.
Either take fat figs, and pound them with pigeon dung, and similar things which are named among the medicines diminishing consolidation.
And sometimes knotting is solved with frequent, old, and gentle friction, which is done with wet hands. And the movement of the limb should be administered to all parts at all times.
If however the tortuousness has already preceded, and become strong, and turned into stone, and necessitated the need for treatment with iron: then it is necessary to cut the upper part of it, and release the continuity of the bone, and cut away what is excessive from the knot or bone with fine scalpel: and facilitate movement in it with care and attention.
Regarding the discussion on dislocation.
Dislocation is the departure of some joint from its place. Therefore, it is prohibited from its motion, and the figure of the member is disfigured. And it causes severe pains and injuries to the patient.
When therefore dislocation happens to someone, then one must hurry to restore it: do not delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the area may become inflamed, and perhaps the reduction of the dislocation with it.
Therefore, it should not be moved or extended during the hour of its suppuration. For it often causes spasms and painful pains.
But when it happens, then you must quickly proceed to bloodletting of the patient. Then it should be left until the suppuration rests.
Then the limb should be rubbed with warm water and oil. Then it should be reduced with ease.
And let the entire limb be treated with it, whose memory will come at its proper time.
I have indeed already arranged the chapters on dislocations, even as it preceded in fractures, from the upper part of the body to its lower part.
Regarding the treatment of the dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two jaws are rarely dislocated to a slight degree.
And the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways. For either they are moved from their places slightly, and are softened for a moment. Or they are dislocated completely and entirely until they soften towards the chest, until the saliva of the patient runs and he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is involved with speech.
When however its displacement is small, then it returns in most cases by itself with little effort.
If however the displacement is complete and entire: then it must be that the reduction be administered quickly, and not delayed entirely: and it is that the operator hold the head of the patient: and the physician insert the thumb of one hand into the root of the displaced jaw between its mouth, if the displacement is on one side. Or let him insert two thumbs simultaneously, if the displacement is on both sides. And the other fingers of his hands should be outside, with which he equalizes.
And command the patient to clean his jaws and prepare them for eating on all sides. And the physician equalizes the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated simultaneously: then apply vaporization with hot water and oil until the reduction of both becomes easy: do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
When therefore they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed, and do not loosen: then place upon them small pieces of cloth with plaster that is made from wax and rose oil.
Then it should be bound easily with soft bands.
And let the patient sleep on his back: and let his head stand between two pillows, so that he does not move it to the right or left: nor should he attempt, or be forced to chew anything: rather, let his food be given by a gentle sip, until when the pains are removed, and the jaw is set: then let him eat what he wants, and let it be administered easily.
Let not one labor over the operation of his mouth at eating and drinking, and yawning, until the jaw is set, and healed.
If the reduction of the two jaws becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their places, then often fevers and persistent swelling result from this, and perhaps the stomach of the patient liquefies, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
When therefore you see that: then know that it is a loss, and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Regarding the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the shoulder.
The collarbone does not dislocate from the inner side because of its connection with the chest. And it sometimes dislocates outward, and this is apparent to the senses.
And its restoration is for the patient to lie on their back and extend their arms. Then force the area with your palm strongly, for it will return to its place.
Then apply a poultice and bandages over it, and bind it tightly.
The extremities that follow the elbow and are connected to it do not dislocate, except rarely. If it dislocates at some time, then it is necessary to reduce and align it as we have said, and prepare it accordingly.
Then place over it a poultice, and powder, and a bandage. And command the sick person to adhere to tranquility and rest until healed.
And with this same treatment the shoulder extremity is reduced when it is also displaced from its position.
On the reduction of dislocation of the humerus.
Know that the humerus is not dislocated except in three ways.
One of which is that it is dislocated towards the outer lower part. The second is that it is dislocated towards the chest. And it may also be dislocated towards the upper part of the humerus: and this rarely occurs.
And it does not dislocate towards the back, because of the spur. And it does not dislocate towards the front, because of the nerves.
And it is dislocated and protrudes most towards the lower outer part, especially in those whose flesh is sparse. For it protrudes quickly in them and recedes quickly.
In those whose flesh is abundant, it is the opposite, namely that it protrudes with difficulty and recedes with difficulty.
And it may happen to some people that they suffer a blow or fall, and the humerus swells with a hot swelling, and it is assumed because of this that it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, it is necessary that you test it until you stand on its certainty, and then proceed with its treatment.
And the dislocation is known when it is directed downwards towards the armpit: and you distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a healthy shoulder. For you will find a clear difference between them, and you will find a concavity in the head of the humerus, and beneath the armpit when touching the head of the humerus it feels almost like an egg: and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear nor move it in all ways.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards: then you will find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easy when it is recent, or the patient is a child.
And its reduction is to have the attendant raise the hand upwards. Then place your thumbs beneath its armpit, and raise the joint with strength upwards to its place: and the attendant should raise his hand and extend it upwards. Then place it below, for it returns quickly.
If it does not return by what we have said, and many days have passed since the dislocation first occurred: then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water, and a massage that softens and soothes should be administered, such as if the roots of coltsfoot, fenugreek, and sweet clover are boiled in water, and applied.
Then the patient should lie on his back: and place under his buttocks a sphere and wool, which should be equal in softness and firmness.
Then the doctor should place his heel on the sphere, and raise the shoulder joint with force, and pull the patient's hand towards the lower part.
And if you wish, return him according to this method: it is that you have present a man who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on the side, and insert his shoulder under the buttocks of the patient: and raise his buttocks upward until the patient is suspended in the air. And another attendant should pull the patient's hand towards the lower part of his abdomen. If the patient is light: then it is necessary to suspend something else with him to weight him down: for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is also reduced according to another method: and that is to fix a long piece of wood in the ground, whose head is round in shape: like the sleeve of a mortar: which should not be thick nor thin. Then place under the patient, after soft cloths are placed on top of the head of the wood, and let the patient stand along the length of the wood.
Then extend his hand downward from one side, and stretch his body with force from the other side: for the joint returns to its place quickly.
If the reduction is difficult by all that we have said, then use this treatment: take a piece of wood whose length is equal to two arms, and its width equal to four fingers, and its thickness equal to two fingers: which has a round head, so that its entry into the wound is eased according to this form.
Then soft cloths should be bound over the round head, so that the wood does not harm the wounded area.
Then it should be placed under the wounded arm of the patient, so that the hand or arm is extended over the wood down to the lower part: and the wood should be bound over the support and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then the arm should be placed on a step of a ladder across its width, and the hand should be extended downward, and the rest of the body should be left hanging from the other side. For the joint moves immediately.
When therefore its insertion is complete in whatever way possible: then it is necessary to place a sphere of equal size made of wool under the wound. Then apply a plaster prepared from mill dust with frankincense, and egg white over the entire shoulder, as it is spread on top.
Then bind under the wound with a suitable bandage: and wrap the binding over the plaster on top: and attach his hand to his neck, and leave it, so that his hand is not moved for seven days.
And it is necessary that the patient's food be limited until the limb is strengthened: because it is faster for its healing.
Then it should be reopened after seven days, or five, and exercised with movement. If therefore it is firm and does not soften, then it is already healed.
If however the joint is dislocated frequently, due to moisture that affects it, or for another reason: then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three holes to it, according to what was mentioned in the chapter on cauteries.
If all this is done, and the ligament loosens after seven days, and the joint does not become firm, and the poultice and binding are reapplied several times, and it does not become firm, and falls down, and cannot be raised upwards: then you know that the nerves which are at the head of the humerus have been cut, or stretched, or softened: and you know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The reduction of a dislocation that occurs towards the chest and nipple, or towards the back, is performed with impulse and extension by hand: until it returns, and the remaining binding and care are applied to it, until it heals.
If after healing there is heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use a bath frequently until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original state.
Regarding the treatment of elbow dislocation.
Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty, and it also returns with difficulty: and it can be dislocated in all directions, but especially towards the front or the back.
And its displacement is not hidden from you: for it falls under sight and touch, according to whatever shape it is displaced. And when you join the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, it is clearly shown to you. For the joint is concaved, and it cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch its shoulder with it.
And you must hurry and reduce the dislocation immediately before a hot swelling occurs.
For if a hot swelling occurs, the reduction becomes difficult: and perhaps it will not heal altogether, especially when it is toward the back. For it is worse than all other kinds of dislocations, and of more severe pain: and death often results from it.
And the restoration of it, when it is one of those that can be reduced, is to extend his hand with two hands: and his arm should be expanded, and the physician's hands should be above and below the elbow, and he should push the joint with his thumbs simultaneously, or with the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or the dislocation is to the front: then it is reduced by doubling his hand with his own hand until he strikes the dislocated elbow with the base of his palm.
If the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer a strong, very powerful extension: and it is done by two assistants extending the arm, and two assistants holding it so that it does not move during the extension.
Then the arm is rotated to all sides after a doubled long cloth or a wide bandage is wrapped over his hand.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with oil: so that it is one of those things which help in lubricating the joint with ease. Then push the joint with a strong force until it returns.
And after its reduction, it is necessary to place on it a poultice that has astringency and drying with egg white: and bind it with a suitable tight bandage. And suspend the arm from the patient's neck: and leave it for several days.
Then it should be loosened. If then the joint is fixed in its place, then loosen the bandage from it, and leave it.
And if you see the joint not well bound, then apply the poultice again, and the bandage, and leave it for several days until it is bound. Then loosen it.
If however heaviness befalls him after the reduction of the joint, and the position is in motion: then administer moistening in bathing, and subtle friction, and compression, until it straightens, or place on the joint fat Euphorbia peplus. Then it should be bandaged, and leave it on it day and night. Then remove it, and insert it into the bath. When therefore he sweats, then friction the joint with moderate friction. Then repeat on it once, and second, and third with the entry of the bath, until it is relieved.
And if you wish, place on it cow dung, wet, heated with butter, and bind over it.
Do this several times. For it is indeed relieved and returns to its normal state.
On the treatment of dislocation by Almahassem.
Mahassem's hand is dislocated frequently, that is, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy. On the contrary, for the other joints. However, it is necessary that the speed be in the reduction of its dislocation at the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place becomes inflamed or a warm abscess occurs in it.
And the reduction of the dislocation is to place Mahassem's affected hand on a board, and have an assistant extend his hand; and the doctor should place his palm over the prominence of the joint and push it until it returns.
However, it must be considered if the palm has already retreated to the belly of the hand: then the patient should place the back of his hand on the board during extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, then the position of his hand should be inward on the board, that is, the inner part of his hand should be placed on the board so that the doctor's hand falls over the prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, it is good: and if not, then bind it with a poultice soothing the swelling: and leave it, do not repeat that.
For if it does not tolerate, nor can you do anything about its reduction, after the days have passed, nevertheless the joint remains according to its curvature: and it does not harm the patient anything, except that the hand is weakened, and cannot grasp anything: then know that the nerves are cut or worn.
There is therefore no other method except to bind it with a cautery near the site of the injury. And perhaps it does not help it at all.
Therefore, when Almahassem does not return, then apply to it the poultice that we have mentioned. Then it should be bound and left for five days: afterwards it should be loosened and left, and the hand should be exercised.
If however its movement is impaired, and something serious occurs in it: then soften it with warm water and rubbing several times until it is softened.
Regarding the treatment of the displacement of fingers.
When one of the fingers is displaced in any direction, whether towards the back of the palm or its front: then extend the finger and push the displacement with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the tip of the finger and suspend it toward the side to which it is displaced, and leave it for two days.
Then hang him and stretch him until he is straight on his day.
When therefore it will be night, bind him according to this account: and do not cease to loosen him during the day: and exercise him with movement: and bind him at night.
Do this for several days until it is stretched.
And do likewise with it if the hand is dislocated towards the abdomen: and bind it to that part, and perform your first treatment on it until it heals.
And do likewise with it when it is dislocated to the other parts.
Regarding the treatment of dislocations of the vertebrae.
When it happens that someone has a complete dislocation of the vertebrae of the back or neck, or many vertebrae are displaced from their places: then there is no treatment for it, because death approaches the sick person.
And the sign of this is that the excretion of the sick person exits without will, and they cannot hold it: and often some of their limbs are weakened, or both of their legs, or both of their arms, or one of them: or one vertebra is displaced from its place.
For it often happens that they are displaced to all four parts.
That which is displaced backward is called Gibbositas.
The treatment, however, is to consider then, if the Gibbositas occurred from childhood: then there is no treatment for it, nor any healing at all.
In those which occur from a fall, or blows, or similar things, the ancients have already spoken at length about the methods of treatment. Of which much does not return with profit.
But I have already abbreviated from that, of which little is excused from much due to its proximity to my intention: and in my explanation whereby I explained it, and formed its instrument in a different way from that in which they showed and explained it.
I say therefore, that in the humpback condition which occurs on the front side, there is neither remedy nor healing from it.
And similarly in that which occurs on both sides as well.
And it is not cured from them, except that which occurs on the back properly, with what I narrate: and it is that the infirm should be extended on his face on an equal podium near the wall: and a wet straw should be spread under him so that his chest is not hurt.
Then a straight piece of wood should be placed and fixed in a socket in the ground at the end of the podium near his head: and another piece of wood near his feet at the other end of the podium: and the assistant should hold the wood, and it should not be firmly fixed in the socket. And another assistant should hold the other one.
Then wrap over the head of the infirm and under his armpits a soft, strong band: and extend the end of the band to the wood that is by his head: and tie it there.
Then tie another band above his thighs, and above his knees, and at his ankles. Then gather all the bands together, and tie them to another stick which is at his feet.
Then let all the ministers stretch the band to the end of the stick, and let not the two sticks be moved from the places in which they are fixed: however, they should not be fastened as we said.
And the doctor should place his palms on the spine with force until it returns to its proper position; or he may place a board on it. Then attach his feet to the board until it returns.
If it does not return by this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms. And make in the wall that we mentioned is near the patient, a place into which the end of the board may enter. Then place the middle of the board on the spine. And let the doctor put his feet on the other end. And let him pull firmly until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with a device that is wrapped around with your hand: and it is such that you fix into the ground near the head of the patient at the back of the foot two sticks, whose length is one arm: and near his head at the back of the foot two sticks.
And let the length which is between all the wood be one palm: and now make a hole in every place where the turn runs: and secure all the wood very much on the ground so that it does not move at all.
And insert the round wood: and it is a turn where the ligament is revolved in two holes of two woods.
And at its end is a hole, in which the wood is secured, whose length is one palm with that which revolves: and in two other pieces of wood is similarly that.
Then tighten the ligaments which you tightened on the chest of the patient to the turn which is at his head: and the ligaments which you tightened on his legs to the turn which is at his feet.
Then let the assistant stand by every turn, who turns his hand with wax with which the turn revolves: and the physician aligns the spine according to what we have said.
This is the form of the turn that follows.
Then after the spine returns and the place is aligned, then it is necessary to apply a drying plaster with egg white. Then apply tow. Then place on top of the plaster a strip of board whose width is three fingers, or about that. And its length should be the amount that covers the hump and the healthy part of the spine.
Then it should be bound with the bandage we mentioned. And let the sick person use a subtle nourishment until he is healed.
And if something of the prominence remains in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary that medicines which soften and alleviate be administered, along with the application of the plaster we mentioned for a long time. And now it is applied with that sheet of lead.
And sometimes there is a prominence in the last vertebra of the spine: and it is thought that by it a dislocation occurs, and it is that bone which now protrudes. Therefore, it should not be presumed to use this medicine on him: for it may cause death.
Concerning the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
Know that the joints of the ankle and the shoulder only suffer dislocation: they do not experience what happens to other joints due to slight displacement and concavity.
And the joint of the ankle dislocates in four directions. It is because it dislocates towards the front and towards the back.
And it dislocates most towards the inside: and only slightly towards the front and the back.
And the treatment for its dislocation towards the inside is as follows: when you align the healthy leg of the patient with the injured one, it appears longer: and his knee protrudes more than that of a healthy person, and the patient cannot double his foot at the groin: and the area following the groin becomes inflamed with a warm swelling, because the head of the femur has now reached there.
And the sign of him to whom happens dislocation outward is that his accidents are contrary to these accidents.
And the sign of him to whom dislocation forward happens is that he extends the sound leg according to complement: however, he does not double it without pain which is in the knee: and if he attempts to walk, he cannot move forward over it: and his urine is retained, and his groin swells, and during walking there is a dragging of his heel.
And the sign of him to whom dislocation backward happens is that he does not extend the knee, nor can he double it before he doubles the groin: and his leg is even shorter than the other: and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip bone is at the place of the ilium.
The reduction of this species of dislocation is to consider then, if the dislocation is old, which already has aged with the person having it. Then if you administer its reduction, and it remains according to its own disposition: then there is no cure in it at all. Therefore, it should not be completely presumed for him.
In the case of one whose dislocation is recent, and it is from one of the four species of dislocation: then hurry to this, to turn the joint, and extend it inward and outward, and move it right and left: for perhaps it will return, and will not require further treatment.
If it does not return this way, then you must prepare a strong assistant, and have him extend his leg from the lower part: either with his hands or with a bandage, which should be tied above his leg over the knee: and another assistant extends his hand from above, so that he inserts his hands under the tendons. Then bind with a gentle bandage over the root of the thigh, and hold the end of the bandage with the other hand.
And let the extension be either from the front part of the groin to the shoulder part, or from the back part to the dorsal part.
And let the extension of all be at once, until the sick person is lifted with their body from the ground, and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is a common type among the four types.
If therefore the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary for every type to do what I will say about the proper cure.
In its proper reduction when the dislocation is inward, it is necessary that the sick person lie on their healthy side. Then place the bandage over the root of the thigh, in the area between the head of the thigh and the region below the groin. Then extend the bandage upward from the groin area to a higher part of the body, toward the shoulder area.
Then let another strong minister take his arms, and compress the thick part of the injured thigh, and extend outward with a forceful stretch. For it now returns to its place.
And this type is easier than the other types of treatment by which this member is reduced.
If it slips out of your control and does not obey you for entry with this type of treatment at all, then it is necessary to bind both feet of the sick person simultaneously with a strong yet gentle bandage over the two heels and over the two knees: and let the length of each be four fingers from its counterpart: and let the sick leg be extended more than the other by the length of two fingers.
Then let the patient be suspended over a beam in the house: and its length from the ground should be two arms' lengths.
Then command a strong youth to secure the head of the thigh: and he should be suspended with the patient being held by another; and another youth should push, securing the thigh with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
In returning it to its proper place, when the dislocation is outward, it is necessary that the patient lie on a platform, as we have described in the case of one having a hump. And a band should be tied above his diseased leg and above his chest.
Then two sticks should be placed, one at his feet and the other at his head. Then a additional stick should be placed in the middle of the platform, fixed well: on which wrapped wet cloths should be placed, so that it does not harm the patient: and there should be a stick between his thighs, so that it is not pulled downward during the extension.
Then let all the assistants pull at their end, and the doctor equalize the reduction with his hand.
If it obeys the return, it will be good.
And if not, place it on the same board and press it as we have said in the case of humpback, equally. However, it is necessary that the patient lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the limb of the patient be extended quickly: and according to this same account on a platform: and the physician should place the palm of his right hand upon the groin of the patient. Then he should compress it with the other hand, and with that compression place it extended downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the back: then it is not necessary that the patient be extended downwards, and he should be raised above the ground: rather it is necessary that he be placed on a hard surface, as is necessary when his hip is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about his lying on two hips: and it is on his face, and the ligaments stretched: according to what we have recently said.
And it is necessary that compression be administered with a board over the place to which the joint protrudes, when the reduction is completed as it should be.
And the sign of its return is not hidden from you: and it is that you extend the two legs of the patient: and when you see them equal, and the patient pulls his leg and extends it without hesitation: then you know that the limb has returned as it should be: then join the two hips, and apply a plaster, and bind with imemati, that is, a wheel: so that the hip does not move in any direction: and the patient should adhere to rest for three days or four.
Then loosen the bandage and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in position, then you know that the dislocation is now fixed: therefore release the patient to walk.
And if you see any softening: then return, and plaster it, and bind it according to your first binding: and leave it also for three days.
Then undo it and make him walk slowly on both for several days until he is well strengthened.
Regarding the dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated outward, inward, and downward, that is, backward.
And it does not dislocate forward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you instruct the patient to apply his leg to his hip. If it does not adhere to the hip: then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of its dislocation is to make the patient sit straight, so that he extends his leg if he can over it, and your back adheres to his face: and place his foot between your feet.
Then make his knee adhere with your palms, and place them straight over his knee between your fingers. Then apply the two sides of his knee with force using your palms. And another assistant should extend his foot until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction is that the leg adheres to the hip with ease, not laboriously.
Then apply plasters to it, and make the leg adhere to the hip. Then bind them together with wool for three days, or four. Then loosen them.
And the patient should not use walking for several days until healed.
If the reduction of it resists you, then administer strong extension with ligaments, the use of which was previously described in the treatment of anchor, until it returns.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the heel.
The heel is sometimes displaced slightly, and sometimes dislocated completely. And its dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel swollen, protruding to the side to which it is dislocated.
The treatment for its displacement is easy reduction: it is to extend it with ease by hand and equalize it until it returns.
In treating it when it is dislocated completely, it is necessary to make the patient sit straight: and let a strong attendant hold him from the back part of his spine, at its midpoint.
Then hold with your right hand the foot from its upper part, and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot at the heel.
Then draw the foot towards yourself with your right hand. Then with the left twice.
Then extend with the left, and push the ball of the foot with the right towards the leg without effort.
Do that twice, as we have said.
Then push the ball of the foot towards the leg on the third attempt, and you pull out the thorn.
If it returns in one attempt, or in two according to this method, and you see the foot even, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation on it: because it will return.
If the reduction is prevented despite what we have mentioned: then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and fix a stake in the ground very firmly, so that it falls between his thighs: and now you have wrapped cloth around it, so that it does not harm the patient.
Then the assistant should take hold of his thigh: afterwards the assistant should extend the other foot, either with his hands, or with a band that ties above the ankle. Then the assistant should stretch fully against the extension of his counterpart: and the stake should stand between the two thighs of the patient holding him so that his body is not drawn downward during the extension.
Then the doctor should equalize the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant should hold the healthy leg downward. For the dislocation returns quickly.
When therefore the dislocation returns, and it is made clear to you the health of its restoration: then apply a plaster and cotton, and bind it firmly with bandages, and tie the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And you must be cautious or fearful of the nerves that are above the posterior heel, so that the bandage is not too strong over them and injures them.
Then leave it for two days or three. If the bandage softens, bind it tightly: then loosen it on the third or fourth day: and prevent the patient from walking for forty days. If however he attempts to walk before that period, there is no security that the dislocation will not dissolve over him, and be corrupted, and not receive healing after that.
If a warm abscess should occur to him, then it is necessary to administer treatment for its reduction as previously described by us in another place regarding care and embrocation, until it is removed.
Regarding the dislocation of the toes and its treatment.
It is necessary that what is dislocated among them be aligned with slight extension without difficulty: and indeed this is not difficult, but rather easy.
If the dislocation is in some of the joints of the foot's arch: then it is necessary for the patient to sit with his foot on an even place on the ground, or on a board: and he should stand as if walking.
Then stand and place your foot upon that which protrudes from those joints. Then press it with your foot forcefully until it returns and you see it now even, and no protrusion appears in the place.
Then place under the arch of his foot a board that captures the whole foot, which has two ends. Then bind it tightly for three days. Then loosen it, and make him rest from walking for many days, until it is tightened and secured from displacement.
Regarding the types of dislocations with wounds or fractures.
When something from that occurs and you attempt its cure and restoration, death often follows: and because of this, one should not presume to treat such a condition unless he is wise in the art through long experience, merciful, pious, cautious, not bold, nor presumptuous: and that he uses at the outset medicines which soothe abscesses, only warm ones: and leaves the patient to divine judgment. Unless you see or hope for salvation from peril with the mildness of the illness, and in which there appears some hope. Therefore, attempt its reduction immediately at the beginning of the matter, before a warm abscess occurs.
If the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen that soothes the abscess: and treat the wound with what is suitable for it from drying ointments.
If the dislocation is with fracture, and cavities separate occur in the bone, then attempt their removal, and do in that which we said in simple ailments from what preceded in their locations.
And be careful according to your ability, and guard yourself from entering the way of fear: according to which my previous teaching was to you.
For it is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and safer for your body among them in your time.
