Since I have completed for you, O Sons, this book, which is the final part of medical science with its completion, and have reached the end in it, through its explanations and clarifications, it seemed good to me to complete it for you with this Treatise which is a part of practice, that is, surgery with the hand.
Since the practice with the hand has fallen into disuse in our region and during our time entirely: until perhaps its knowledge has perished, and its trace has been cut off: and nothing remained of it except small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which have been altered by hands: and errors and hesitations occurred to them, until its intentions were closed, and its power was diminished: It seemed good to me to revive it with the organization of this Treatise according to the way of positioning, clarification, and abbreviation: and to come with forms of cautery tools and other instruments of work: which is made by the addition of clarifications and hastening what is necessary.
The reason why a good practitioner of this art with his hand is not found in our time is: because the art of medicine is long, and its author must be trained beforehand in the science of anatomy, as Galen narrated, until he knows the benefits of the members, and their forms, and their conjunction, and separation, and has knowledge of bones, and nerves, and tendons, and their number, and their emergence, and of pulsating and quiet veins, and the places of their exit.
And because of this, Hippocrates said that the name is abundant with the name, but scarce with the work, and especially in the art of the hand.
We have indeed already spoken of this at the beginning of this book.
For he who is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy will not be cleared of error, by which men are killed: just as I have seen many of those who are formed from this science and boast about it without knowledge and without experience.
This is because I saw a foolish doctor cut into a scrofulous abscess on a woman's neck, and he cut some arteries in the neck: therefore the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who attempted to extract a stone from an elderly man, and the stone was large. He therefore came to him and extracted it along with a piece of the bladder. Therefore, the man died on the third day.
And I had indeed been called to extract it: and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he would die.
And I saw another doctor who received payment from one of the Dukes of our land for his medicine: and it happened that a black eunuch who was with him had a fracture in his leg near the heel: and the doctor hurried with his ignorance, and tightly bound the fracture over the wound with cushions and strong splints, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he treated him according to his own desires. Then he left him for several days and instructed him not to loosen the bandage: and he remained thus until his leg swelled with pus, and his foot as well, and it came to destruction.
I was summoned therefore to him: and I hurried to loosen the bandage: and tranquility followed, and he escaped from his pains.
However, the corruption was already confirmed in the member: and I could not restrain it.
Therefore, the corruption ceased to spread in the member until it perished.
And I saw another doctor who punctured the cancerous abscess: and it became ulcerated after days, until its maliciousness was magnified with its lord.
Which means that when the cancer is purely from melancholic humor, then it should not be approached with iron at all, unless it is in a limb that can tolerate being entirely cut off.
And for this, O sons, it is necessary for you to know that the procedure with the hand is divided into two parts: namely, the operation associated with safety, and the operation with which there is danger in most conditions.
And I have already alerted in every part of this book where the operation comes that involves fear and dread.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to beware of it and leave it alone: so that foolish people do not find a way to speak about it and dishonor it.
Take therefore the measure with care and protection, and attend to your patients with ease and firmness, and make use of the better way leading through God's grace to salvation and a praiseworthy succession: and leave behind terrible illnesses difficult to heal: and free yourselves from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation may not enter into you in your faith and comfort.
For it remains more to your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to your statuses.
For Galenus has already said in some of his admonitions. Do not treat bad illness: lest you be called bad doctors.
Now I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
First Chapter.
About the hot cauterization and the sharp medical cauterization, categorized and ordered from head to foot, with forms of instruments and cauterizing tools: and everything that is necessary for the procedure.
Second Chapter.
About cutting and piercing, bloodletting and inflation, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and similar things: and all categorized and ordered with forms of instruments.
Third Chapter.
About restoration, and displacement, and the treatment of twisting, and similar things: categorized and ordered from head to foot, with forms of instruments.
But before I recall the procedure with it, I must say what its benefits are and what harms it has: and in what temperament it is administered.
I say therefore that the discourse on the quality of the benefit of the cautery and its harm is a lengthy and subtle discussion, a science, and an hidden secret.
Also, many wise people have spoken about it and disagreed on it: and for me, a little of their discourse is sufficient, fearing lengthiness.
I say therefore that the cautery is beneficial universally to all temperaments, which are with matter and without matter: except for two temperaments, which are the hot temperament without matter, and the dry temperament without matter.
In the hot and dry temperament with matter, they disagreed. For some said that the cautery is beneficial in it. And others said the opposite of that, namely that the cautery is not appropriate for the disease caused by heat and dryness: because the nature of fire is heat: and it is inappropriate to be cured from a hot and dry illness with something hot and dry.
And he who says the opposite said that through the cautery there is benefit in every hot and dry disease that occurs in human bodies: because when you compare the body of a person and its moistures to the temperament of fire, you find the human body to be cold.
And indeed I say through his speech: because from experience it has already revealed that to me on several occasions.
However, it should not come to that unless one who has already been tested and trained in the chapter on the last exercise of cauterization, and known the diversity of human complexions, and the disposition of diseases in themselves, and their causes, and their accidents, and the duration of them.
From the other complexions there is no fear for you: especially in cold and moist diseases. For all doctors have now agreed on them: and they have not disagreed about aiding with the cautery in them.
And know, sons, that from the secret of healing with cautery by fire, and its goodness over cautery with burning medicine is this: for fire is simple, whose action does not reach beyond the part that is cauterized: and it does not harm another connected member except with a slight injury.
The action of burning medicine reaches to that which extends from the members: and it may cause a disease difficult to heal in the member, and perhaps even cause death.
But fire, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause that, unless there is an excess.
Now this has become known to us through experience, because of the length of service and study with the art, and standing upon the truth of things: and because of this, I am excused for the length of my speech.
And if it were not, because it is not permitted to this my book, to bring you the hidden secret in fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies of its expulsion, by which it expels diseases demonstrated philosophically, which would be sharpened by your minds.
And know, sons, that they disagree on the time when it is appropriate to perform cauterization, and they place the better time in spring.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times: because the harm caused by the time is overshadowed by the benefit that is drawn with the cauterization. And especially if the cauterization is for pains from necessary, strong, urgent pains that do not tolerate delay: because it is feared that a greater mischief may occur than a small harm entering due to the time.
And do not let this fall into your minds, o sons, which is not feared except by the common people and foolish doctors, namely that there is not always a recurrence of that disease which is cured by cauterization: and they place the following consequence, but things are not as they think: because cauterization is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the humors which are the cause why pains occur.
Nevertheless, cauterization surpasses medicine by the speed of its health and the power of its operation, and the strength of its dominion: and it is possible for the disease to return at some time according to the complexion of the sick person, and the location of his disease, and its power: and what is prepared in his body from the aggregation of superfluities in him: and what comes to him in acquiring it from foods, and similar things from those causes, unless the disease is such that cauterization is administered.
A subtle illness in the limb of few excesses and moistures, like a tooth cauterization, because of pain, and similar to it, for it is possible that that pain does not return in it. But that happens in few cases.
But the common saying again, that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, is a true statement: not in what they intend by it themselves: for they believe that there is no cure which compares with medicine, nor with anything else after the failure of cauterization.
The matter is contrary to that, and the intent, that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, is not what it means, except that when we administer methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not help: then we apply cauterization at the end, and it helps: then it follows that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and many foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron: and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold and the nobility of its substance: and they said that the site of the cauterization does not produce pus. But that is not absolutely true: for I have already tested it and found that it does not do that in some bodies without other factors.
And cauterization with it is good and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you ignite cauterization with gold in fire, it is not clear to you when it is ignited according to the amount you want, because of the redness of the gold: and when it quickly cools down, and if you add more heat to it, it melts in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls from that into the task: and because of this, the cautery with iron is made faster and closer to us, from straightness to the operation.
And indeed I have already arranged this Chapter on Caustics according to the chapters: and I have ordered them from head to foot: so that it may help the seeker find what they want from it.
Chapter II.
This cauterization is effective for controlling the dominance of moisture and coldness over the brain: these two are causes of phlegm, and the excessive flow of fluids from the head to the regions of the eyes and ears, and an abundance of sleep, and tooth pain, and throat pain: and generally all illnesses that occur due to coldness, such as paralysis, phlegm, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
The method of cauterization is that you should instruct the patient to purge first with a cleansing and dissolving medicine for three nights or four, according to what the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits require.
Then instruct him to shave his head with a novacula. Then have him sit between your hands squarely, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the tip of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever therefore your middle finger reaches, mark that place with ink.
Then cauterize with an oil fire: whose form is this.
Then place it on the marked spot with ink, by the descent by which your hand is gradually tightened, and you will turn it. Then quickly remove your hand, and look at the place.
If you see that the amount of alkil's head or the amount of zehrab is now exposed from the bone, then lift your hand. And if not, apply your hand with the iron itself, or with another one if it cools down: until the bones appear, which I have told you about.
Then take some salt, and dissolve it in water, and soak the cloth in it, and place it on the spot: and leave it for three days.
Then place on it a cloth soaked in butter, and leave it on the spot until the fire eschar is destroyed. Then treat it with the unguent tetrapharmacon until it is healed.
They have said that the longer the wound remains open, it expels pus: therefore it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized until it reaches the bone: and the cautery should be held until something of the density of the bone is burned.
Then it is scraped after that which has been burned from the bone, then it should be treated.
And others say that it is necessary to use the cautery until it makes a deep impression on the bone so that the bone falls off, which becomes like the shape of a key: or an instrument that women place with a small amount of ink: and they believe that vapors from the head are exhaled from this location, and the wound should be left open for a long time.
Then it should be treated until it is healed.
To me, these two types of cautery do not seem to apply to anyone except certain individuals according to a method of fear.
And to leave it, in my opinion, is better for its safety.
For the head is weakened by the breaking of its natural continuity: as we have testified in other members: and especially when the head of the weak patient is naturally weak: and indeed the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and I use it: therefore act with it for safety.
Chapter III.
When chronic pain occurs throughout the entire head and persists in the patient, they use hellebore, cohimae, head purges, oils, and emplasters. And especially if it has already been cauterized with the cautery we mentioned and it has not brought any relief, then consider. For if the head of the sick person is strong in its natural constitution and is not weak, and finds intense cold: then cauterize with another cautery a little beneath it. Then cauterize the entire horn of his head with a cautery, so that it does not penetrate the skin, and uncover from the bone the amount we have mentioned. And cauterize it with one cautery on the back of his head, in the place which is called the vase: and it is the place where the suction cup is placed: and raise your hand in this manner, and do not uncover the bone. For the sick person finds because of that a very severe pain, different from the pain of all the other head cauterizations.
And I will say this is the Cautery in its place: and it must be a cautery with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of the head more subtly than the cautery with which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When pain and swelling occur in part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and it is cleansed with purifying medicines for the head, and the rest of the treatment, which I have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, does not help: then cauterization is performed in two ways: either by cauterization with an acute burning medicine, or with iron.
The cautery with sharp and burning medicine is to take one garlic clove, and peel it, and cut off its ends from both sides. Then cut the painful area with a wide lancet until you make an area under the skin where the tooth is caught.
Introduce it under the skin until it is hidden; then apply a moderate constriction with a poultice, and leave it for fifteen hours, then release it, and remove the garlic, and let the wound be for two or three days: afterwards place on it a cloth soaked in butter until pus forms at the site: then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do this with some burning medicines, which I have written about in the twelfth treatise, on burning mediines.
The cauterization of it with an iron is according to this method. The cautery with fire, which has this form.
And it is named Clauilis: because the shape of its head is like the shape of a nail, in which there is something curved, and in the middle of it there is a small prominence.
Then place it on the area and hold your hand steady: and you should rotate the iron gradually with speed: and the amount that is burned should be according to the thickness of the skin, like its middle part. And lift your hand so that the artery below is not burned and bleeding does not occur.
Then soak the cloth in salt water, and place it on the area, and leave it for three days: then place the cloth with butter: afterwards treat with an ointment until it heals.
And if you wish, cauterize this half of the head with the second knife end of the Cauterizer. And be careful not to cut the artery in this half of the head, not properly the old one.
On the method of cauterizing in the old half of the head.
When you treat half of the head, with what we have said from the previous treatment, and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not help: and you see from the illness that what we have said about using the first cautery with medicine, or with fire cautery, is not enough for it, then you must heat the knife cautery until it whitens after you mark the place of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or almost that: and put down your hand once, and press it until you cut the artery and reach the bone.
However, you must be careful not to continue the cautery on the jaw that moves during chewing, so that the side or the nerve that moves it is not burned, which could cause spasms.
And be on guard and cautious about the flow of blood from the artery that has been cut. For there is fear in cutting it, especially for one who does not know what he is doing, and is not skilled or experienced: and he leaves the procedure right away.
And I will come with a reminder of the regimen of blood flow occurring from an artery according to its manner, and in its place in this book.
If you see from the illness that this cautery is not sufficient for it, and you see the body of the sick person tolerating the cautery on the top of the head as we have mentioned, treat the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of an artery with a cautery having two knives. For cautery is better than this and more beneficial.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for ear pain.
When pain occurs in the ear due to cold and is treated with solutives and other treatments we have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not disappear, then apply cautery with fire: and it is that which is called Punctum, whose form is this.
Then puncture around the entire ear with it after igniting it, as it circles around: or around both, if the pain is in both ears simultaneously. And keep the cautery away from the root of the ear for a moment after you have marked the places with ink: and let the quantity of the cautery be ten points on the entire ear, and about that.
Then treat the areas until they heal.
Regarding the method of cauterizing for torture.
Chapter VII.
The torture which is treated with cauterization is only of the kinds that occur from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
And avoid cauterization in the kind that occurs from dryness and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this kind of torture with plasters, and head purgations, and gargles, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the second a little below its temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cauterization on the opposite side of the affected area. Because softening does not occur unless in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of the cauterization is to cauterize directly at the upper ear extremity slightly below the horn of the head: and another one at the temple, whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cautery until the amount of half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a type of knife, whose shape has been described previously: however, it is not as fine, as you see: and it must be a knife that is somewhat overly thick.
Then treat the areas with what precedes: until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in old apoplexy.
When apoplexy becomes old, and you treat it with what we have said, and your medication does not help, and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on each horn of his head, and a cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have said, and a cauterization on the back of the head, according to what preceded: and the method of the cauterization should be according to what preceded.
It is also cauterized with a cautery on the mouth of the stomach: and it is the very last.
Then it should be treated with what preceded.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in the drink given first to the patient there be hyraceum and pills that cleanse the brain.
Then shave the head of the patient entirely, and place on the back of his head a plaster of mustard as described in the chapter on plasters: and apply it several times.
This is indeed the method of cauterization: and do it according to the same order which I said there.
If therefore he is healed by that, it is good. If not: then make three cauteries on the back part of his head, which should descend from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye: and place between each cauterization the thickness of a finger.
Then treat the cautery with what preceded it.
If however you wish for an addition, and the patient is tolerant of it: then make a cautery on the middle. If you wish for an addition: then cauterize it over both horns.
Then treat it until it heals: let the cautery be oiled according to the form which was mentioned.
On the method of cauterizing in paralysis and softening.
Chapter Ten.
It is necessary that you proceed with the cleansing of the head with sulfur and with what we have said.
Then shave the head of the patient: afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery on every horn of the head, and with a cautery on the back of it, and with three on the cervical vertebrae.
If however you need more than those for the sickness and softening of the body, and the patient is tolerant, and the illness is strong: then cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and the last with a cautery until it is burned deeply from the skin, and lift your hand. Then treat it until it heals: and thus oil the cautery.
On the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized unless his epilepsy is due to phlegm.
Therefore, you must first clean its brain with warm water, and with the rest of the treatment we mentioned in the division: when the patient is strong, or is tolerant in receiving medications.
If, however, it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then a gargle and cleansing mouthwash for the brain are administered, after many days with the improvement of food.
Then shave his head, then cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head, according to what preceded in the method: and with another cautery on the back of his head, and on all the horns of his head with cautery. If the patient is strong and is tolerant, then cauterize it with the cauteries I mentioned for those having paralysis, and softening of the body over the cervical vertebrae, and the dorsal vertebrae: and let it be an olive oil cautery according to the method that preceded.
If, however, the patient is a child, then apply a fine cautery according to this method.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with the cauteries we mentioned for those having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess inclined towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him in drink what will cleanse his brain, according to what preceded in the division: then shave the head of the patient, and make afterwards a properly made tortella from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the patient sitting squarely shall be held on all sides.
Then apply the ointment. And it is more worthy from old sheep's butter. And heat it over the fire with moderate heating, to a degree that can be tolerated by the finger when inserted into it. Then evacuate it in the middle of his head in a circle, and leave it until it cools down.
Do this for the patient once every week, along with the rest of his good regimen, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small points, except where you hold the hand with the cautery: let it be smelled.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place on it a cloth soaked in butter, or in hen's fat.
On the method of cauterizing for water descending to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When it is made clear to you that the beginning of water in the eye is indicated by the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and purify the patient, with what cleanses his head.
And protect him from all moistures, and have him sit in a bath, on fasting for several days.
Then instruct him to shave his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize it over both temples with two cauteries, if the beginning of the descent of water is in both eyes at the same time: or from one side, if the beginning of the water is in one eye: and sever with the cautery all veins and arteries which are under the skin: and let the cauteries be as long as the width of the temples: and beware of the flow of blood.
If you see anything of it, then sever it immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with the wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries, and their severing, and caution against the flow of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck, below two bones, with two fully extended cauteries.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in ancient tears.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and persistent: and they are above the veins and arteries which are on the exterior part of the head, it is verified that this is from cold, phlegmatic humors: then cauterize with the same cautery as I described in the beginning of the descending water, a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries over both temples, and two cauteries on the neck below two bones. And if additional treatment is needed, then cauterize it on all sides of the eye cautiously, above the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
On the method of cauterizing for nasal odor.
When you treat it with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment does not help: then hurry and give the patient infirmocochias for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize it with a medium cautery, with olive oil. Then cauterize it with a key cautery twice, above the eyebrows slightly under the hair.
And be careful of the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of the key cautery.
On the method of cauterizing for the softening of the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid once with this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it slightly above the eyebrows with two cauteries on each side: and they should be distant from both temples: and the length of each cautery should be according to the length of the eyebrow: and do not extend your hand with the cautery, but according to the amount that the third eyelid is burnt.
On the method of cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs turn and pierce the eye.
Cauterization is done in two ways: either with fire; or with burning medicine.
In cauterization with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to remove his hair, if he is one of those who shave it, until it grows long and even. If they puncture him at their origin: then bind his eyes with linen, so that they do not move, until they heal.
When they have grown and are even, then place the patient's head in your lap: then mark above the eyelids of his eyes with encaustic, making a mark in the shape of a myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hair.
Then place a cloth soaked in egg white: or in psyllium mucilage over the eye.
Then cauterize with fire, the form of which is this.
Then cauterize over the figure you marked gradually in many places until the surface of the skin, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, appears properly burned entirely.
And the sign of the healing of your work is: if you see the eyelid already contracting, and the hairs rising around the eye puncture.
Therefore lift your hand then: and leave him for three days.
Then place a cloth with butter over it until the eschar is removed. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
If any of the hairs return after an hour, and the eyelid softens: then apply the cauterization to that area again, as you did at first.
If the hairs are on the lower part: then cauterize it until it rises to its natural position: and level it so that the hairs do not poke the eye.
It is that you should instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they lengthen and even out. Make a shape of a myrtle leaf from cloth paper.
Then take from known soap and from unslaked lime, an ounce of each or nearly so; then grind them together well, and make it quickly, so that it does not cool. Then spread it over the paper you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place under the eye a cloth soaked in egg white: and let the patient's head be in your lap.
And place your index finger on the medicine and press it for a moment. And you should move it whenever the patient feels the sting of the medicine: for its sting is like fire.
Therefore, when this biting that he discovered persists, then release the medicine and move it with your finger. Therefore, when the biting ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And then consider, if you see the eyelid rise, as it rises with contraction by fire or incision, it is good: and if not, then again apply medicine over the place where the medicine does not leave a mark and does not blacken, until your operation is equal and the eye contracts.
Then apply Cotum with butter on it until the burned skin is removed. Then treat it with diaphinicon ointment or another until it heals.
And it is necessary for you during the operation to guard carefully that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes soft after some days and something from hairs struggles in the eye, then again apply medicine to the place that is softened from the eyelid itself, as you did at first. Then treat it until it heals.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of humans differ in size and smallness. Therefore, let your consideration be according to this: and the way of righteousness is not hidden from him who has a zeal for this art.
On the method of cauterizing in lacrimal fistula.
When you treat a fistula, and your treatment does not help as we have discussed in the divisions of diseases, then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, and let the assistant hold his head between his hands in such a way that it does not move or shake with his head.
Then place a cloth soaked in egg white or in the mucilage of psyllium over his eye; then cauterize with fire using an instrument of this form.
Let it be concave, like the shape of a vulture's quill feather from one end, with which the cauterization is performed: and if you want it to penetrate to the other end, and if you want it to go up, try it thus.
However, this concave shape is better for your work.
Then express the fistula if it is open, and extract the pus from it, and dry it: and if it is not open, then open it and extract its pus.
Then place the cauterization instrument on it, which is made very hot.
And hold your hand near the cauterization instrument by the eye, toward the nasal side, so that your hand does not waver or disturb the patient: and place the cauterization instrument on the eye fat, and destroy it.
If therefore you reach with the beginning of your cautery up to the bone, it will be well. And if not: then apply the cautery once, or twice, if you need that: and leave it for three days.
Then place the poultice with butter, and treat it with a drying ointment until it heals.
If forty days have passed and it has not healed: then apply a sharp corrosive medicine over it until the bone is exposed: and scrape it according to how it comes in its chapter.
And there is another method of the cautery for fistulas, which some first said. Attend to the location of the fistula and find it: then place a fine camahan into the fissure, that is, a fine cannula, whose form is this. And pour into it the quantity of a drachm of molten lead, and hold your hand with good retention of the cannula, and do not move the patient at all, so that the molten lead does not run or reach his eye.
And it is necessary to place on the patient's eye a poultice soaked in egg white or water.
For the lead burns the area of the fistula and heals it with a marvelous healing.
If the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nasal passage and redirect the fistula to the course of the nose, according to how it will come to its own proper place.
Of the method of cauterizing in fissures of the lips.
Often fissures occur in the Lip, which are called Chaps, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat these fissures, with what we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and if the treatment does not help, then prepare a small knife-like cautery with fire, according to this form.
And its concavity should be according to the fineness of the knife.
Then place it, when heated, quickly on the fissures, until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
Then treat it with cerote until it heals.
Of the method of cauterizing in oral fistulas.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gum, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then it forms pus and bursts: afterwards it becomes chronic, and pus runs, and a fistula is formed: then you treat it, and if the treatment does not help, then you must heat a cautery according to its size so that it fits into the fistula. Then insert it, when heated, into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches its depth and end: do this once or twice.
Then treat it afterwards with what we have said about the treatment until it is healed.
If therefore the pus is removed and healed, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what will come upon its head.
On the method of cauterizing in gums and softened teeth.
When the gum is softened due to moisture and the teeth are loose, and you care for it with medicines and it does not improve: then place the head of the patient in your lap.
Then with a fire cauterize it, whose form will come after this, so that you place a cannula on the tooth: and insert into it a burning cauterium quickly: and hold your hand for a moment until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
Then lift your hand: then repeat the cauterization several times, as you wish.
Then let the patient fill his mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour: and spit it out.
For the loose tooth is fortified, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
On the method of cauterizing for tooth pain.
When the pain of the tooth is due to cold, or there is cold in it, or a worm, and treatment with medicines does not help: then cauterization is applied in two ways: either cauterization with butter: or cauterization with fire.
The cautery of this is with butter, that you take cow's butter and boil it in an iron spoon, or in copper. Then take the cloth and wrap it over the end of the bandage. Then submerge it in boiled butter: and place it on the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools: then repeat it several times, until the heat penetrates to the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or cloth in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth: then place red-hot iron on it until the heat reaches the deep cavity of the tooth.
The cautery of this with fire is to apply a brass tube or an iron tube. And let there be something thick on the body of it so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
Then with fire cauterize it, whose form will come: and place it on that tooth: and hold your hand until the cautery cools.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed, either on that same day or another day.
And it is necessary after the application of that cautery that the patient fill his mouth with good butter and hold it for one hour: then spit it out.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Cauterize with whichever end you wish according to what is possible: and this is the form of the cannula.
Of the method of cauterizing in strophulus.
When strophulas are caused by phlegm and cold humidities, and are not obedient to digestion through medicines, and you wish for their rapid digestion: then use a concave cautery, whose form is this.
Having two open ends, so that smoke may exit at the cautery from the other end: and place it ignited upon the aposta once, and a second time if needed, until it reaches the depth of the aposta.
If the aposta is small: then place the cautery according to the size of the aposta.
Then leave it for three days, and place upon it a cloth soaked in butter until what the fire burned is removed.
Then care for it with toothpaste until it heals in the shape of a tube.
Of the method of cauterizing in hoarseness of voice and constriction of breathing.
When humors bind the lung channel, and especially when it is with a cold disposition, then it is necessary that the patient be first evacuated with dissolving medicines.
Then cauterize it at the no crati at the root of the throat in a depressed area: and be careful not to reach with the cautery to the throat itself, nor on the skin, except slightly.
Then cauterize it with another cautery near the joint of the neck at its last vertebra ultimately: and let the cautery be according to the manner which preceded.
Then care for it with what preceded until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in diseases of the lungs and cough.
When cough and disease of the lungs are from cold humidities, and the patient does not have fever, nor consumption, and the disease is chronic: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the clavicle in depressed, gentle, empty places. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples: and let the cautery be of a cannula according to the form which preceded.
And if you wish your cautery to be done by pricking with a cautery which is called Punctum, whose form preceded in the pricking of ear pain: and let the pricks be from thirty points up to about another.
Then care for it with what preceded until it heals.
And now let the cautery have three branches: according to this form. Therefore, it is alleviated with the cautery when you do three cauterizations with it at once.
Chapter XXVII.
When the head of the helper is displaced due to moisture and does not return at its usual time after being displaced until it becomes accustomed to returning, then it is displaced by a small movement as we have already testified, then you must first reduce the displacement. Then the patient should lie on their back or on the healthy side. Then lift the skin that is inside the Titillici upwards with the fingers of your left hand: and if the joint is displaced inward.
Then take a cautery with two prongs. Whose form is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of the cauterization will come with four cauteries.
And sometimes the cauterization is done with a cautery having three prongs, hence the figure of the cauterization then consists of six cauteries: and the prongs are according to the fineness of the wire.
And this is the form of the cautery having three prongs.
And sometimes one is added to this manner, hence there are eight cauteries.
Then place ground onions with salt on the cautery. Then make the patient adhere to stillness, so that the limb is not moved for some time until it is strengthened.
And if the displacement is upward, and this rarely occurs, then cauterize it on the shoulder with a key-shaped cautery or with multiple punctures of cauteries.
For the joint is strengthened, and moisture is removed: and the sick person is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and excessive moisture occur in the stomach, causing it to be drawn away from its natural temperament and increasing phlegm in it, and usual methods of treatment are not beneficial: then the sick person should lie on their back, extend their legs, and stretch out their hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries, a cautery under the spoon-shaped area of the chest the size of one finger with a key-shaped cautery, and two cauteries below from both sides of one cautery, until the shape of the cauteries forms a triangle. And space them apart so they do not join, when they would form pus.
And the depth of the cautery should be two-thirds the thickness of the skin.
And the shape of the cauteries should be according to this form without addition: and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery with which this cautery is made be one according to the shape of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by marking the area to be feared from this cautery: and it is, that you mark a point on the stomach according to the size you wish with an encaustic; then cauterize it with a puncture cautery; then treat it with the preceding treatment until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing the cold spleen.
When there occurs in the spleen pain from cold and moisture, or from thick wind, until it departs from its natural temperament by expelling excess, and the patient is treated with what we have said, and does not improve thereby: then the patient must lie down on his back, and you mark with encaustic three cauteries according to this figure, and this same quantity above the spleen below the hypochondria where the man's elbow reaches: and let the space between each cauterium be according to the thickness of a finger: and let the cauterium be straight according to the length of the body: and do not press your hand with the cautery too much.
And let the quantity that is burned be according to the thickness of the skin, half of its quantity not added: and let the patient stand on his feet.
If however he is not standing, then let him lie down, who has already extended his legs and raised his arms.
This is the form of the cautery.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife cautery when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed too far in cauterization, and burn the thickness of the entire skin, so that the whole body is burned, and it reaches the intestines: for the skin there is thin, therefore be aware of this.
On the method of cauterizing abscesses of the liver.
When it happens that one is about to depart, and you wish to know if the swelling is in the substance of the liver or in its membrane: then if it is in the substance of the liver, the patient suffers a dull pain and heaviness without sharpness; and if it is in the membrane of the liver, there is intense sharp pain with the pain; and you see now that its treatment has fatigued its physicians.
Therefore, the patient should lie down on his neck. Then mark the location of the abscess with cautery: then heat the cautery which resembles a rod. And this is its form. And cauterize with it once, until the skin is completely burned and reaches the siphac, until all the pus comes out: then treat it with the treatment for those about to depart, until it heals.
And one should not use this type of cautery unless their study in the art of medicine is prolonged: and through whose hands these ailments converge with experience on several occasions: then indeed they may dare to perform such an operation.
But to leave it alone is better in my opinion.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in pleurisy.
The ancients said, use a cautery with roots of aristolochia for cold pleurisy in the following manner. And it is that you take from the dried long roots of aristolochia one longer root, which is found among them, and let it be as thick as a finger. Then dip it in oil: and light it on fire. Then cauterize with one cautery where the fork joins the neck, and with two small cauteries under the slightly inclined parts towards the area below the beard.
And with two cauteries also where the fifth and sixth ribs slope towards the back slightly: and with another cautery on the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three cauteries from the back: one where the two spatulas meet: and with two cauteries from the two sides of the chest, the lower cautery being between the two spatulas.
And you should not compress your hand with the cautery, but let the skin be clearly discerned by smelling.
And some ancients have said that there are those who use a cautery similar to a rod: and they heat it, and insert it between the ribs until they reach the abscess with it, and the pus comes out: as we have said regarding the abscess of the spleen.
But in this puncture with the cautery, there is a fear that either the patient dies immediately, or an ulcer forms at the site, which has no cure.
Regarding the Method of Cauterizing the Spleen Chapter XXXII.
When you treat spleen disease, and your treatment according to what we have said in the division of diseases does not help, then cautery is applied in three ways, all of which are correct.
One of them is to make three cauterizations, or four by lining according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the liver's cauterizations, whose figure precedes.
And there should be the quantity of the thickness of a finger between each cauterization, or slightly more.
And the method of the cauterization, which we have mentioned for the cauterization of the liver, should be equal.
And do not compress your hand with the cautery: and let the patient lie supine on his back.
And another method of cauterization is: to ignite a cautery having two horns, which we have mentioned in the chapter on the dislocation of the shoulder: and raise the skin which is directly over the spleen, where the left elbow of the patient reaches: and let your raising be such that you lift the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauterizations fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert the two ignited horns strongly until you penetrate the skin from the other side: then extract the cautery: thus four cauterizations are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with another cautery having three horns.
Then care for the cautery after you have allowed it to discharge pus for many days: for it is more beneficial than all that has preceded in the treatment.
Regarding the method of cauterization in hydrops.
The cautery does not apply in hydrops unless properly positioned.
When you treat a person with dropsy using the methods of treatment we have mentioned in the division, and if the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize them with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the spleen, and a cautery on the liver, and two cauteries on the back between the vertebrae, and one directly on the chest, and another directly on the stomach: and the depth of the cauterization should be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the cautery open so that it discharges pus over a long period of time.
And do not evacuate the weak patient after cautery with it: which requires that two intentions should be combined: and healing will hasten to him with God's help.
The shape of the cautery with which the stomach is cauterized should be claw-like: according to its previous form: and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped: according to its previous form.
Regarding the method of cauterizing the feet and legs.
When abscesses form in a dropsical patient and are filled with yellow water: it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot at the knuckle, which is between the thumb and the little toe: and lift your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then raise your hand: and do not repeat it at all.
For yellow water will ooze out, and the cautery should be in this form.
Then make two cauteries on each leg, and let the cautery be made with the knife-like end of the cautery instrument: and let a cautery be made along the length of the leg, one below the knee, and another below it, about the middle of the leg: and on each hip two cauteries: and leave the open cautery without treatment for a long time: so that some water may sweat out of it: then treat it with the other things we have said.
On the method of cauterizing for the treatment of abdominal conditions.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
When there is a relaxation of the abdomen due to cold and moisture, which weakens the retentive and digestive powers that are in the stomach and intestines: and it is treated with methods of treatment, but it does not heal: and you see the patient tolerating an excess of power, then cauterize him with a large cautery on his stomach, as previously described for cauterizing the stomach with a circular cautery, and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle key-shaped cautery: and a large cautery on the alcat (a type of gland) above the alhosos (a term possibly referring to lymph nodes or similar structures), or two cauteries.
And if you see an abundance of moisture and the patient tolerating it, then cauterize him with a cautery on the comb area, and a cautery on all the ilium: and perhaps you may add two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one.
For it is an effective treatment, whose benefit does not fail.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter XXXVI.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the year, or one, and they are from thick, cold humors, or corrupted moistures, and are treated with what we have said in the division, and the treatment is not beneficial: then cauterize with three cauteries above the lower spine of the back below the almeidati briefly triangularly, and a cautery below the navel about two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is overly cooled, and his food is not digested, and you see his face swelling with pus, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery, as previously mentioned: and with a cautery on his liver, and another on his spleen, with a key-shaped cautery: and leave the cautery open for some time: then treat him until he is healed.
Chapter XXXVII.
When you cut off althelul, then heat the cautery which resembles a rod. Then insert the heated cautery into the cut althelul: and hold it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows: do this once or twice.
If therefore there are many althelul, then cauterize each one with a cautery as we have described. Then treat them with what is beneficial for them from ointments until they heal.
And if you cauterize it with a large cautery on an ulcer, it is worse for healing.
On the method of cauterizing an anal fistula.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
When the patient does not obey the incision and the procedure which we have described in its proper place, and is terrified by it, perhaps he may be cured with a cautery.
When therefore an anal fistula occurs in someone and becomes old, pus runs from it, and corrupted moistures. Therefore, it is more proper to examine it with a fine probe. Then determine the depth of it with a probe.
Then heat the cautery, which is like a rod. Then insert the heated cautery into the fistula itself to the extent that the probe entered.
And repeat the cautery on it until all the corrupted bodily parts are burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to the extent of your necessity.
And beware of burning the nerve, if it is there, or large veins: or if the fistula extends to the bladder or to the intestine, then be careful of all these areas.
And do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area: and you think that it is not penetrating.
Then care for the area until it heals.
If however the place is sealed, and materials are cut off from it, and remains thus for a long time: then you know that it is now fully healed.
And if materials are not cut off from it, then you know that it is penetrating, or there is a corrupted wound in its depth, or something like that: of which the mention will come in its place.
On the method of cauterizing the kidneys.
When pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or severe wind, and it weakens the patient because of it, then you should cauterize over almethen on the kidneys, with a key-shaped cautery over the entire kidney, whose precedent has been mentioned.
And perhaps we cauterize it a second time on the almeidatum. Therefore, three lined marks will come. Therefore, they will be more beneficial for healing.
On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When weakness and softening due to cold and moisture occur in the bladder, until the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it on the lower part of the scrotum over the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, and with one cautery on the right side of the scrotum and another on the left side. The length of each lateral cauterization should be according to the size of a thumb knot. Cauterize it with the lower back cautery or with two cauterizations if necessary, as previously mentioned, with a key-shaped cautery.
On the method of cauterizing the womb.
When cold and dampness occur in the womb, and because of this impregnation is prevented, and her menses are corrupted, and their onset is delayed, and pain occurs with their arrival, then it must be cauterized with three cautery points around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and a cautery above the lower back, or with two cauteries: and let the cautery be done with a key-shaped instrument.
On the method of cauterizing the anus in dislocation.
When mucous dampness flows to the socket of the anus, and becomes the cause of its departure from its place: and the sign of this is that one leg extends beyond the other when they are set side by side: and the site of dislocation is found empty in it.
Therefore, you should cauterize the affected area above the socket of the anus with a similar circular cautery: after you mark it with ink around the socket, as it turns: and let the socket itself fall in the middle of the circle.
If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries using a large olive cautery: and the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the skin.
Then care for it until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in sciatica.
When pain occurs in the hip joint, and its cause is cold and dampness: and the patient is treated with what we mentioned in the division, but the treatment does not help, and it becomes chronic: then it is necessary to rid the patient of thick humors with foul pills, or with artificial pills, and similar ones. Then cauterize him.
And the method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterization with burning medicines, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with fire is according to many methods.
One of which is to cauterize above the hip joint itself with three triangular cauteries, according to this form. And make their depth good or bad. And let the space between each cautery be the width of a finger's thickness: and let the cautery be olive-shaped.
Sometimes, however, the cautery is made in the middle on top of the head of the hip itself. Therefore, there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, use one: so that the circle contains the entire hip.
And burn the thickness of the entire skin.
This is the method of cautery for sciatica when the pain is attached to the hip itself, and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, then apply two cauteries on the thigh, on the spot where the patient indicates there is pain, and with your cautery on the ankle four fingers towards the woodland side: and let the cautery be knife-like.
And the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the patient indicates that the pain extends nearly to the toes of the foot, then apply the cautery where the patient indicates with a point cautery, three, or four, or more if it is needed.
And if he indicates the pain to be below the knee towards the thigh, then apply one knife-like cautery there.
And be careful in all your cautery work, so that you do not end up with the cautery burning a nerve or a large artery, thereby causing great harm or contraction to the patient.
And indeed, I have seen one or another of those who cauterized on the ankle and ended up damaging in the cautery, and the leg swelled until a tumor followed to the foot, and it was entirely perforated and corrupted: then there was an opening of the bowels, and death followed that.
If the pain is in both parts at the same time, cauterize each according to this method.
And certain wise men said regarding the cauterization of an anchor, for this is the method of such a cautery. Make a tube from iron, whose diameter is half a palm: and let it be at its opening according to the thickness of a kernel of a finger, or slightly less: and within this tube be a third tube.
And let the space between each tube be the quantity of a thumb knot: and let the tubes be open on both sides: and their height should be about one knot or two knots: and make them a handle from iron suitably fitted to the tubes.
Then it is heated in fire until it turns red and throws out sparks: then it is placed on the anchor's lid of the sick person lying on their healthy side. Therefore, cauterize him with three round cauteries in one course.
Then leave it for three days. Then apply plasters with butter: and leave the wound open for many days. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Albucasis says, with this type of cautery, O sons, we have little used it because of the terror of its appearance: and furthermore, because we find few who can withstand it.
Nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries for those who endure and find their proper place with it.
The cautery with burning medicines is such that you make two jars having a perforated ring, into which descends the hinge of its lid made of bronze or iron, the length of the wall: at their height are two knobs, or like them.
And let the space between both quantities be the thickness of a finger, and let them be open below and above: and let them contain themselves together according to this form.
Then place it over the anchor's lid, with the patient lying on the healthy side. And press your hand heavily over the anchor's lid. Then pour between the two circles with hot water, which has been heated briefly with fire, and hold it for a period of one hour: and let the patient endure its stinging and its burning, for he finds the sting like fire, until the stinging subsides.
Then lift your hand with the instrument, and wash off the hot water from the entire anchor with fresh water: then leave it for three days.
And place butter on it until the blackness of the burning is removed: and leave it for several days, and pus will flow from it. For it is the final step in treatment.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg, make a similar treatment in the affected area as you did for the anchor equally.
And this is the method of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Take alkali and unslaked lime, one part of each; grind both, and place them in a new pot whose lower part has one small hole through which a finger can pass: and put another glass pot under the bottom of the pot: then pour over the alkali and lime sweet water enough to cover both by a finger's breadth: after this you compress them with your hand firmly: and leave the pot until the sharp water descends into the lower glass pot.
Then collect all that water and pour it over another lime: and distill until it is renewed.
For it will then be very strong in sharpness, which is used in many medical procedures, and in cautery of the other parts. For it effects the action of its fire.
And among the medicines are those with which the ankh is cauterized, even like tesiie, and mango paste, and lime with soap, so that each is well mixed.
And Galen narrated the treatment of an ancient man who was cured of the pain of the ankh and the sciatic nerve: and he praised it greatly. And he said that no other treatment was needed, and that he was cured with a single application, until he reported that he perhaps entered a bath carried in, and exited it already healed.
And it is taken from green seetaragi: and if green is not found, take dry, fresh: and grind much with some fat, and place on the ankle, where there is pain, or leg, or in the thigh: and bind, and leave for a quantity of three hours, or to the extent that the patient feels sedation from burning. Then put him into the bath.
When therefore his body becomes moist, put him into the seat. For the pain retreats, and it is healed.
And you should know that one should not use a cautery with these medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides said that goat dung, when it is used to cauterize the sciatic vein, helps it: and the cautery is made in this way. Let wool be taken, and soaked in old oil, and placed on the deep place which is between the big toe and the instep, and it is closer to the instep.
Then take dry goat dung, and ignite it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the wool, and leave it until it is extinguished. Then repeat it. Therefore do not cease to do it until the sensation reaches the middle and the pain ceases.
And this method of cautery is called the Vaccinum cautery.
On the cauterization of back pain.
It sometimes happens that pain occurs in the back for many reasons, either from a fall, or from a blow, or from excessive evacuation, and similar causes, due to the infusion of cold and humid matter: and cauterization is only applicable to this particular type which results from the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the sick person with foul pills and similar remedies, three lines should be made on the back where the pain is, according to the width of the spine itself. Once you mark with encaustro five cauterizations on each line, or more according to the amount that comes from the strength of the patient's tolerance: and the cauterization should be done with cautery points.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a median claw cautery according to this form.
On the method of cauterizing at the onset of hunchback.
This disease often occurs in small infants.
And the sign of the onset of this condition in children is that it occurs during breathing, lifting, and movement, and you will find at the last vertebrae of the back and its joints that it has already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
Therefore, when you see this and wish to address it, then cauterize it with a cautery that is circular according to this form.
And let him take the cautery over all parts of the vertebra equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the vertebra with a cautery, make two lines or three: and let the points be near the joint.
Then treat the area until it heals with what we have said.
And beware, do not apply the cautery to the hump that occurs from nerve spasm.
On the method of cauterizing in gout and joint pains.
When joint pains are caused by cold humidities that are poured out into any part of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call this gout properly.
Therefore, when gout caused by cold is treated with methods of cure and the pains are not removed, then the cautery removes them.
And it is to be done that you cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the feet with many cauteries: and let the cautery be olive oil.
And if you need to make points on the surface of the foot, then do it with a pinpoint cautery. If the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize it over the entire knee with three or four cauteries from all sides, using the same key-shaped cautery.
If however more are necessary to you by this cautery then cauterize it. And do not submerge your hand with the cautery, but let it be about the thickness of the skin only.
If however the pains ascend to the knees and the back: then apply what we have said about the cautery in its chapter.
If the pains are in the hands only, then prick around the joints, as two lines are drawn.
If however the pain remains in the fingers, then prick them, on every knot a pricking, and on the palm of the hand.
If however the pains ascend after days to the elbows or to the shoulders, then cauterize both from all sides.
And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen, from the reception of medicines. For if good is done by the regimen, and the phlegm is evacuated, it will be healed with the help of God along with this cautery.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestine or hernia descends to the testicle, and this is an initial proximate occurrence: then it is necessary to advise the patient to abstain from food on his day. And let him use laxatives, so that the stool may descend from his stomach.
Then sit it between your hands on its back: and command it to hold its breath until it comes out, or the rectum or intestine appears.
Then replace it with your fingers, and mark with cautery under the rupture at the mouth of the crest, with a mark whose end is similar to half a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then with fire the cautery, whose form is this, until it comes white and throws out sparks. Then replace the intestine or rectum to its concavity. Then the assistant should place his hand on the area to prevent the intestine from coming out: and you have already opened between the patient's thighs, and placed a cushion under him, and another servant is above his thighs, and another on his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery on the same mark, with your hand holding the cautery straight. And hold it until you reach the mouth with it: or repeat with it another time, if you have not reached the mouth with it on the first try.
And carefully observe the exit of the intestine during your cautery, lest you burn it, and thereby cause either death or great harm to the patient.
And know that when you do not reach the mouth with the cautery, your operation is of no benefit.
And it is necessary that the cautery for infants be fine, according to their size.
Then treat with the other ointments until it heals.
And let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you provide nourishment for the duration of his treatment, which soothes his stomach: so that the intestine does not come out during effort and evacuation.
Then when he wants to rise after forty days, then administer a properly made bandage, and let it stay for another forty days.
And he should be reduced from labor, and from fullness of food and drink, and from loud voices.
For when he follows this regimen, he is healed with a complete healing.
And I will speak of the treatment of ruptures with incision in its chapter.
When ruptures occur in the rest of the abdomen and are initial, and you want to prevent them from worsening, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size: and let what is burned from then on be like a third of it. Then treat it with what we have said: and it will not worsen.
And some have said first: that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, in this shape.
After it is marked with cauterization, and a line is placed across the width at the upper side of the rupture, and another line toward the lower side. And place your hand in the middle with the claw cautery.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
On the method of cauterizing for pains due to falls or blows.
Chapter XLVIII.
When pain occurs in certain limbs due to a fall or blow, and that pain persists for a long time, and treatment with medications does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize using the Point cautery.
And the cautery should be for the entire limb according to its size, and its sensitivity, and its weakness, and its strength, and the location of the twist, and the pain from it.
If it is healed by the first cautery, it is well. If not: then repeat over the same cautery.
For it is customary for these pains to shift from one member to the adjacent one. Therefore, it is necessary to address them with cautery until the patient is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in leprosy.
However, lepers are sometimes greatly helped by cautery. And especially the type of leprosy that occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melanchole: when you wish to cauterize it, consider.
If therefore leprosy is beginning to spread, and you have treated it with what we said in the division, and it does not descend nor remain still: and you fear for the patient that corruption may take hold of his entire complexion: then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the known head, and the second below towards the forehead at the end of the hairline, and two above the two temples, and one behind above the cervical nuts.
And finally place your hand with the cautery for a moment until it makes a small impression on the mouth, and the scales fall off from it: so that the expulsion of gross vapors from it may be alleviated, and cauterize the spleen itself with the cautery as has been described.
If however the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible: then it is necessary to cauterize with these cauteries which we said at the beginning, and a cautery on the end of the nose, and two cauteries on both jaws, and two cauteries on the cervical vertebrae, and six on the dorsal vertebrae, and one large one on the alhahosos near the tailbone and one above it, in the almeidati: and two on the hips: that is, one on each hip, and two on the knees: one on each knee, and two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows, and two on the tender parts of his chest: and cauterize him on every joint, from the joints of his hands and feet: and cauterize on every heel of his feet, and on the palms of his hands.
And beware of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, so as not to burn them.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery over the mouth of the pelvis, and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the spleen.
And know that the more you apply the cautery, the greater the benefit and the more it contributes.
And know that the sick person does not find pain in the cautery as much as healthy people do: because their body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of various sizes and smallness according to the limbs and joints: according to which precedes from the kinds of instruments.
Then care for the cautery with flour of the herb and honey, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in stupor.
When a limb is numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize the numb limb with cauteries according to the size or smallness of the limb.
And let your cautery penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin. Then care for it with an ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes it is cauterized for a kind of numbness that affects the hand and foot at the vertebrae of the back near the exit of the nerves that move that limb: and the numbness is removed.
But let not one who is not wise in the anatomy of the members and the distribution of the moving nerves presume upon it.
Chapter LI.
When Albaras becomes old and no improvement is brought about by medical skills: then cauterize it with a deep cautery for a moment, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color is changed.
Then treat it with the flour of the herb, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and blood of a dove, and blood of a swallow: let there be one part of each; mix all these together, and apply them on cloth, and keep in place until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it, as it revolves.
The wise have said that it should be cauterized with the final cautery in the middle.
But it does not seem right to me: for I fear that it may cause ulceration: and I have already seen this happen several times.
And it is better to cauterize around it with a circle, as we have said: or with multiple cauteries.
On the method of cauterizing in Adubelati.
When someone has an abscess and its maturation is delayed either due to excess causing it or due to the age of the patient being weak and having little blood, or due to time, and there is a need to hasten the maturation of the abscess, then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by puncturing. Then leave it. For it will hasten with the maturation.
If you wish to perforate it with a cautery, then take a fire cautery, which has this form.
And place it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery be from what follows for the patient, so that the course of pus may be relieved.
Then care for it until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in a corrosive disease.
Chapter LIV.
A corrosive is nothing but corruption in a limb that spreads and corrodes it: just as fire eats dry wood.
If you see a corrosive in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then use many cauteries, small and large probes, according to what is suitable for the place where the corrosive is.
Then cauterize it from all sides until you root out the entire corruption and nothing of it remains thoroughly.
Then leave it for three days, and apply ground sulfur with oil over the cauterized areas until all the eschars are removed, and all corruption is gone.
Then treat it with flesh-generating ointments.
If therefore you see that after three days flesh is born with a healthy growth, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not, then apply the cautery again to what remains of the corrupted areas.
And it is treated with sharp medicine when corroded. For it arises from the place of the cautery.
However, cautery with fire is faster for healing: and I have already mentioned its cautery with sharp medicine in the division: therefore take it there when you need it.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in claws and warts.
Chapter LV.
This illness often occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a thick, filtered substance that harms the foot.
And there are two methods of cautery for these: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
As for cautery with fire, make a concave cautery similar to the feather of a vulture: it should be made of iron according to the size that can contain the claw on all sides: and let it have fine edges.
Then place it ignited upon the nail. Then rotate the hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail: and leave it for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply plaisters to it with wild apples, crushed with salt: and leave the plaister on it during the night. For it will be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the area with a flesh-generating ointment until it heals.
If they are not converted and often occur on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet: then apply a cautery with warm water: and it is as you take a tube made of metal, or iron, or from an eagle's feather: and place it over the nail, or althelul. Then pour a small amount of warm water into the tube: hold your hand, and rotate it with the pressure of your hand for a moment, so that the edge of the tube is impressed on the root of the nail, and let the warm water find its way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and let the patient wait a while over the biting effect of the warm water for one hour.
Then leave it, for the nail is uprooted with its roots.
Do this one by one, until you have addressed all of them that are in the body.
Then treat them after they are uprooted with what generates flesh from ointments.
On the method of cauterizing in tremor.
When tremor occurs in someone due to cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or another cause: then it is necessary to cauterize with four or five cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and a cautery between each vertebra, and a cautery on his chest, and a cautery on his stomach.
For tremor is calmed with olive oil cautery, and recovery from cold disease is hastened.
On the method of cauterizing Albathir.
Chapter LVII.
Sometimes foul Albathir are expelled from the body, that is, pustules which are caused by corrupted thick matters.
Therefore, when they first appear, they should be cauterized on the entire head of the pustule with a fine cautery using myrtle wood, the end of which is ignited with fire. Or with the root of long Aristolochia. Or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method: and they do not increase: and the excess causing them is dispersed, and they are healed from them.
However, it should be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the method of cauterizing in the flow of blood from an artery in a wound.
It often happens that blood flows from an artery which is cut at a wound, whether it occurs externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or of a member's cautery, and similar cases; and it becomes difficult to stop it.
When this happens to someone, then quickly reach with your hand to the opening of the artery, and place your index finger on it: and press it strongly until the blood is blocked under your finger, and nothing can escape from it.
Then place small olive cauterials on the fire, and a larger number of them: and blow on them until they are thoroughly ignited.
Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the wound and the place where the artery is ruptured, and place the cautery on the vein after you quickly remove your finger: and hold the cautery until the blood is stopped.
If the blood flows out when you lift your finger from the opening of the artery and extinguish the cautery, then quickly take another cautery from those that are prepared in the fire.
Therefore, do not cease to do this, one after another, until the blood is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is there, and do not cause further harm to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop it, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is drawn out, its ends are contracted, and the blood is severed. Or it should be tied with a strong thread. Or let medicines with the property of severing the blood be applied to it, and bind it with a suitable constrictive poultice.
He who administers its severing with a ligature, and binding with cloth, or application of burning substances, and similar methods, does not benefit it entirely, except rarely.
If it happens to someone and a physician or medicine is not present, then begin by placing the index finger over the opening of the vein itself, as we have mentioned, and binding it very tightly until the blood is blocked from the upper part of the wound, and above the artery. And the finger should not be removed, always cooling it with very cold water until the blood congeals, thickens, and is severed.
And during this time, one should consider what it needs from a cautery or medicine.
 On Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in Wounds, and Similar Matters.
We have already spoken in the first chapter about every sickness in which it is appropriate to use fire for cauterization and burning medicine, its occasions, its causes, and its instruments, and the forms of cauteries.
And I have placed there chapters from the top of the head down to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter by the same method: so that it may relieve the seeker of what he seeks.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you to learn, O sons, what is in this chapter concerning the fear which is mentioned in the first chapter on cauterization.
And because of that, it is necessary to have a more vigorous caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter, evacuation with blood often occurs, by which life depends on the opening of a vein, or an incision over an abscess, or the opening of an ulcer, or the treatment of a wound, or the extraction of an arrow, or an incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of which trembling and fear arise, and in many of them death occurs.
And I warn you not to let hesitation overcome you, for sometimes methods of people with the methods of illnesses fall upon you in this art. For there are those among them who become angry with their sickness, and death is And when the illness is from fear which signifies death.
And from them is he who gives his ringing sound and enriches you with it, hoping for health, and his illness is deadly.
Therefore, you should not agree with him who comes to you from them, whose manner is such. And let your caution be stronger than your desire and your greed. And do not presume anything from it unless after certain knowledge, which verifies with you that to which a praiseworthy succession arrives.
And use it in the cure of all your ailments, by prognosis and indication of that to which health appropriately leads.
For in that is your assistance for gaining fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you with His understanding, O sons, and not deprive you of direction and inspiration: for that is in His hand.
And I have indeed organized this Chapter by distinguishing it into sections, according to what preceded in the chapter of Cauterization, from the neck down to the feet: so that your search for what you want from it and what you need may be alleviated.
Regarding the treatment of water that accumulates in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
Know that this illness often occurs in children at birth: or when the midwife grasps the child's head without gentleness.
And it sometimes happens also for a hidden cause which is not known.
And indeed I have not seen this disease in anyone other than children: and death hastened to all of them whom I saw; therefore it seemed to me to abandon the treatment of it.
And indeed I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head grew larger every day until he could not sit up straight because of the size of his head; and the swelling increased until he died.
And this moisture indeed gathers either between the skin and the bone: or it gathers under the bone on the surface.
And the operation for this, if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you must make a single incision in the middle of the head in width: and the length of the incision should be about two fingerbreadths, until the moisture flows out.
And this is the form of the spatula.
If the moisture has increased more and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions according to this pattern.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open on all sides: and the water is depressed when you press it with your hand towards the interior, and this is not hidden from you: then you must make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner.
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. Then bind the wounds with cloths and poultices. Then fumigate it from above with wine and oil up to the fifth day.
Then loosen the bandage, and treat the wound with bandages, and ointments.
And do not leave to bind the head equally. And feed the weak with all dry food of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is to determine where the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of fluid appear.
For sometimes it is more on the back of the head, or on the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore, make an incision where the abscess and the accumulation of fluid appear to you: and cut it open as much as possible for you.
And observe, lest you cut an artery, and a flow of blood occurs, and the patient dies from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
Regarding the incision of arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When catarrhs affect the eyes or the chest of someone, and it becomes chronic, and the treatment with medicines does not help: then the final treatment for that is the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you want to incise them, the patient should shave their head. Then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries become visible. Then the patient should compress his neck with any cloth. Then observe where the vein pulses. And the locations of both are the depressed areas behind the ears: and it is rarely hidden, except in some people.
Then mark with encaustic on both: and cut each with a scalpel on both sides sharply, the incision reaching the bone: and let it be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel under the artery, and cut it upwards with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be about two fingers joined.
For when the vein is cut, blood exits with a pulsating flow, which leaps into the interior frequently.
If however the artery does not appear to the sense, then it is necessary to measure from the ear a length of three fingers. Then mark with encaustic, and cut until the bone.
And what is necessary to let out of the blood is six ounces and you may emit more or less from it. All of this according to the amount that appears to you from the strength of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
Then attend to the wound. Then if anything remains attached to the bone from the cut, then cut that off, so that a warm abscess does not occur: then bind the wound with strips of linen cloth.
Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
Regarding the removal of arteries located in the temples.
Chapter III.
When an individual suffers from chronic hemicrania or acute catarrhs due to sharp humidities and heat in the temporal arteries, or severe and chronic soda-like conditions, and similar ailments: and if treatment with medicinal cures does not improve it: then we have found in these illnesses the extraction of arteries from the temples, or their cauterization, as we have narrated.
And the method of the operation for their extraction is to shave the hairs that are on the temples and focus on the visible artery in the temple. For it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is rarely hidden except in a few individuals or due to extreme cold.
If it is hidden from you, then have the patient bind his head with any cloth: then rub the area with a coarse cloth. Or steam the area with hot water until it appears to you with a clear manifestation. Then take the spatula which I previously shaped. Then scrape the skin with it easily until you reach the artery. Then throw the hook into it, and pull it upwards until you extract it from the skin, and make it emerge from the tissues beneath it on all sides.
If however the artery is thin: then wrap it with the tip of the hook. Then cut from it the portion according to the amount by which its ends are extended, and drawn together, so that bleeding does not occur. For if it is not cut, and if it is not severed, the blood does not fully stop.
Then evacuate six ounces of blood down to three.
If the artery is large: then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a double, strong thread, of silk: or of the gut of a hen, so that corruption does not set in too quickly before the wound heals, and bleeding occurs.
Then cut the excess that is between the two ligatures. Do this at that hour, or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery knife up to the mouth: until its ends are cut, and it will remain in place for the same procedure.
And it is better practice, unless the patient has a fever, or has a heated temperament. For cautery is one of those things that helps to stop humors. Therefore, it is better assistance.
And after the extraction of arteries, the place should be filled with old cooked material: and properly made lint should be placed on top.
And after the treatment, it should be cared for with drying medicines that promote flesh growth, and with plasters, until it heals.
If during the operation blood flows from an artery, then quickly proceed to sever it with a cautery, or fill the place with zegi: and hold your hand until the blood is severed. If none of those are available to you, then place your finger on the place until the blood"congeletur sanguis"the blood freezes And embrocate the place with water of intense coldness until the sharpness subsides and is constricted as necessary.
And because it is lighter and easier to extract the artery, you should cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives: let the sharpness of the two knives be similar to almadatem. However, they are much less sharp than the two knives. Because if they are sharp like the two knives, the cold affects both quickly: and they do not cut the flesh with speed. Therefore, because there is a slight thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained, and the flesh is cut quickly: with this method, the work is better, lighter, and easier.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And let the space between the two knives be the thickness of a finger, after you mark two places with cautery: and place both very hot until they reach the mouth, and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between its ends may be extended. For they do not consolidate completely with this cautery.
Chapter IV.
On the treatment of acute and persistent tears from the eyes.
When the tears are persistent and their course is from the veins that are above the skull of the head externally: and no cure can be effected by medicine with medicaments, and you see the face of the patient already reddened, and he feels a creeping sensation in his forehead, like the creeping of ants: and his eyes are weakened, moist, so that their hairs are already corroded with corrosion: and his eyelids are heated by the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients required this operation for their cure, and they named it cure with the Sword.
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave the hairs that are on his forehead. Then make three equidistant cuts on the forehead along its length: and let the length of each cut be about two fingers, with one cut equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second along the length somewhat away from the movement of the eyebrows, and the third from the other side: and beware of cutting the arteries that are on both sides: and keep your hand away from the junction of the two jaws, and let the space of the entire incision be the width of three joined fingers: and have a piece of prepared sponge or many pieces of dried cloth with which you will dry the blood.
Then insert a spatula with two sharp ends, whose following form is this. From the incision which is at the temple part, to the second incision: and with it, remove all the skin that is between the two incisions, with a knife, which is above the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision to the second incision. Then remove this spatula, and insert into the first incision again another instrument which is called a sharp knife, acute on one side, not sharp on the other side. And this is its form.
And place its sharp side towards the flesh attached with skin, and its smooth side towards the bone: and push it until it reaches the middle fissure: and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision continues until what appears from the skin.
Then do this in the middle fissure until the other fissure.
And after a quantity of blood has flowed, press the areas from the clots of blood.
Then place a lint from old cloth in every fissure, and put on them small pieces soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And take care that a warm abscess does not occur.
And on the third day, remove the bandage, and administer a large infusion with warm water. Then treat it with basilicon ointment, and other things with which wounds are treated: until it is healed.
Chapter Five.
On the treatment of sharp tears and catarrhs to the eyes from the inner parts of the head.
When sharp, pungent, persistent catarrhs happen to someone, and you see his eyes weakened, small, and already their sight is weakened: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out of them, and there is a sharp, painful pain deep in the head, followed by sneezing: then take from these occurrences that those materials and catarrhs do not come except from many veins.
And the better treatment for them is this. And it is that you instruct the patient to rub his forehead. Then make one incision in the middle of the forehead, or another shortly across its width, and begin with the incision from the left temple to the right temple: and let the incision go up to the bone: and keep your hand away from the jaws near the temples, which move during mastication: until when the bone is exposed: and you will dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with an old cautery, or with threads from linen. Then bind it tightly with bandages: and soak the bandages with wine and oil, so that a warm abscess does not occur.
And when you loosen it and see that the warm abscess is already diminishing: then you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then care for it with a drying regimen that causes flesh to grow: such as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony: and prepare an ointment from them, and administer it for the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter Six.
On the treatment of that which falls into the ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is of one of four types: either a mineral stone, or similar to stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is a liquid substance, such as water, vinegar, and things similar to them; or it is some animal.
When a stone or stone-like substance that does not add to or grow in the ear falls into the ear, expose the ear to the sun: if you see the stone, then drip something from violet oil or hyssop oil into the ear. Then administer its extraction and make the person sneeze with costus, and plug the nostrils at the onset of sneezing, after you place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and pull the ear upward.
For it often exits with this treatment.
If it does not exit, then administer its extraction with Gesti, that is, with fine pizigarolis: which has this form.
If it exits with the use of gesti, it is good.
And if not, then administer its extraction with a fine, few-fold blind hook.
If therefore it does not exit through that, then make a tube of copper, and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole very much, and pack what is around the tube with wax softened with oil, so that there is no way for air except through the tube: then extract with your breath strong suction.
For it often exits along with what we have mentioned. If it does not exit this way, then take a small amount of helkalimbat or visco, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are caught, and place it on the end of the probe after you have properly wrapped it with tow: then insert it into the ear hole easily after you dry the ear from moisture.
If therefore it does not exit with all that we have mentioned, then hurry to make an incision before a hot abscess or spasms occur.
And the method of the incision is to bleed the patient first in the cephalic vein: and let blood from him according to the measure of his strength. Then have the patient sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear near its fatty part in a depressed area: and let the incision be of a crescent shape until you reach the stone; then remove it with whatever instruments are possible for you.
Then cleanse the incision quickly with your own hand, and care for it until it heals.
If the thing falling into the ear is one of the grains that grow and swell, then administer its removal.
And if it does not obey you to come out, then take a thin, subtle spatula, according to this shape.
And administer with it the incision of that kind from the grains which fall into the ear, and do not do this when you think that grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you place it in many pieces: then extract them with hooks, or with a fine probe, or with suction, as we have said, for its extraction is alleviated.
In the water which enters the ear, the patient must use sneezing with condysium at first: and he has already filled his ear with some old cooked substance: and he is lying on that ear in which there is water. If it exits through that, it is good.
And if it does not: then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, thin, soft, and heat them with fire for a moment, and let the patient insert one of them into the opening of his ear: and jump on one foot from that side, and strike with another stone on the stone which is in the ear. Therefore, he should not stop doing this with stone and stone until all the water comes out.
And now the water exits in such a way that you take one from a parpyro or from a reed, and insert one end of it into the ear: and light the other end with fire until most of it is burned. Then use another reed, and do this many times until all the water comes out: and extract it with a tube as was mentioned before regarding the stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering into it, if it is of a small body, like a flea, and similar to it, treat it as I said in the division.
But if it is of a large body, which appears to the sense: then administer its extraction with hooks and forceps; and its matter is easier than all those held in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and your cure does not take effect: then you must look at the ear in the sun. If therefore something of the worms appears there, then extract it with hooks or with subtle forceps.
But if nothing appears there, then take a tube, which has this form, narrow below, wide above: and insert the thin end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate it: then suck with a strong suction. Do this many times until all the worms come out.
But if they do not obey you to come out, then smear the tip of the tube with wax, as I said with the stone.
If they do not come out with what we have said, then administer the distillations which the ancients have already used to kill worms: and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion, with which you pour oil and medicines into the ear, be done with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it from silver or bronze, narrow below, in which there is a small hole, wide above.
Let it be that the impelling device which is in the concavity of the tube be properly made from bronze. And if you wish, take a rod, and wrap cotton at its end with a proper wrapping; then pour oil, or juice, or whatever medicine you choose into the tube: and place it in the ear; then insert the rod with the cotton above, and press it with your hand moderately so that the oil is propelled into the concavity of hearing, and the patient feels it internally: and what is infused into the ear should already be warmed slightly by fire: and beware that what is distilled into it is not very cold: for medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
Regarding the treatment of auricular ailments due to opilation.
Sometimes infants emerge from their mothers' wombs unperforated.
And it has also happened to some individuals that opilation in the ear canal occurred due to a wound or flesh grown in it.
And this opilation sometimes occurs in the deep part of the ear canal, which is not visible: and it sometimes affects the outer part of the canal slightly, which is visible.
Therefore, that which occurs in the deep part of the ear and which is not visible, is in most cases difficult to heal.
And in that which is visible, you should place the patient's ear in the sun and look into it: then if you see an apparent opilation, open it with a fine spatula, whose form is as follows, let its end have some small width, part of which is sharp: and the rest of the spatula be of two smooth sides: so that it does not hurt the ear.
If therefore the growth is from flesh born in the ear canal: then hold it with a fine hook, and cut it with vehement ease, until all the flesh is removed.
If the growth is in the depth of the ear: then take a fine, gentle probe, and heat it slightly with fire: then insert it into the ear canal.
If therefore you sense a growth with it, which the patient finds with heaviness of hearing, attempt to open it with ease: and beware lest you wound the nerves of the ear.
Then apply to the ear lint according to the size of the opening which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment: do this for several days until you are sure of the wound's healing.
Or take lint, and soak it in rose water, and sprinkle ground zedoary on it, and use it.
If you see the ear already forming an abscess: then it is necessary to remove the lint, and allow it with another piece of lint which you wrap in cerote made with rose oil, until the warm abscess settles: then care for it until it heals.
If a flow of blood should occur: then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water, and place it on the affected ear: and use the remaining treatment which stops the flow of blood as described in the chapter on distillations.
Regarding the treatment of Altheli of the eyelids.
Chapter VIII.
Injuries that occur on the eyelids of the eye are sometimes moist and are dry.
Therefore, you must hold them with forceps: or with a hook, and cut them with a spatula from their roots. Then place ground zegi on the affected areas.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lentil-shaped cautery.
And to cauterize them is better after the incision. For they often return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned, and they do not return.
On the treatment of warts on the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter Nine.
Often something happens on the eyelids that resembles warts in its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called a granum: and it is an aggregation of thick moisture in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid.
The operation on them is to examine whether there is a granum protruding from the eyelid, which appears and moves in all directions, and its removal is easy.
Therefore, make an incision over it lengthwise. Then remove it from all sides with ease until it comes out. Then suspend it with a hook, and cut it off.
If the excision is not prepared for you unless after you penetrate the eyelid with a temporary incision, then it harms the patient somehow.
If the fissure is large, then join it with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. For the ointment restores it and causes flesh to grow over it.
And if the stone is inclined towards the inner part of the ear towards the internal surface, then invert the eyelid and suspend the stone with a hook; besides which you may need an incision, and press it from all sides.
If the eyelid is extended by an incision, it does not harm in any way.
Then wash the eye after the stone is cut out with salt water, and care for the area with something that causes flesh to grow over it until the patient heals.
On the treatment of Axirnath of the eyelids.
Chapter Ten.
Axirnath is fat that forms in the layers of the upper eyelid. It mostly affects children, weighing down their eyes and causing them to have colds in the mornings. They cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes, and you see them always lying on their faces and sleeping on them. Their eyelids beneath the eyebrows are wet, covered by swelling, and the prominence of Axirnath is visible to the eye. When you press the area with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of its operation is that the sick person puts his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth, and prepare wax on it, and make a circle out of that wax according to the size that contains Axirnath on all sides. Then place him on it, and press with your fingers on all sides, so that Axirnath gathers in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a scalpel penetrating fissures horizontally, and let not the fissure be larger than that which is made in bloodletting deeply.
Or it is necessary to cut through the entire skin until you reach Axirnath, for in many conditions Axirnath proceeds from a fissure according to the shape of a fragment of white fatty tissue.
Therefore, extract it with a cloth, which you infiltrated between your fingers to the outside: and you turn your hand to the right and left until it disperses: and beware, lest you add to the fissure, so that you do not reach the eye with the scalpel and harm it.
If Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, you should extend the fissure a little with ease until Axirnath appears. Then extract it as we have said.
Then soak the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the area, and bind it with bandages.
And there are some people who rub salt and place it in the concavity of the fissure, so that what remains of that moisture may dissolve.
Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, a hot abscess occurs in the place, then treat it with soothing plasters until it heals.
Regarding the methods for ataxmia of the eye, that is, when the eyelid softens, causing it to droop more than it should.
Chapter XI.
When additional hairs grow on the eyelids beyond the course of the natural hairs and become old: then they harm the eye and cause various illnesses to occur, such as continuous tears, softening of the eyelids, and opacities, until it becomes a cause for the destruction of the eye.
And ataxmia of the eye is treated in four ways. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization. Or ataxmia is treated by incision and suturing. Or by means of tubes, as I shall explain.
It is necessary to place the head of the patient in your lap. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it turns, that is good. And if not: insert a needle into it, at the part where there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread from above, and place it near the hairs themselves, that is, near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with a probe.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs with the spatula inserted from the larger tear duct to the smaller tear duct.
Then extract the thread, and place a small piece of felt or cloth under the eyelid; then mark above the eyelid with branding iron, which should be like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it must be done according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: for it already varies among people.
For there are some who need a large quantity to be cut from the eyelid, according to the amount that is softened from the eyelid.
Then with the spatula find above the two lines which you marked, and begin from the larger tear duct to the smaller tear duct, and let the cut be near the natural hairs, like the thickness of a ray.
Then insert the hook into one of the two corners of the skin. Then scrape the entire area. Then sew together the two lips with a needle and fine wool thread: and clean the blood, and make adhere what remains of the threads above both eyebrows, with some adhesive substances, if you wish to do so: and if not, do not mind.
Then leave the stitches and threads for three days, or four: afterwards care for it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without stitches, and care for it with something that dries and constricts. For the eyelid is raised at the sealing of the wound and its gathering together: but it will be better.
The ancients taught this method of treatment.
However, there is careful attention on the patient, and it is from good practice, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is in Ataxmir as well: and it is to mark on the eyelid a figure that resembles the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have narrated.
Then raise the eyelid with three separate or joined hooks, according to this following form, then cut away what is excessive with small scissors, according to this form, with equal incisions.
If it is not possible for you to hold the hook and it does not align: then take a needle with thread, and insert it in the middle of the figure: and insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and a second thread near the smaller tear duct: and gather the threads between your fingers equally.
Then raise your hand with equal lifting: and raise the skin on which the line is marked, as we have narrated.
Then bring together the two edges of the wound with sutures: and care for it until it heals.
If an abscess occurs at your incision or fissure: treat that abscess with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
And it sometimes happens to the eyelid that its hairs turn inward.
Therefore, you should use what we have said in making the incision; but sewing up both is more skillful. On the treatment of Ataxmir with reed.
And it is such that you turn the eyelid and tear open the slit which is inside, as I have described. Then skillfully make two reeds or two fine sticks: the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width should be less than the width of a spatula: and you will now cut at the ends of each from both sides where you hold the threads.
Then carefully place each one over the excess of the eyelid, and tightly bind the two reeds on both sides with a strong tie, and leave it for several days. For skin that is tightly bound will die, and turn black, and rot, until it falls off by itself.
If it is delayed, then cut it with scissors. Then care for it until it heals.
When it is consolidated, lift the eyelid: and the hairs do not pierce.
And this is the form of the two reeds that you will make according to this figure, and the size in length and width.
Chapter XII.
On raising the piercing hairs in the eye with a needle.
The operation is to take a fine needle and insert into it a thread made of fine, soft silk. Then join the ends of it, and tie each end with a very fine knot; and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then arrange another fine thread under it briefly, and knot the ends of it if you wish.
Then let the patient place his head in your lap, and be near the sun so that the operation may be clear; for it is a fine or minute operation.
Then insert the needle with silk into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly, until you draw it out above the natural hair.
Then pull the hair above the silk: and insert that hair into the silk: whether it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the silk in the eyelid with the natural hair.
If the silk is pulled out and the hair does not come out with it: pull the silk downwards with the thread you composed in it until the silk comes out from the upper opening, and see it with your eyes: then pull the silk and the thread together and extract both, and close the eye: leave it closed for two days or three until the hair adheres to its place and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then either attach to it a long hair from the natural hairs and lift with it, or leave it until it grows longer over time, and then lift it.
Chapter XIII.
When this Alxatrati occurs in the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Alxatrati is either natural or accidental.
Accidental therefore occurs from the healing of a wound, or a cut, or a cautery, and similar to these.
And the method of the operation is to split that healing, and to separate its lips, and place between them a strip of linen, and bind it until it heals.
And it is not appropriate to use in its treatment things that dry and constrict: for if you do that, the Alxatrati returns worse than it was: rather use in it things that soften, such as Greek fennel: and foment with water, in which marshmallow and flaxseed have been cooked: and an unguent of dyaquilon, which has been melted with some oil: and wrap it with a strip of linen, and treat it thus.
And the treasure of your treatment is to strive with all ingenuity that it not heal solidly, according to the form it had at first.
And this operation which we have mentioned is only a correction of Alxatrati, so that the form of the place does not return entirely as it was.
The treatment of Alxatrati which occurs in the lower eyelid, and is a wrinkling or contraction upwards towards the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This Alxatrati which occurs below is truly named Alxatrati. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental occurs from a wound, or a cut, or a cautery, and similar things.
And the method of operation is to take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with the needle, and cut it with a broad spatula. If the shape of the eyelid returns as it should, it is good.
And if not, take a rod, and place it in the cut, and turn the eyelid with it: and make two cuts on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two cuts be from the two angles of the incision, until they meet and form an angle: until when joined they form this shape, which is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh to the extent that its sharp lower side is from what follows the eyelid. Then join the separated parts: sew it with wool thread.
Then treat them with what we have said about softening medicines and plasters until they heal.
And if an Alxatrati occurs from a cut, and stitching, or cauterization: then it is necessary to make a flat cut under the eyelash hairs, also according to what preceded. Then separate between the two lips with an ointment, according to what we have said.
And the summary of the discussion on the treatment of Alxatrati, whether it is above or below, is that the operation should proceed accordingly, according to how it is prepared from the form of Alxatrati.
For it is indeed of many diversities in form: and the wise artisan prepares the method with whatever way is possible for him, until he restores the figure to its natural form, or near it, and the patient himself, according to what is suitable for him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Regarding the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid becomes consolidated with the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, you must introduce the tip of a probe under the eyelid and lift it up; or extend it with a hook: then cut through the adherence with a blunt spatula that is not sharp like a cutting spatula, but rather slightly blunted: so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatula does not injure the eye with its sharpness: and let your incision be such that you pare down that adherence easily until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the entire adherence heals.
Then pour salty water into the eye, wash it with water: or drip onto it from a sieve made from dissolved zinc and water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with flaxen oil: and place wool soaked in egg white over the eye: and after the third day use a sieve, and with soldering materials, until it heals.
On the incision of the nail and the prominence of the flesh of the tears.
Chapter XVI.
Know that the nail is according to two modes. Or it is nervous: and it is similar to a hard, fine sieve. Or it is not nervous, similar to frozen white moisture: which when it touches hot iron, or you try to take it with a hook, it breaks apart, and the hook does not hold onto it.
And neither kind begins unless from the larger lacrimal gland, extending gradually until it covers the vision and prevents light and eye movement.
And the method of operating in its incision is: that the patient places his head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and lift the eyelid with your hand. Then collect the nail with a hook of few twists, and extend it upward. Then take a needle, and insert into it a hair from the hairs of a horse, an ox, or a cow: and let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle for a moment, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with the thread, and extend it upward: and scrape with the hair the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were sewing it with the hair to its end.
Then cut the remainder in the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula, or with small scissors: and leave the natural tear flesh, so that the steady flow of tears does not fail from its cutting.
And sometimes the claw is extended with a hook alone: or with a thread, as we have said. Then it should be scraped with a gentle spatula, which has this shape.
And beware that the spatula does not touch the horny layer, and a rupture occurs in it, and the pupil be perforated.
Then after the incision, throw some ground salt into the eye, or something made from ziniar, and leave it until the next day. Then care for it with what is necessary until it heals.
If the claw is not nervous, and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor can a hook be fixed in it, then this kind of claw is often cured with medicines, and heals as I have described in the division.
If you wish to cut it, then open the patient's eye, and take a fine, gentle spatula of weak sharpness according to this shape. And scrape the claw gently from above with delicacy. If you see that it becomes rarefied and breaks, and the scraper impresses upon it, then drip into the eye from your hour something made from ziniar, or red powder, or ground salt: and bandage the eye until the next day.
Then repeat the operation on it until all of it is removed. Unless there is a warm aposteme contrary to you in the eye: then leave it alone and treat the aposteme until it heals.
Then repeat the operation on it reasonably until it heals.
However, if the prominence of the lacrimal flesh harms the eye greatly, it should be suspended with a hook and a part of it cut off: and do not make the incision at the end, so that the course of the tears is not hindered.
Then apply a red salve to the lacrimal area, or one made from zincwort, until it heals.
Regarding the incision of Alguardenic, and the flesh grown in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
Sometimes in the eyes of some people, red flesh is formed or positioned over until it covers the pupil, or approaches it, or extends over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward: and it resembles a damask rose.
And the operation on it is such that the patient should place their head in your lap. Then open his eyes, and gather all that flesh with suitable hooks: and hold it with one forceps or tweezers.
Then cut the flesh initially until it is all finished with a cutter. And be careful of the eye so as not to harm it during the operation: and let your cut, whether you make it with a spatula, which we mentioned in the nail incision, or with small scissors, with which asbel is collected, according to how its form will come after this chapter.
When therefore your incision is completed and all the almond milk is removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt: or sprinkle on it red powder, and similar things from corrosive medicines: and place over the eye outwardly a cloth with egg white: so that it may be secured from a warm abscess.
If any of the almond milk remains and hot blood dominates you, and you fear a warm abscess: then leave the eye alone, and treat it with that which soothes the abscess.
Then repeat the procedure on it until it is healed.
And similarly treat the added flesh that occurs in the eye of this kind.
However, it is necessary to avoid the treatment of any weak eye by natural means or by accidental means, using iron: and do not intervene with your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can tolerate that operation.
Regarding the extraction of Sebel from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
Sebel are red veins that form over the eye and prevent it from functioning properly: and they weaken the eye over time.
Therefore, it is necessary for you first to consider whether the eye in which Sebel is present is strong and has no other illness besides Sebel: then extract its Sebel.
And it is necessary that you instruct the patient to place their head in your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one hook, or two according to your judgment: and let the hook be delicate of folding, according to this form, or let there be two hooks set in one body, according to this form.
Then collect with delicate scissors those veins with subtlety, and cleanse the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins removed from the eye, and they dissolve: and beware lest you injure the eye with the ends of the spatula.
And let your operation be at noon facing the sun, and be firm in your operation very much: so that you cut only those veins.
And when you have completed, then distill into the eye green vitriol or red: so that with its sharpness it corrodes what remains of sebel.
If, however, it is not possible for you to collect all of it in that hour, then apply a poultice to the eye with something that alleviates the pain of the eye: and leave it for several days until its pain subsides: and it should be protected from warm abscesses: then repeat on it according to the same method until it heals.
And this is the form of the scissors.
Regarding the reduction of Arissati to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
Physicians name Arissati the Fistula, which you treat with a cautery or with a sharp burning medicine, according to what was previously described.
And if it is not healed, then there is no efficacy in it: unless you incise above the abscess at its origin, and extract all the moisture and pus within it until the bone is exposed.
When therefore you uncover the tooth, and see in it corruption or blackening, then scrape it with an instrument whose form is this.
And it is called Head of Asper.
Let it be made of Indian iron, and let its head be round like an awl, which should be pointed with the point of a file, or with a subtle point of aliskilferi: and place it on the corrupted part of the bone.
Then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand for a moment until you know that the corruption has been scraped away: and do this several times.
Then restore the area with drying and astringent medicines.
If therefore the area consolidates and flesh grows there, and the course of pus is stopped: and it remains for forty days without recurring, without abscessing, and no accident befalls it: then you know that it is now healed.
And if not, then there is no skill involved, except to redirect the fistula to the nostril opening, according to this form.
And it is such that you uncover from the second bone with iron or with sharp medicine: and when the bone is uncovered, then take a drill according to this form, let the iron end be triangular: and its wood should be a tapered pyramid down to the end, as you see.
Then place it on the bone itself: and let it be near the tear duct: and move your hand slightly away from the eye. Then rotate your hand with the awl until it penetrates the mouth, and let the patient feel it: by this he finds air coming out of it when he holds his hand over his nose.
Therefore then restore the place with astringent drying medicines, as I taught you.
When therefore the flesh is born and the place hardens: then the matter which was poured out externally returns to the nose: thus it is a milder condition for the patient.
Regarding the reduction of a protrusion of the Eye.
Chapter Twenty.
When the eye protrudes entirely and no harm or reduction occurs in vision: then you must calm the patient: then bleed him: afterwards apply cupping to the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then apply to the eye an unguent made from acacia, aloes, frankincense, and sarcocolla. Then bandage the eye over the plaster with many poultices.
And the method of the poultices is as follows: take soft cloths, many of them, and fold each cloth over four times: make many of them: then place them one on top of another according to the amount needed by the eye: then bind them tightly with a hard cloth in a strong bandage.
And repeat cupping with suction without scarification.
Then remove the cupping and leave the eye tightly bandaged day and night.
If however the bandage is softened again, then it must be tightened greatly; then remove the bandage after a day and night, as we said.
If therefore you see the eye has returned to the grape skin, it is good: and if not, then apply the poultice, and the powder, and the compression, and the cupping, until it heals.
Regarding the incision of the grape skin.
Chapter Twenty-One.
When a disruption occurs in the grape skin layer, then it protrudes and extends beyond the eyelids like a grape seed, and the person's appearance is marred because of it, and you wish to cut it: then the procedure for this is as I narrate: and it is to insert a needle at the root of the grape seed from the lower to the upper part.
Then insert another needle with double thread from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate: and leave the first needle in its place.
Then cut the double thread, and tie it around the grape part with the needle: and tighten it greatly.
Then remove the needle, and place wool soaked in egg white on the eye: and leave it until the thread falls off with the grape.
Then care for the eye with what strengthens it until the wound heals.
And sometimes the grape is tightened on all sides with a circle made of cloth until the eye develops a large protrusion.
Then it should be pierced with a fine spatula that reaches the depth of the eye, and let the whitish moisture flow out, and let the eye sink in, and immediately proceed: then press it until it heals.
On the treatment of Alcomnati.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
This sickness which is called Alcomnati is not anything but a pus that gathers in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not itself.
And the method of operating on it is to have the patient sit on a prepared seat or stand straight.
Then take his head in your hands from two sides and move it until you see the pus come to the lower parts of your eyes. Then it should be fixed, and not allowed to descend, and the light should be restored: and the patient should see things as he saw before: and if it does not go down further, you know that it is water.
If the pus does not prepare to descend with what we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands. Then take a fine spatula and use it to puncture slightly above the corneal membrane at the junction of the conjunctiva with the corneal layer in the crown, until the pus comes out.
When it comes out, then drip warm water into the eye in which you have mixed honey: or water in which you have already boiled Greek hay and honey: then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
On the treatment of water descending into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
We have already spoken about the types of water in division, and what is suitable for piercing, declaring and explaining it, then accept the same according to health.
Then it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands, facing the light, near the sun: and bind his healthy eye tightly, and hold it very firmly: then with your right hand if the eye with water is the left eye, or with your left hand if the eye is the right one, hold the eyelid of his eye.
Then take with your right hand the needle if the eye is left: or with your left hand if the eye is right.
Then place the tip of the needle near the cornea at the thickness of the radius in the apparent white of the eye of the smaller lachrymal: then push the needle with force: and you turn your hand with it until it penetrates into the white of the eye: and you will feel that the needle has reached the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the needle's journey to the depth be the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the black part: and this is the cornea of the eye. For you will see it in the pupil of the eye itself, because of the clarity of the corneal membrane.
Then place the needle until it reaches the place where the water is. Then press it below once after another.
If water descends immediately, then the patient sees what he opens his sight to immediately, and the pupil in his eye.
Then rest for a little while. If water descends, then remove it secondly, except for the pupil to emerge.
When it is fixed and does not rise: then extract the pupil with ease: and you turn your hand gradually.
Then dissolve something from clear gem salt in water: and wash the eye inside with it. Then place outside the eye the entire piece of cotton, or wool soaked in rose oil, and goose grease: and bind the healthy eye with it.
We, and those of our time, put ground cinnamon with egg white on it.
If the pupil does not obey you for entering into the eye because of its hardness, since it is from a person whose eye is very hard: then you must take a spatula, which is called Alberid, which has this form.
Therefore, insert with it only the connecting part, and do not put your hand deeply into the hole: and you do this only to make a way to the delicate place of the pupil.
Then insert the pupil as we have said.
And at the completion of your work, a properly made resting place should be prepared for the patient, in which he may sleep on his back in a dark room: and he should be prevented from all movements, and from coughing: and give him food that suits his nature: and he should not move his head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandage be according to its arrangement up to the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark house, and test its vision: and make it see things. Then reduce the bandage up to the seventh day.
And it should not be done at the time of healing, or immediately after the incision: rather, it should be delayed because water rises quickly through a vehement gaze.
If a hot aposteme occurs, then it is necessary to dissolve the eye before the seventh day: and correct it with what sedates the aposteme until it is calmed: then restore its vision, and place over its face an oral device which regulates its sight under it for several days, while being in that dark house.
Then let him gradually leave the house and move about in his own rooms.
And know that in zaltea the student is not excused from seeing several times: then he may dare to perform the operation.
And indeed it has come to our attention from some who are from Alayrach, who said that in Alayrach a magdan was pierced through which water is drawn.
Therefore, I have not seen anyone in your land who has done this: nor have I read it in any of the books of the ancients: and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the images from the magda, so that one who is ignorant may stand over them.
They shall be made of suitable metal: and their ends should be shaped with this same fineness into triangles, and the end sharp.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of flesh protruding in the nose.
Sometimes diverse flesh growths appear in the nose, some of which resemble many-footed scorpions: and from these is a cancerous, stony, dark-colored flesh: and there is also a softer flesh that is not dark-colored.
In those among these flesh growths that are soft, not deceptive, nor cancerous, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing away from the sun, and open his nostrils, and insert a hook into those flesh growths: then pull them outwards, and cut what you have grasped with a fine sharp spatula from one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
If any part remains that cannot be cut off: then scrape it with one of the fine instruments easily, until nothing of it remains. If blood dominates you, or a hot abscess occurs: then oppose it with what is appropriate; or if it is one of the malignant abscesses, then quickly cauterize it until the blood is severed and all the flesh is removed.
Then after the incision, vinegar, and water, or wine should be applied to the nose. If the nose is opened and moisture flows from it to the palate, then you know that it is now healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that flesh has grown inside within the upper nasal bones to which the instrument does not reach with incision.
Then therefore it is necessary to introduce a flax thread which has some thickness, and many knots on it: and place between each knot the length of a finger, or less: and the patient will manage to insert one end of the thread into his nose with a probe, or with whatever is possible for him after he makes it similar to azzer: and he should pull it through until it reaches the hollow, and exits above his throat.
And indeed boys in schools often do something similar to this: and it is easy for one who wishes.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one end which comes out over the nose, and the other which remains in the nose. Then cut the flesh with the knots that are on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is now with the knots of the thread.
Then withdraw the thread: and insert into the nose after wiping away the blood a lint that you have soaked in Egyptian ointment: do this for three days, or longer, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
Then place a lead tube at the end of the matter into the nose for several days until it heals.
If however it requires a treatment that dries, use that.
For making the head purgation device through which oils and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it of silver or bronze: so that it is like a small lamp, open like a shell: and its spout similarly.
And if you want to make a closed tube, like a cane.
And the shell of the head purgation device should be full, open: to which there is a handle at the end of it, with which you hold it when you heat oil or any juice and liquid substances in it.
Chapter XXV.
Often a thorn grows at the end of the nose, and it enlarges and increases with days until its appearance becomes ugly.
And because of this, it is necessary to cut it down at the beginning of its appearance and root out all of it. Then place on the area either a cautery or a burning medicine that serves in its place.
If the cutting is delayed until it enlarges, then examine if it is hard, stone-like, dark in color, and insensitive: then do not touch it with iron, for it is a cancerous tumor.
For I have often seen that cutting such a tumor on a person results in great harm to the one who had it.
And if the swelling is of mild touch, not of dark color, and you see that an incision can be made in its entirety, then evacuate the diseased part, and cut it without fear, without dread: and treat the area with what dries and constricts until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
On
Know that when there is a separation of continuity in one of these cartilages, the operation avails little, except in certain individuals.
Therefore, when something of that sort happens to someone, you should consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood: and then bring together the edges of the wound with a suture: then care for it until it heals.
And if the edges of the separated continuity are already apart, and each part has become healed: then it is necessary to remove all the skin from its visible surface until it bleeds. Then bring together the two edges with a suture, and tighten them, and powder dragon's blood and frankincense over it: and place a piece of diafinicon plaster over the powders, and another of consolidating plasters: and leave it bound for two or three days. Then loosen it, and change the medicine: and leave it until the threads fall off by themselves. Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
The method of suturing is to bring together the separation of continuity, either with needles, as we have mentioned in the suturing of the abdomen: or bring together the separation with thread, as I have made you know.
Chapter XXVII.
Chapter on the removal of lip knots.
Many people often develop hard swellings similar to grains of herb-like growths inside their lips, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Therefore you must turn the lip, and cut over all its knot, and suspend it with a hook, and cut it from all sides.
Then fill the place after the incision with ground zegi until the blood is stopped.
Then it should be mixed with vinegar, and the area where there is astringency should be treated with it until the wounds heal.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
About the incision of the flesh growth above the gum.
Often flesh grows above the gum, which the ancients call abuluss.
Therefore, you must suspend it with a hook: or hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the pus flow, or the blood.
Then place ground zegi or other astringent, drying powders on the area.
If that flesh returns after treatment, for it often returns, then cut it a second time and cauterize it: for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
About the treatment of teeth with iron.
Sometimes on the surfaces of teeth, both from the inner and outer parts, and between the gums, rough, ugly crusts form, and they sometimes blacken and turn yellow or green until corruption from them reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul because of this.
Therefore you must have the patient sit between your hands, and his head in your lap, and scrape the mill and tooth where the crusts appear to you like sand: until nothing remains of them, and do similarly with the blackness, and greenness, and yellowness, and others until they are cleansed.
If therefore what is at the beginning of the reasoning in them is removed, it is good: and if not, then apply reasoning to them again on another day, secondly, and thirdly, until the study finally reaches what you desire.
And you should know that a tooth requires razors of various forms and many shapes: according to how it is prepared for your operation: therefore, the razor with which the tooth is scraped from the lower part is different from the razor with which it is scraped between the teeth, according to other forms.
And these forms of razors should be prepared for you, which you see.
Chapter Thirty.
Regarding the extraction of painful teeth.
You must treat the tooth for its pain with all ingenuity and delay in its extraction. For there is nothing to replace it when it is extracted, since it is a substance of high value: until there is no excuse for its extraction, then you must extract it when the patient is compelled, so that the painful tooth may be secured and certified by you.
For often the pain deceives the patient, and they think that it is in the tooth saha and extract it: then the pain does not cease until the diseased tooth is extracted.
For we have already seen this from the procedure of the bloodletters.
When therefore it is confirmed with you that the painful tooth itself, then you must cut around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is some virtue, until the gum loosens from all sides; then move it with your fingers, or with delicate forceps at first gradually, until you shake it.
Then place the large forceps firmly on it, and hold the head of the patient between your knees; which you have now held firmly so that it does not move: then pull the tooth straight out, so as not to break it.
If therefore it does not come out, then take one of those instruments, and insert it under it on all sides with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
If however the tooth is perforated or corroded: then you must fill that hole with cloth: and hold it tightly with the tip of a slender iron, so that it does not break when you grasp it with forceps.
And you must act carefully with the incision around the gum on all sides extensively.
And guard your strength so that you do not break it, leaving a part behind, which may return to harm the patient with an even greater pain than before.
And beware that you do not do what ignorant bloodletters do in their haste and boldness in extracting it, besides administering what we have mentioned.
For they often cause great infirmities in people, which are harder to heal, leaving all or some of the roots behind, or extracting it along with some bones of the jaw; as we have testified many times.
Then it should be treated after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If a flow of blood occurs from the places (for it often happens), then grind something from zegi, and fill the area with it: and if not, cauterize it if zegi is not available to you.
The forms of delicate forceps with which the tooth is moved should have long ends, a short handle, thick, so that they do not fold when pressed on the tooth: they should be like you see with thick handles, so that when you grip with them, they do not bend themselves nor double over: short ends, and they should be made of Indian iron or properly made steel, straight ends: and at their ends there should be teeth, some of which enter into others and grasp with a proper, strong constriction.
And sometimes the ends are made in the shape of the mouth of a bird which is called a stork, and they have a strong constriction.
Chapter Thirty-One.
Regarding the extraction of teeth and the removal of fractured jawbones.
When something remains after the extraction of a tooth that is broken, then it is necessary to place cow dung with butter on the area for one day or two days until the area softens: then introduce algasti or forceps, whose ends resemble the mouth of a bird which is called a stork. This is the form of the forceps.
Let their ends be made like a file inside: or like aliskilfegi.
If therefore it does not obey you to exit with these forceps, then it is necessary that you cut above the root, and expose all the flesh, and insert the instrument which is called little lever, whose form is this.
Let the end be short and somewhat thick: and let it not be hollow, so that it does not break.
If therefore the root exits through it, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to assist with these other instruments whose forms are these.
The form of the first triangular end, in which there is some thickness.
The form of the thin triangular end.
And with other instruments and tools which have been mentioned earlier in the discussion of teeth.
It is also helpful with this instrument which resembles a large hook, of this form, a twisted triangular end, in which there is some thickness, so that it does not break: and let it not be hollow.
And you should know that dental instruments are many: and similarly other instruments are not counted, and a wise and skilled craftsman discovers the instrument for himself according to what the operation and the illnesses themselves signify.
Because there are illnesses for which the ancients did not describe an instrument, due to the diversity of their forms.
If however the bone is fractured from the jaw, or from other bones of the mouth, or it becomes putrefied: then examine it thoroughly in its place with what is suitable for it from the instruments and forceps which I have mentioned in the extraction of roots, and assist with a lever, whose form is this.
Let there be something thick in it gradually, so that it is tightened, or the mouth holds onto it, and does not slip away and go until the mouth comes out: and restore the place with medicines appropriate for that.
If there is a small rot in the bone, then scrape it from its rot, and care for it until it heals.
Chapter XXXII.
About the treatment of prominent teeth above others.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural course, the appearance is marred by this: and especially when it happens in women and girls, that is, in maidens.
Therefore, you should consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth and does not fit, or its correction is not possible, nor its grinding: then extract it. And if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose form is this.
It is similar to a small beak and is made of hardened iron with a very sharp end.
And let your cut, with which you cut it, be done over many days, because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that another of the teeth is not disturbed.
If it is prominent and suitable for grinding, then grind it with a file made of iron, whose form is this.
Let it be entirely of iron, and its handle of small strong points, like the file with which needles are made: with which the tooth is gradually ground over many days with ease, so that the tooth is not disturbed and falls out: then smooth it, at the end scrape it with some razors.
If it is a tooth from which a part is broken and it injures the tongue: then one must trim it until the roughness of that break is removed and leveled: and flattened, so that it does not injure the tongue nor corrupt speech.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
On the rotation of teeth with gold wires.
When it happens that the front teeth are shaken and jolted by a blow or fall: and the patient cannot bite on what he eats so it does not fall out: and you have treated them with astringent medicines, and the treatment was not effective: then the method is to bind them with gold wire: because silver turns green and rots after some days: but gold never changes.
And let the wire be of medium thickness according to the amount that fits between the teeth.
And the form of the rotation is to take the wire and insert its double between two healthy teeth: then weave with the two ends of the wire between the loose teeth, whether one or more, until you reach with the thread all the way to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the weaving back to the part where you started: and hold firmly with skill and wisdom until it is not moved at all: and let your constriction when you bind the wire be at the roots of the teeth so that it does not come loose.
Then cut the excess ends of the wire with scissors: and bring both together, and turn them with pincers: and hide them between the healthy tooth and the loose tooth so that they do not injure the tongue: then leave it bound tightly as it is.
If it is loosened or cut, tie them with another thread, and it will remain thus for the whole time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the figure of the arrangement of two sound teeth, and two moving teeth, as you see.
And it sometimes happens that one or two teeth return to their places after falling out, and they are retained as we have mentioned, and remain: and this is done only by an artisan who is wise and experienced.
And sometimes a piece of cow's bone is fitted: and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in position, whereby the tooth is supported and held, as we have said: and it remains, and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Sometimes this ligament that occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which a person is born, or accidental, from an injury that has already become consolidated.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient in your hand, and lift his tongue: then cut that nervous ligament across until the tongue is freed from its restraint.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and this is due to the consolidation of an injury: then insert a hook into it, and tear it across until you cut the ligament and loosen the knot.
And be careful that the cut is not deep into the flesh, and that you do not cut the artery there, causing a flow of blood.
Then it should be sewn at the trace of the incision with rose water, or with vinegar, or cold water.
Then place under the tongue a piece of linen that the patient holds throughout the night: so that it does not harden secondly.
If, however, a flow of blood occurs, then place ground zegi on the area. If the blood overcomes you, then cauterize the area with a mottled cautery, which is appropriate for it: then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter XXXV.
Sometimes it happens that a swelling occurs under the tongue which resembles a small frog, preventing the tongue from its natural function: and it may grow so large that it fills the mouth.
And the procedure is to open the patient's mouth facing the sun: and examine the swelling.
If you see that it is of a brown or black color, hard, and the patient feels no sensation in it: then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it tends towards whiteness, in which there is moisture, then insert a hook into it, and cut it with a fine spatula, and free it from all sides. If the blood overcomes you during your procedure, then place ground zegi on it until the bleeding stops: then return to your procedure until you remove it completely.
Then it should be treated with vinegar and salt: and care for it with the rest of the appropriate treatment until it heals.
On the treatment of abscesses of the two tonsils.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
Sometimes there occur between the throat glands, which resemble algodad occurring externally: and they are called the two tonsils: which when you treat with what we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then consider.
If therefore it is a hard abscess, of dark color, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color, and its root is thick: then do not touch it with iron either, fearing a flow of blood, but rather leave it until it ripens. And then either you will pierce it: or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of white color, round, and its root is thin: then it must be cut open.
And the procedure is such that you should consider before performing it whether the warm abscess has completely subsided or decreased somewhat: then make the patient sit facing the sun, and let his head be in your lap: and open his mouth, and have the servant take between his hands, and press his tongue down with an instrument of this form.
Let it be made of silver or bronze, which should be thin like a knife.
When therefore you press with it the tongue, and the swelling is shown to you, and your sight falls upon it: then take a hook, and fix it in the tonsil, and draw it outwards as much as you can, besides which pull out some of the tissues with it.
Then cut it with an instrument, which has the following form. It is similar to scissors: however, the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each of them is directly opposite the other's sharp end: hence be careful that it is made of iron indoo, or alfuled soaked in.
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula, which has the following form. Let it be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you cut one tonsil, cut the other according to this same type of incision.
Then after the incision, the patient should gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If bleeding occurs, gargle with water in which pomegranate rinds have been boiled: or myrtle leaves, and similar astringents, until the bleeding stops: then care for it until it heals.
And at times, other swellings arise in the throat besides the two tonsils. Cut them accordingly as I have said in the incision of the two tonsils equally.
And indeed I have treated a woman with an abscess that had formed between her throat, which was drawing it to darkness, loss of senses, which was nearly closing her throat: and the woman was breathing narrowly from the constriction, and already it had prevented her from eating and drinking water: and she had almost reached death, if one day or two days had remained.
And the abscess had risen so much that it sent out two branches, until they came out above the two nasal passages.
I hurried quickly, and I fixed a hook into one of them. Then I pulled it, and a large part was drawn out from it.
Then I cut it off where it protruded from the nasal opening.
Then I did the same to the one that protruded from the other nasal opening.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue: afterwards I fixed a hook into the abscess: then I cut off part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it: thus the woman's throat was healed, and she began to drink water immediately, then took some food.
Therefore, I did not cease to cut from that abscess many times over a long period: and the abscess would grow back in place of what I had cut, until it became excessively prolonged with it.
I then devised a plan and cauterized the abscess in the throat.
It therefore ceased from growing: then I left her side, and I did not know what God did with her after me.
On the incision of the apostematis of the uvula.
Chapter XXXVII.
When the catarrh descends to the uvula, and it becomes apostematous, and is long: then it is called perpendicular. And if it is thick, round, in the lower part, then it is called a grape.
When it is treated with what we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help: and you see that the warm apostem has settled from it, and is thin: then you must cut it.
And what is gathered from it is round, and does not have length, and is bloody, or of a brown color, or black, and does not have feeling: then you must avoid cutting it. For in it there is fear for the patient.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described by its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit before the sun: and press his tongue with the instrument of which the description preceded: then fix a hook in the uvula, and pull it down: and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for incising both tonsils.
And you must not cut from it anything except what extends beyond its natural limit without additional tissue.
For if you cut more from it, you will damage the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use what we have mentioned in the incision of both tonsils: and treat it until it heals.
If however the patient is terrified of the incision: then it is necessary that you use ingenuity in his cauterization without fear and dread.
And the method of the cautery on it is not to be done except with sharp water: and it is that you place the patient's head in your lap. Then press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned. Then take from the water that I told you about in the chapter on cauterizing, and mix it with unextinguished lime, and make it neither thick nor thin, and fill with it the concavity of this instrument, which has this form.
Let the end of it where the medicine is placed be concave, like the concavity of a spoon's bowl.
And place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer itself: and let the patient lie on his side, so that saliva runs out of his mouth from the internal medicine, so that nothing descends from it to his throat and injures him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you should apply it to the ulcer for a quantity of half an hour, until you see it already blackened, and the biting effect of the medicine calmed.
And if you want to take a cloth, and wrap it over the end of the probe, and pour the cloth with medicine, and insert the probe with the cloth into the tube above, until the cloth adheres to the ulcer.
Do this many times, until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the ulcer. Then leave it: for it dries up and falls off after three days, or four.
If you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it: and after cauterization, clean around with a grape soaked in butter, and cleanse with it what is around it from the medicine: and mix it with cold water.
And let it be treated externally with embrocations, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
This method of treatment, therefore, is more healthful than incision and farther from danger.
And sometimes it is cured with something finer than cautery and incision: for it is cured with fumigation, according to this method. Take calamus, hyssop, origanum, ruta, sseah, chamomile, abrotanum, and similar herbs: and gather all of them or some of them in a pot, and let them be submerged with vinegar, and boiled: and the pot should be sealed with clay properly: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot over which a concave instrument should be placed according to this method.
Let it be made of silver or bronze: and insert the end with the nozzle into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the ulcer through the tube, until the ulcer is greatly obscured.
Then repeat on it many times until it dries up.
And beware, do not perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of the abscess. For it usually adds to the abscess: and you should not do that unless at the inclination of its warmth.
If this instrument is not available to you, then take a cane, and attach at its end an oat husk: so that the patient's bone is not burned: because the oat husk prevents the heat from burning the bone: and this is a good treatment for healing with safety.
On the extraction of spines and bones from the throat.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
Often, a bone or fish spine or something else adheres to the throat.
Therefore, you must extract what is apparent from them where the sight falls, after pressing the tongue with an instrument at the base, and it is made clear to you what is in the throat.
And what is not apparent to you and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. For perhaps the attached object will be expelled by vomiting.
Or let the patient swallow a piece of celery, or a radish root, or swallow a piece of dry bread: or take a piece of soft dried sea sponge: and tie it to a string, then swallow it. When it reaches the place where the spines or bones are and is pulled out, then it exits.
Therefore, if it does not exit with what we have said, then use an instrument made of lead according to this form.
It should be thicker than the radius for a moment, and at its end there should be a curvature, which he may introduce into his throat with ease: and he should raise his head upwards.
And let him be careful of touching his epiglottis, so that coughing does not occur, and push the mouthpiece or the spine, or the physician himself introduces it with his hand.
But that the patient introduce it is better: for his knowledge of the location of the attached object: and push downwards, or pull his hand upwards with the instrument, the whole of it according to the quantity prepared for him, until it comes out.
On the removal of the leech.
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
When a leech is treated with what I said in the section on treatment with medicines and it does not help, then examine the throat of the patient in the sunlight, or near the sun after you press his tongue with the instrument that I described to you.
If therefore your sight falls upon the leech, remove it with a small hook, or with fine tweezers appropriately.
If it is not possible with them: then take a concave tube, and insert it into the patient's throat up to near the throat: then insert a heated iron into the concavity of the tube. Do this multiple times: and let the patient abstain from water for the whole day.
Then let him take a vessel full of cold water and open his mouth in it: and blow his mouth into it, and not swallow anything from it: and move the water with his hand every hour. For the leech immediately falls when it feels the water.
If it does not exit with what we have mentioned, then fumigate the patient with bugs, or with ash with the instrument I described for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this many times, for it will fall.
And the method of operation in fumigation is to take a pot in which there are live coals with fire: and the pot should be covered with a cover, in the middle of which there is a hole: and the end of the instrument should be placed in that hole.
Then throw in the fumigation, and let the patient place his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape, until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech. For the leech will immediately fall.
If it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the patient endure thirst, and eat salty foods, and garlic, and not drink water.
Therefore, it is necessary for it to be expelled with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the leech is extracted from the throat when it falls on the tonsil.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which is inserted into the throat. And its end is similar to the mouth of a bird which is named stork, in which there is the roughness of a file: when it grasps something, it does not release it at all.
On the opening of abscesses, and their incision, and general care.
Chapter Forty.
There are many kinds of abscesses, in various ways, according to the memory of them, namely one and another in this book: and they are different in piercing them and incising them in two ways.
One of which is a kind of abscess in itself and that which it encompasses from moisture.
And the second method is due to the locations in which it occurs in the body.
For an abscess occurring on the head is different from an abscess occurring on the anus: and an abscess occurring in a fleshy part is different from an abscess occurring in joints: and each of them has its own judgment based on treatment.
And among abscesses, there are those that should not be punctured until the pus is mature within them and complete: and among them are those that should be punctured while they are raw and do not mature according to completion.
Like abscesses that are near joints.
For when an abscess occurs near a joint and prolongs its existence until what is around it putrefies, the ligaments or nerves of that joint may be corrupted: hence it is a cause for the contraction of that member.
There is an abscess near the main member: for if you delay piercing it until it ripens, it will harm either that or through the main member.
It is near the anus, pierce it therefore while unripe: and it should not be pierced when the abscess is raw, not of complete digestion, unless it is near the anus, so that the deep part does not rot and extend to the interior of the anus, and a fistula is formed, or something incurable is formed at its end.
You should know the time for piercing an abscess that has ripened according to its completion: and this is at the subsiding of pain, recession of fever, and reduction of redness, and pulsation, and sharpness of the head of the abscess: and the other signs.
And you should make the same piercing in the lower part of the abscess and the more prominent elevation: and the piercing should go lengthwise along the body, if the abscesses are in parts of hands and feet, and in areas of tendons, and chords, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflection.
In those that reflect, proceed with the piercing according to that member.
When the abscess is in fleshy areas: then it is better to delay piercing it until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to its completion.
For if you pierce it before that, the course of the poison from it is prolonged, and there is much filth and foulness, and perhaps its lips and depth harden.
And some swellings are pierced according to the width of the body under necessity: or according to what the limb needs.
And it is necessary that you administer a small piercing in small swellings, and a large piercing in big swellings: or many incisions according to the size of the swelling.
And there are swellings in which it is necessary to hollow out the skin: and to incise when it has already become like cloth, and reached the point where it is already dead: such as that which occurs in many, like dubet, and buboes.
And there are some that are cut with a three-angled incision. And there is one that is incised in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Like the swelling of the groin.
And there are some in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered: and similar to them among the incisions.
But that which has no head, like mild superficial swellings, it is necessary to pierce it with a superficial piercing, or only flat.
And it is necessary that when the swelling is large and has already collected much pus, and you pierce it, you should not be hasty and extract all the pus at that hour: rather, extract a part of it. Then cleanse the swelling until the next day. Then extract some of the pus again.
Do this many times according to the progression, until it comes out: especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old decrepit person: for the animal spirit is often dissolved from the body with the discharge of pus: and perhaps the patient dies, and you do not notice.
Beware therefore this chapter with great caution.
And after your perforation with which you pierce the abscesses, it is necessary to clean the wound: and observe. If therefore the wound of the abscess is small, or the incision is flat, then apply lint from linen, or old felt. And if the abscess is large, and there are many perforation fissures, then you must insert lint into each fissure until they reach the joint.
And if you have cut part of the skin in the abscess, or scraped it around: then you must fill it with old felt, or as when a cloth is woven, or combed with flax down without moisture: and bind it until the third day.
Then remove it, and treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals.
If however a flow of blood occurs during your operation, then apply cold water and vinegar, after the cloth has been soaked in them: and place it on the site of the bleeding multiple times.
If however the flow of blood persists, then you must administer treatment, and cure, and powders, which I have described in many places in this book, and in divisions.
If however it is in winter time, and the place of the abscess is of many nerves: then it is necessary that you pour finely ground [substances] with warm wine, and oil: and place them upon the area.
And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy: then it is necessary that you place finely ground [substances] soaked in water and oil, or with wine and oil, and all of that cold. Until when it will be the third day, as we said, then it is necessary that you open the abscess, and clean it, and administer to its cure what is appropriate for it, until it heals.
This therefore is what is necessary from the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally.
According to the path of distinction, I have already spoken about every abscess, how the way to its cure is specified individually.
Chapter XLI.
Regarding the incision of abscesses that occur on the scalp.
Small abscesses occur on the scalp, and they are of the kinds of Knots, which are contained in the layers that serve as their sacks: almost like they are the egg follicles of a hen.
And their kinds are many.
Some of them are fatty: and some contain moisture similar to mud: and some contain moisture similar to boiled grains and porridges: and others similar to these, and some are hard like stone.
And in the cutting of all and their extraction there is no fear, as long as at their cutting the artery does not make opposition.
And the operation in cutting them is to examine them with an instrument whose form comes after this, which is named Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then cut it with a longitudinal superficial cut: in this manner.
And begin with a cut from line b to line g. When the moisture is evacuated, then scrape the cyst that contains the moisture, and do not leave anything of it entirely.
For it often returns if any part of it remains.
Then soak the cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is available: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day. For what remains from the cyst will be corroded.
Then repeat over the cloth with the Egyptian ointment a second and third time, and if necessary do so until you are confident that nothing of the cyst remains, then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
If the aposteme contains a fatty knot: then cut it in this manner, with a cross-shaped incision: and insert hooks between the two lips of the incision, and scrape it from all sides: and endeavor to extract the tissue that contains it.
If however the artery opposes you, then do what I will tell you next.
And similarly do for an abscess, if it is stony, by incision, and the same treatment, according to what we have said.
And incision on a stony abscess is easier: because it has little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are some of these abscesses that are on the head in some individuals, which completely lack moisture.
Which means: I incised an abscess on the head of an old woman, and I found the abscess like a solid, hard, rough, white stone that could not be broken: and if struck with it, it would wound someone.
In other abscesses occurring on the head, besides these abscesses which occur on the heads of children and near the roots of the ears, the incision of all of them should be superficial.
Or make the puncture always from the lower part of them, so that the flow of pus is directed downwards.
Then treat it with what is appropriate for them from the treatment.
Regarding the incision of strophulas on the neck.
Chapter XLII.
These abscesses often occur on the neck, under the jawbones, and in the groin: and sometimes they occur on the rest of the body.
And regarding those that occur on the neck, there is one and many: and they are generated from each other: and every Strophula among them is within its own coat, as it is with knots and abscesses of the head, as we have narrated.
And there are many kinds of these Strophulas. And among them are stone-like ones: and among them are those that contain humors: and among them are malignant ones, which do not obey treatment.
In that one which you see of good disposition to the touch, whose color is clearly near to the skin's color, and moves to every part, and is not attached with the neck nerves, nor with glands, nor with arteries, nor is it deep: it is necessary to cut it with a superficial incision from the upper part to the lower part of the body along line b. to line g., and peel it away from all sides: and stretch the two skin lips with a hook, or with many hooks if you need them, as we said in abscesses of the head, and extract it gradually.
And be cautious so that neither vein nor nerve is cut.
And let the scalpel not be very sharp: so that it does not make your hand shake during the incision, or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary.
If you do cut a vein or artery, or if it prevents you from continuing the operation, then apply ground zegi or certain powders that stop the flow of blood to the wound, and bind the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the abscess has subsided and the wound has softened: or it begins to turn and tend toward putrefaction.
For the blood is congealed by the lint. Return therefore to your operation until you complete it.
Then inquire with your index finger if anything of the small Strophulus remains; therefore cut them and clean them.
If there is a large vein at the root of the Strophula, then you must not cut that Strophula from its root; rather, you must tie it with a strong double thread and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old wool that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then care for it.
If the Strophula is cut entirely, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound: and sew it up immediately, as soon as you see that there is absolutely no excess remaining.
If you see that there is excess remaining due to the size of the Strophula, then you must proceed to cut its root and remove it: and apply the suture as we have said.
And for those Strophulas that contain moistures, pierce them with a superficial puncture so that the site of their maturity is apparent to you: and place the puncture from what follows below the body, as we have said.
Then apply licinia with ointment after the puncture, and similar treatments, to corrode what remains of the corruption, until you see the wound already cleansed: then treat it with flesh-generating ointment until it heals.
Chapter XLIII.
On the incision of the epiglottis when an abscess occurs within the throat.
The ancients said this incision on the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it: and this is the writing of their speech.
In those having a synanche, however, it is necessary that the incision of the epiglottis be avoided: since no benefit is achieved through it: therefore, because all the veins and lung are weakened.
In those who have a warm abscess in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no illness in the canal, it is necessary to use the incision of the epiglottis, to avoid the danger that arises from obstruction.
Therefore, when we wish to do this, we should cut the epiglottis below three or four circles of the epiglottis, with a small incision in width, in what is between two circles by the amount that the incision is on the surface, not in the cartilage: and this place is suitable for the incision because it is devoid of flesh, and the blood vessels are far from it.
If the surgeon is timid, then he must stretch the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he should incise the skin until he reaches the canal: avoid the blood vessel, if he sees any of them.
Then he should cut the surface that we have mentioned: and it is indicated over the incision of the canal by the phlegm that comes out of it, along with what is disrupted, and by the cutting of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
And when the time feared for suffocation has passed, bring together the two lips of the skin wound, and sew only the skin itself without the cartilage.
Then apply medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
Albucasis says. The summary of this discourse we have narrated is not explained unless they see that some of these abscesses have already swollen the patient's throat: and the patient has risen above death, and wishes to cut off his breathing: they go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the wound place with a certain respiration and be saved from death: and for this reason they commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed, and it lasts for three days or nearly so: then they command to sew the wound and treat it until it is healed.
And what I saw with my own eyes is that a certain servant took a knife and inserted it into her throat, and cut a part of the windpipe.
And I was called for her treatment, and I found her gasping, as one who is near death.
I uncovered the wound and found a small amount of blood that had come out of it. Therefore, I was confident that she had not cut the vein or the windpipe: and air was escaping from the wound.
I hastened therefore, and treated his wound, and cured it until it was healed: and nothing happened to the servant except hoarseness in her voice: and she returned after days to a better state of health.
Therefore, I say that there is no fear in the incision of the epiglottis.
Regarding the incision of the throat hernia.
Chapter XLIV.
This swelling named throat hernia is a large swelling according to the color of the body: and it is very common in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either it is natural, or it is accidental.
In the natural case, there is certainly no malice.
The accidental, however, occurs in two ways: one of which is similar to fatty knots. And the other way is similar to the swelling that occurs from the knotting of an artery. And there is fear in it, and one should not presumptuously approach it with iron, unless it is small: and you should examine it and investigate it with an introducer. If you find it similar to a fatty knot and it is not suspended with any veins, then cut it as knots are cut: and extract it along with what it contains from the cyst, if it is in a cyst: and if not, then thoroughly examine the entire area. Then treat the area with what is necessary for the healing until it is healed.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On the incision concerning the types of Nodes.
There are many types of nodes, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division: and it is necessary that I describe here the difference between a node and an excrescence, as it causes confusion.
I say therefore, that when an excrescence is accompanied by heat, fever, and severe pains, until the effervescence of the superfluity is calmed and putrefaction is complete, then the fever and heat subside.
With a node, there is no heat, no fever, no pains, and they are contained in cysts called sifachin, which are their own sacs, and they are according to the color of the body: and their beginning is like a chickpea, and they become like a batecha, and may be larger or smaller.
And they are of two types: either fatty, or containing humidity. And the colors of the humidity are many, according to what I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a node, you must examine it and inquire about it first with an instrument called Intromissum, according to how its form will be presented in the chapter that follows this.
And the method of examining swellings and all nodes is to take this instrument and insert it into the moister place you find in the swelling: and you should gradually rotate your fingers with it until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then place your hand at the measure of the size of the abscess.
Then remove the inserted object, and examine what comes out after it.
If then a flowing moisture comes out, whatever the color may be: then cut it with a superficial incision, as I have said in the other abscesses.
And if no moisture comes out after the inserted object, then you know that it is thick: therefore cut over it with a cross-shaped incision, in this form, as I have taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and remove the skin from all sides easily: and apply the cupping vessel if you can over it, to extract the healthy tissue with the knot.
If, however, the cupping vessel breaks during the operation, and it is not possible to extract the healthy tissue, for this often happens, then remove it in pieces until nothing remains of it.
For if any part of it remains, whether little or much, the knot returns in full measure.
If it overcomes you and a little of it remains: then fill the wound at your completion with some sharp corrosive powders: bind the wound, and place something warm over it where the abscess sits, and care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If then the knot is large, then suture its two lips, and care for it with what promotes fleshing.
If, however, there is a pulsating or non-pulsating vein against you: then hurry and fill the place with ground zegi, and leave it tight for two or three days until the wound becomes putrefied and the blood boiling ceases: then return to incising what remains of the knot.
Chapter Forty-Six.
On the instruments for cutting and piercing.
There are forms of speculums, and they are of three kinds.
Among them is the large one, and among them is the medium one, and among them is the small one.
Let them be made of square-ended alfulud iron appropriately, so that they may quickly enter into the abscess.
And these are the forms of perforating instruments, and one of them is called beris, that is, perforator: and they are of three kinds.
Among them is the large one, and the medium one, and the small one.
They are used to investigate abscesses, sinuses, fistulas, and buboes from what is between them of bones.
And others are made round, smooth, and blunt, like large needles with which chairs are sewn, made of brass, or copper, or iron, or silver.
And the better ones are those made of brass.
And perforating instruments are also made of black lead, which are used to examine fistulas, whose concavity has reflections, so that they can be gently reflected with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. For among them are the long ones, the medium ones, and the short ones, according to the size of the width of the fistula and its narrowness.
The form of forceps, and they are of many kinds.
For they are simple, that is, they have one curvature: and they are of three kinds as you see, Great, Medium, and Small.
And among them are blind forceps: and they are of three kinds.
And among them are hooks having two curvatures, and they are of three kinds: and among them are hooks having three curvatures, and they are of three kinds: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels, with which knots and abscesses are cut and skinned: and they are of three kinds: for among them there is a large, medium, and small one.
Their ends with which the cutting is done are sharp, other ends are not sharp: and they are not used thus, except to aid in skimming knots near a fear of vein or nerve incision: and to heal through them the sick and find temporary relief from burning, which is found in skimming abscesses.
They are made of bronze and resemble a still with which alcohol is made: and at the wide end there are hidden points of spatula: and it runs to the interior and the exterior when you wish, as you see.
The form of spatulas which are hidden between the fingers during the piercing of abscesses: and the sick do not feel them: and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Forms of Venous Arteries with which the flow of blood is cut off: and they are of three species, large, medium, and small.
Let them be made of bronze or citrus wood, round, to a moderate length, as you see: and let them be fine.
And it is necessary for those species of veins to be with you, large and small: so that you may cut off the blood quickly in an emergency, and then when medicine is not present for you.
However, do not use them to cut off the blood flow in every part of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas: such as the calves of the legs, the hips, the arms, the nipples, the abdomen, the groin, and similar fleshy, moist areas.
And sometimes small instruments similar to the rinds of onions are made from them according to their shape: with which the blood is cut off when it flows from the place of bloodletting, or at the incision of a vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made round according to this form.
Chapter XLVII.
Regarding the treatment of men's nipples which resemble women's nipples.
Sometimes the nipples of some men swell during the completion of sleep (that is, when they begin to emit semen in sleep) until they resemble women's nipples: and they remain foully abscessed.
Therefore, for those who wish to avoid this, it is necessary to cut above the nipples with a crescent-shaped incision, according to this form from line b to line g. Then remove all the fat. Then fill the wound with a flesh-forming medicine. Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and care for it until it heals.
If the nipple inclines downwards and softens due to its size, as often happens with women: then it must be incised on its two upper sides with two similar crescent-shaped cuts, each of which is connected to the other at the ends of both, until a larger line contains a smaller one, according to this form from line b to line g. Then remove the skin that is between the two lips and take away the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders, which is necessary for the cure, until it heals.
If you cannot complete the incision that you are supposed to make due to the patient's restlessness or due to blood flow: then you must fill the wound with a linen dipped in a corrosive ointment, and leave it until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then care for it until it heals.
Regarding the puncturing of an abscess, which occurs under the Titillico.
Chapter XLVIII.
These abscesses which occur under the Titillico are of the hard species of Strophularia, which contains cysts, and among them are those which contain moisture.
Those among them which contain moisture should be incised with a crescent-shaped cut, according to this form, from line b to line g. When all the pus in the abscess has been evacuated, then fill it with an old cloth and leave it until the next day.
Then the scab shall be removed, and it should be treated with a suitable ointment until it heals.
If the abscess is of the kind of knots like Strophularia, then cut above it, as we have said in the section on cutting equally above Strophularia.
If the wound extends so as to discharge pus, then apply a cautery to it, according to what we have said in the preceding.
Chapter XLIX.
Regarding the incision of an abscess that occurs due to the artery and vein.
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it becomes hardened, an abscess often results from this: and similarly with veins, so that an abscess and swelling occur in them.
And the signs by which it is known that the abscess and swelling are due to the artery and vein are: for when the abscess is due to the artery, it is long, gathered deep in the body: and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if it has a pulsation.
And that which is due to the vein is round on the surface of the body.
And incising this abscess is an error, especially when it is under the armpits, in the groin, on the neck, and in many parts of the body: and it is very serious. Therefore, its treatment should be avoided with iron, and those that are also in the extremities or on the head should be avoided as well.
Therefore, concerning that which comes from the swelling of the artery's opening, make an incision in the skin lengthwise. Then open the incision with hooks, then the artery: and free it from the tunics, until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle under it, and make it penetrate all the way to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread at two places, according to what I taught you in extracting the two arteries which are in the temples.
Then puncture the area between the two ligatures with a lancet until all the blood within it escapes and the abscess is resolved.
Then apply treatment that generates pus until the ligatures fall off: afterwards treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the abscess is due to the cutting of a vein, then you must hold as much of the abscess with the skin as you can with your hand. Then insert a needle under the area you are holding with your hand, and make it penetrate: and have double thread on it until you pull it out from the other side. Then tie it with a good bandage along with the abscess: according to what I told you about tying a grape, from both sides with both ends of the thread.
If you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert another needle with another thread under the entire abscess at the needle's incision: press and tie your threads at four places.
Then cut the abscess in its middle until what is inside comes out; then cut away the excess skin, and leave what was bound from it.
Then place on it the poultice which you soaked in wine and oil. Then administer the treatment which is done with plasters and ointments until it heals.
Chapter L.
Regarding the abscess that occurs from the twisting of nerves.
As an abscess occurs in arteries and veins, so does an abscess occur in nerves: which happens to them through percussion or from excessive labor and similar causes: and it is most common in places such as the helpers, or heel, and in any place where joints are moved: and this abscess is severe.
Its color resembles the rest of the body, and it is in most cases without pain: and when it is pressed with vehemence, the patient feels something similar to stupor in it.
And the abscess is not aggregated deep within the body, but it is beneath the skin, and it can be moved in all directions, nor does it go forward or backward to the rear.
Therefore, what is among them in the joints should not be penetrated with iron. For it may cause contraction.
In those that are in the head or forehead, incise the skin with a spatula. If therefore it is a small abscess, then hold it with tweezers, and cut it off from the root.
And if it is large, then hang it with a hook, and remove the skin: then take it away, and close the wound with stitches: and care for it until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-One.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs in the abdomen.
There occur in some men at times in their bellies, and in the rest of their bodies, growths which are called Fungalia, by similarity to fungi.
Whose root is subtle, and their head is thick, and their lips are inverted. And some of them are small: and some of them become greatly enlarged.
And I have indeed seen a man, and in his belly were two growths, which were more like fungi than other things: there was no difference between them, they were white, of small roots, and their lips were inverted, and they ended, and moisture ran from them always.
I cut them, and found one to weigh nearly ten and eight ounces and the other nearly six ounces. The procedure for cutting them is such that you should then consider if the patient is moist, and the color of the growth is white, moist, and of a subtle root: then cut it with a broad spatula, and have cauterizations ready at hand over fire.
For often much blood is expelled upon cutting it: therefore hurry if the blood overcomes you, then cauterize it.
If you see the patient fearful and timid about being cut with iron, then take a properly made thread of lead, and bind it to the athelul: whose amount is as we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then add to the binding of lead. Therefore, do not cease to bind the lead whenever it adheres to the hair, until it is separated and falls off by itself without effort.
If the hair has a thick root, then there is something to fear and be anxious about its cutting: especially when it is on the belly.
However, it is possible to cut through the middle of it. Then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then care for it until the wound heals.
And beware lest you presume to cut the hair which is of black color, little sensation, ugly appearance: for it is a cancerous tumor; and I will come with a reminder of Cancer after this.
Chapter LII.
Concerning the treatment of the navel protrusion.
The protrusion of the navel occurs for many reasons. Or from the fissures of the sifac, which is above the belly: and althub or intestine comes out of it, according to what happens in other hernias. Or from the blood that flows from a vein or an artery, according to what has been previously stated. Or from constrained wind in it.
If however it is due to a sifac fissure, and the exit of thirbi: then the color of the apostema is similar to the color of the body: and it is gentle, without pain: and appears at different sites. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then its location is of much greater diversity than what we have mentioned. When you press it with your fingers, it disappears: then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound with it: and it swells greatly at the entrance of the bath, and causes great labor.
If it is due to moisture, it is gentle, then it does not disappear when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrict or increase.
If it is due to blood, then the apostema appears with these signs towards blackness from the slope.
If it is due to born flesh: then the apostema is heavy, thick, hard, and fixed according to one quantity.
If it is due to wind, then its touch is gentle.
And the operation in this case is to determine if the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an Artery, or Vein, or wind: then you must refrain from treating it. For in this case there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter where I said about apostemata due to artery and vein.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or the zhiri: then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold their breath and stand stretched. Then mark with encaustic around the entire navel. Then instruct him to lie supine in your hands on his back. Then circle with a broad spatula around the navel on the place which you marked with encaustic. Then extend the middle of the abscess upward with a large hook. Then bind him firmly around the circumference with thread or with silk cord: and let the knot of the binding be secure.
Then open the extended middle of the abscess above the binding. If you find it already captured by the binding: then extract securely, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine into the abdomen: and if you find the zhiri, then take it with a hook, and cut off its excess.
If however an artery or vein is in the way: then tie it tightly. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and insert two strong threads into them: and insert the two needles around the area you made around the abscess in the shape of a cross, which you make to penetrate.
Then grasp the abscess at four points above the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the area until the extended flesh putrefies: and falls off by itself: or cut it when it becomes thin and putrid.
Then care for it with what is necessary from ointments until it is healed.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to hard flesh in it or moisture, then it is necessary to hollow out the abscess as we have said. And you shall remove the blood or moisture that you find in it.
Then care for it with what strengthens the area.
Chapter LIII.
About the treatment of CANCER.
We have already spoken about the classification of cancer types and how to treat it with medicines. And one must be cautious when treating it with surgery so that it does not become ulcerated. We have also discussed cancer generated in the uterus and precautions for its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where its removal is possible, such as cancer in the breasts or in the thigh and similar limbs located for extracting it entirely, especially when it is a small, initial growth.
When it is old and large, you should not approach it closely.
For I was not able to heal anyone from it, nor have I seen anyone before me who has succeeded in treating it.
And the procedure for it, when it is located as we have said, is to precede and relieve the patient from black bile several times. Then bleed it if you find it with obvious fullness.
Then prepare the patient for the preparation in which he is placed with the operation.
Then throw into the cancer hooks that suit it. Then hollow it out from all sides with the skin according to the examination until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, but press the areas, and wipe off all the thick blood with your hand, or with whatever is possible there from the instruments.
If, however, the flow of thick blood from the incision of an artery or vein opposes you, then cauterize the vein until the blood is stopped. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
Regarding the treatment of dropsy.
Chapter LIIII. We have already discussed in the division the types of dropsy, and how the gathering of water occurs: and the signs of each type, and its treatment with medicines.
And that which is treated with iron is only the ascites type alone: and it is not approached with iron in the case of the tympanites type: nor thoroughly in the case of the hyposarca type: for that is deadly.
When you have already treated this type of dropsy, tympanites, with medicines and your treatment has not helped: then consider. For if the patient has already incurred weakness, or there is another illness with them besides dropsy: such as if they have a cough, or diarrhea, and similar conditions: then beware of treating them with iron: for there is fear in that.
If however you see a patient with excess strength, and he has no illness other than dropsy alone: and he is neither a child nor an old person: then the method of treatment in his case is that you lift the patient standing between your hands, and the assistant behind him should press his belly with his hand driving the water to the lower part of the chest.
Then take the spiked spatula according to this shape. Let it be of two sharp parts, long, with a sharp end like a spatula. However, let there be something of gradual shortness in it, so that you do not penetrate through it during the operation all the way to the intestine and injure it.
Then consider. For if the cause of dropsy is from the intestines, then it is necessary to extend with the incision three fingers' width below the navel, towards the lower part directly above the pubic region.
If however the cause of dropsy is due to disease of the liver: then let your incision be to the left of the navel by three fingers.
And if its cause is due to the spleen, then the incision should be on the right side: and it should not be on the side on which the patient prefers to lie, so that the excess fluids do not flow to that weak spot.
Then pierce the skin entirely with the instrument. Then insert into that incision, and lift your hand with the spatula between the skin, and sinew, as if you are flaying it: and let the amount flayed be the size of a nail, or about that.
Then pierce the sinus until the spatula reaches the empty space: and that is the location of the water. Then extract it, and insert into the opening an instrument which has this form. And it is like a cannula: made of silver, or bronze, or brass, smooth, clean: which has at its lower part a small opening, and on its sides are three openings, two from one side, and one from the other side: and the edge is its cut end according to the manner of cutting a reed, as you see: at its upper end is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it descends immediately on the instrument, therefore evacuate the amount of water in an hour.
For if you evacuate more than is appropriate from it in an hour, the patient may die through the dissolution of his animal spirit, or he may suffer a syncope that approaches death.
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of its power, and according to what the dispositions of the patient signify to you from the strength of his pulse, and from his good condition.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water.
This is because it is retained immediately due to the skin which holds the opening that is on the sinus: of which I have spoken, so that you pierce it in that manner.
Then insert the instrument again on the next day, if you see the patient tolerate it: and also extract a small amount of water.
Do that for several days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until hardly any water remains.
If you are afraid for the patient and leave much water behind: then treat him with burial in warm sand, and much sweating in a bath and sun, and expect thirst: and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed: and cauterize over the stomach, spleen, and liver after the extraction of water: as I have narrated in what precedes.
On the care of infants who are born with unperforated urine passages.
Chapter Fifty-Five.
When one of the infants exits the womb of his mother, and his anus is not perforated, or there is a narrow opening, or it is not in its proper place.
Therefore, it is necessary to intervene with the perforation immediately upon birth using a very fine spatula, according to this method.
Then place a thin pin made of lead in the opening and tie it: and keep it there for three days, or four.
When he wants to urinate, it should be removed, and he may urinate. Then replace it.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area will prevent it from closing.
He whose opening is narrow is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days until it is enlarged.
Those who have a hole in an unusual place are injured. Which is because, in those who are born, there is a hole at the end of the penis: therefore, he cannot urinate forward until he lifts the penis upward with his hand. He cannot reproduce because the sperm cannot reach the womb properly: and it is a very foul disease.
And the method of the operation is to lay the patient on their back. Then extend the head of his penis with your left hand strongly, and cut the head of the penis from the priapic area with a sharp knife or scalpel: like cutting a reed, or as if you were peeling something, so that its middle comes similar to the head of the penis: and so that the hole falls in the middle as it should.
And be careful during your operation from blood flow. For it often happens that. Therefore, apply to him something that stops the bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
Regarding Albather, which occurs in the foreskin and head of the penis, and concerning corruption, blackening, and adhering.
Chapter LVI.
These Albather often occur on the penis, and it is a foul flesh prominence.
And from it, some are malignant, and some are not malignant.
Therefore, you should suspend it with a subtle hook and cut it off until you clean it all. Then place on it a quince submerged in Egyptian ointment. Then treat it with diaphynction ointment after that until it heals.
If the Albather is malignant and of ugly color, then you should apply a cautery to it after its incision and reasoning.
If the Albather is in the foreskin of a captive, uncircumcised, and part of the Albather is within the foreskin and part of it outside: then you should remove the Albather that is inside first, until when it consolidates, then treat it externally: because when you treat them simultaneously, the foreskin does not heal without being stretched.
And it also happens in the testicles, and there is blackening and corruption in the foreskin. Therefore, you should scoop out everything that is already blackened and what is about to be corrupted or is already corrupted.
Then apply on it after that with honey which is already mixed with the flour of pomegranate rind and the herb of triturated sieve.
Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
If a flow of blood occurs, then apply a cautery with a crescent-shaped cautery, according to this form.
For cautery is beneficial for two conditions simultaneously, namely for blood flow and a wound when it becomes corrupted.
If the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed entirely within an hour: then it is necessary to insert a cannula made of lead into the urethra so that the patient may urinate over it.
In cases of the foreskin adhering to the head of the penis, and this adhesion does not occur unless in one whose foreskin is healthy and does not require circumcision: and sometimes it occurs due to a wound or an abscess: therefore, it is necessary to scrape it with a blunt spatula until the bond is loosened and the head of the penis is freed on all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish them precisely, then it is necessary to scrape away something from the head of the penis and from the foreskin. This is because the foreskin, when it is thin, may be punctured quickly due to its thinness.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a fine linen cloth that has already been moistened in cold water, so that they do not stick together again.
Then it should be treated with astringent wine until it is healed.
Chapter LVII.
Regarding the cleansing of infants and the treatment of errors that befall them.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity like other wounds; however, since it is performed by our operation, by our will, and its use is proper for children, it is necessary to mark it with a better procedure and an easier path leading to healing.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books: because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
Which is because I found that the majority of surgeons and phlebotomists use purification by circumcision with a lancet and scissors: and they use cautery, binding with thread, and incision with a scalpel.
And I have indeed tested all these methods, and have not found a better one than purification with scissors and binding with thread.
Because in purification with a lancet, the skin often escapes. Because the skin of the foreskin has two layers: therefore, perhaps the upper layer is cut, and the lower layer remains: thus it is necessary to make another incision, causing future pain. And with the purification that is done by cautery, that is, digitally, which tailors use, the end of the male member is not secured from injury: because it might enter its opening.
In purification with a scalpel, the iron might slip and ruin your operation: and the skin of a boy is naturally short, and often they are born in such a way that they do not need purification: and I have already seen this.
However, the method of purification with scissors and binding with thread has proven to be good through experience: because scissors are proportional in their cutting: therefore, the sharpness on top is like the sharpness below. When therefore you press with your hand, two sharpnesses are proportioned, and they fall according to one operation at the same time: and a compression of similar shape is made, containing the skin of the rod from all sides, with which no error at all occurs.
And the method of the operation is to make the boy understand, especially if he is one of those who grasp quickly, that you do nothing except tie a thread to his rod only: and leave him until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every way that is possible for you to do so, from what his own understanding receives. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and let him not be sitting: and hide the scissors in your sleeve, or under your foot, so that the boy does not see them at all, nor any of the instruments.
Then insert your hand to his rod, and blow on the skin, and pull it up until the head of the rod comes out. Then cleanse it from what dirt accumulates on it.
Then bind the marked area with a double thread. Then bind below that briefly with a second bandage. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the area of the lower bandage firmly, and cut between the two bandages. Then pull the skin up quickly, and extract the head of the rod. Then let the blood flow gradually (for it is better) and apply powder on top: and on top of the powder place a cloth in which an egg yolk beaten in rose water, mixed with good fresh rose oil, is spread: and leave it on until another day: and care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
The form of the scissors for cleaning is this.
Let the two ends be blunt and inclined so that the branch of the nail does not protrude from them: and let the length of the two sharp parts be equal to the length of the two handles.
The error falling in cleaning is: because perhaps the inner skin entirely or part of it escapes at the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary to extend it with your thumb before the apostemation of the area: and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your thumb, then extract it with a hook, and cut it.
If however three days have passed and what is under the nail remains swollen, having formed an abscess: then leave it until the hot abscess ripens, and remove the scab with ease, and cut it according to how it is prepared for you: and beware of the tip of the nail. For it will not harm it.
Treat it with what consolidates the wound from the powders we mentioned in the section on powders: and if it is cut beyond measure from the skin and extends to the upper parts, it will not harm it either.
Treat it with what we have said until it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
Regarding the extraction of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs from an obstruction caused by a stone, or coagulated blood, or pus, or flesh growths, and similar things from those methods of treatment we have mentioned in the division.
And if the urine is not resolved, and you see that its retention is due to a Stone already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over on his knees. Then his feet should be placed on his back, and he should extend his abdomen from the upper part of his back, and the patient should hold his breath as much as possible. Therefore, the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the Stone towards the back: hence the urine is released.
If it is not resolved by what we have said, and the matter is severely affecting the patient: then it is necessary to administer its extraction with an instrument which is called a syringe, whose form is as follows: It should be made of silver, and be delicate, soft, hollow like the tube of a bird's feather in the thinness of a finger, long resembling one and a half palms: with a fine tube at its head.
And the method of urine exiting through it is to take a doubled thread, and tie wool or cotton, a good ligature, at its end: and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and cut with scissors if there is any excess wool, but insert it into the tube forcefully, like an awl.
Then anoint the syringe with oil, or with butter, and egg white: and have the patient sit on a seat, and insert the syringe into the bladder, and its rod with wet oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the twig with ease until it reaches the root of the twig.
Then double it above the navel.
Then insert the syringe into it until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel that it has already reached the empty place: and this is not done in this order unless because the passage through which it goes is twisted.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. For the abscess will follow the wool.
Then remove it, and make the abscess flow through the urine passage: and repeat the syringe, and do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied, and the patient finds relief.
Regarding the quality of bladder irrigation with a clepsydra.
Chapter LIX.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or blood congeals in it, or pus is compressed in it, and you wish to distill water and medicines into it: then it should be done with an instrument called a clepsydra, and this is its form.
For it is closed, that is, sealed. And in it there are three holes, two on one side, and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave area, in which is the part that pushes, should be according to the size that fits it without addition, until when something is drawn with it, moisture is attracted: and when it is pushed, it expels the moisture far away: as a clepsydra does, from which naphtha, that is, Greek fire, is projected in battles.
Therefore when you want to transfer moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the clepsydra into the moisture, and draw with it what is pushed upwards, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clepsydra.
Then insert its end into the tube, as we have described in the syringe. Then push the moisture with that which pushes it, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, so that the patient feels it.
The form of a subtle clyster with which the bladder is irrigated.
Let it be made of silver or brass, whose head should be higher and similar to a small alcam, and below it there should be a groove in which the ligament falls.
Then take the bladder of a ram, and place in it the moisture with which you want to irrigate the bladder. Then tie it between two grooves with a strong ligature and double thread: and warm that moisture slightly over fire.
Then insert the end of the clyster into the tube, then place your hand over the bladder with the moisture in a proper grip, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder available, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle out of it, and pierce it entirely around its circumference. Then insert a strong thread into those holes, as they turn. Then add a circle, as is added to a brother: after you place on it what you wish from moistures, and oils, and waters.
Then bind it to the instrument: and do with it as you did with the bladder by pressing with your hand, until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
Regarding the extraction of Stone.
We have already discussed the classification of stone types and its treatment with medicines: and I mentioned the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and bladder, and the signs of it all: and I spoke of the stone on which manual operation and incision falls: and this is the stone properly generated in the bladder: and that which is fixed in the penis: and I am narrating this with clear explanation and abbreviation.
I say, therefore, that the stone generated in the bladder most often occurs in children.
And among its signs is that urine exits the bladder similar to water in its fineness: and white sand appears in it, and the patient rubs his penis, and labors with it, and hangs down frequently. Then it erects, and the anus exits with it in many of them.
And the healing is easy for children up until they reach fourteen years. And it is difficult in the elderly. In young adults it is moderate, between the two extremes: and for those whose stone is larger, the treatment is easier: and if smaller, the treatment is conversely more difficult.
When we come to the treatment, it is first necessary that we cleanse the patient with a purgative which removes all the feces that are in his intestines: for it sometimes prevents the discovery of the Stone during the examination.
Then the patient should be taken with his feet and shaken and moved downward: so that the Stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or jumps from a height several times.
Then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be under his hips, so that the bladder becomes entirely inclined downward.
Then examine him, and touch him externally.
If you feel the Stone in the space, then immediately proceed with the incision over it.
If it does not yield entirely to your touch, then you must clean your index finger with the oil of your left hand if the patient is a boy: or your middle finger if he is a full-grown youth: and insert it into his anus, and search for the Stone until it stands under your finger: and gradually turn it towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger, and drive it outward toward the site where you wish to make the incision: and command one servant to press the bladder with his hand, and command another servant to lift the testicles upward with his right hand: and with his other hand, to pull away the skin that is beneath the testicles from the site of the incision.
Then insert the Spatumile for cutting, which has this form. And find what is between the anus and the testicles, and not in the middle, to the left side of the buttocks: and let the incision be above the stone, and your finger be in the anus: and let the incision be transverse, so that the cut be wider on the outside and narrower on the inside, according to the amount that the exit of the Stone from it should not be larger.
For perhaps the finger which is in the anus compresses the Stone near the incision, and it exits without difficulty.
And know that the Stone has angles and edges, which is why its exit is difficult because of that.
And it is smooth, similar to a gland, and round: and its exit is easy.
Therefore, for the one that has angles and edges, add to the incision.
If it does not exit thus, then you must be ingenious with it: either grasp it with forceps properly, the end of which is like a crescent, which grasps on the Stone and does not slip away from it: or insert beneath it a subtle instrument of curved end.
If you cannot grasp it, then enlarge the opening slightly. If anything from the blood overpowers you, cut it with a scissors.
If there is more than one stone, then push the larger one towards the bladder opening first. Then make an incision over it. Then push the smaller one after that: and do likewise if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then it is ignorance to cut a large incision on it. For it happens to the sick person one of two things, either that he dies or there is a continuous distillation of urine; therefore, because the place is not consolidated at all.
But administer the expulsion of it until it comes out: or extract the fragments of its fracture with scissors until you remove it piece by piece.
Therefore, when you have completed the operation, then fill the wound with frankincense, aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it, and place over it cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: so that the warm pus may be set.
Then place the sick person on their back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. Therefore, when you loosen it, fumigate the area with water and much oil.
Then treat it with diaphyllite ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals.
If, however, a warm pus and corroded matter, and things similar to those, happen in the wound: such as if blood congeals in the bladder and urine is prevented by it: and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine. Therefore, insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood. For if it remains, it causes the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, and water, and salt: and treat every type as befits its treatment until it is healed.
And it is necessary during the entire course of treatment to bind the two hips together, for the sake of the medicines that are placed on the area.
If the stone is small and is in the channel of the penis, and is fixed there, and the passage of urine is prevented: then treat it with what I narrate before you reach the incision. For often you will be spared from surgery through this treatment, for I have already proven it.
And it is such that you take the Perforatorium from Alferac iron, whose form is this, with a triangular tip, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a string and tie the penis with it under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the perforating iron into the penis with ease until the Perforatorium reaches the stone itself: and turn the Perforatorium with your hand on the stone gradually: and strive to penetrate it until you make it go through the other side.
For the urine is immediately expelled.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outer part of the penis. For it breaks apart and exits with the urine, and the patient is healed.
If this treatment is not prepared for you, because of something that prevents it: then tie a string under the stone and another string above the stone. Then cut on the stone on the twig between the two ligatures. Then extract it. Then loosen the ligature, and clean the clotted blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone unless it does not return to the bladder: and another ligature above, unless when the thread is loosened after the exit of the stone, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound: and for this reason you must do it when you tie the upper thread, to raise the skin upwards, so that it returns at the completion and covers the wound, as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
Regarding the extraction of stones in women.
A stone is rarely generated in women.
If, however, it happens that any of them has a stone, then the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited due to many reasons.
One of the reasons is that the woman may be a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who will expose herself to a doctor when she is chaste, or among those who have husbands.
The third is that you do not find a woman well skilled in this art, especially the manual procedure.
And the fourth is the distance from the location of the stone: therefore, it requires deep incision, and there is fear in that.
If necessity provokes to this, then it is necessary that you take a female doctor, well knowledgeable: and she is rarely found.
If you are deprived of that, then seek a pure and skilled doctor, and present a well-educated midwife in women's affairs, or a woman who shows some part of the skill in this art: therefore make her present, and especially instruct her to do everything you command her according to the examination on the stone.
First of all, it is to see if the woman is a virgin: then he must insert a finger into her anus, and seek the stone.
If he finds it, he should press it under his finger, and then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the vulva of the patient, and examine over the stone, after placing her left hand on the bladder, and pressing it with a good compression.
If he finds the stone, then it is necessary that he gradually move it from the opening of the bladder downward with all his strength until he reaches the root of the hip with it.
Then he should incise over it at the midpoint of the vulva near the root of the hip, on whichever side is prepared for him, and where he feels the stone: and his finger should not be removed from the stone, pressing under it; and the incision should be small at first. Then he should insert a probe over that incision.
Then he should insert a probe over that incision. If he feels the stone, then he should increase the incision according to the amount proportional to how the stone is exiting from it.
And know that there are many kinds of stones. From these there is a small one and a large one, smooth and rough, long and round having branches.
Know therefore its kinds, so that it may be signified to you through this about what you desire.
If therefore the blood overcomes you, then add in place of zegi powder, and hold it for one hour, until the blood is stopped.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out: and do so that you prepare with you from the instruments I mentioned for extracting stones in men, to assist you with them in your operation.
If the flow of blood overcomes you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which has been cut: then place powder on the area, and bind it with bandages tightly: and do not change it: and leave the stone, and do not extract it. For perhaps the weak woman may die. Then treat the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of the blood is calmed after days, and the place becomes putrefied, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter LXII.
Regarding the incision of a watery hernia.
A watery ramex is not such unless it is an aggregation of moisture in the sifac alb, which is beneath the skin of the testicle containing the egg: and it is called sifac.
And sometimes it is in its own membrane, which nature has prepared for it in the part of the egg, until it is considered: which is another kind of egg, and it is the skin of the testicle between the white, which we have said: and that does not occur except rarely.
And the generation of this ramification is from the weakness which befalls the testicles: whence this material is discharged to them. And sometimes it happens from a blow upon the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. For its color is either inclined to yellow, or it is blood red, or bile-like black, or it is water-like white, and this is what predominates.
And the signs by which it is known where the aggregation of water is, are these. For if it is in the white part which we have said, then the abscess is round in length somewhat like the shape of an egg: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in its own membrane, then the abscess is round with a part of the egg, and because of this, a person thinks that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white part, then it falls under sensation.
When therefore you wish to know the color of the moisture, then test the color of the moisture in the abscess with an inserted square, whose form preceded. According to what goes out in the track of the Intromissi, judge of that which is within it.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary that you advise the patient to be bled if it is possible for him, and you see his body full.
Then he should lie on his back on something slightly elevated, and place many cloths under him.
Then sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, who will stretch his rod to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the groin area.
Then take a broad scalpel, and cut the skin of the testicles lengthwise through the middle, nearly to the epididymis: and let the incision be made according to a straight equidistant line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white membrane enclosing it: and strip it off, and observe, beware from this so as not to cut it yourself: and let your stripping be on the part which hangs more with the egg: and carefully examine with the stripping according to what is possible for you.
Then pierce the membrane full of water with a wide puncture, and draw out all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the membrane upward, and do not touch the skin enclosing the testicles: and cut the membrane however it is possible for you to cut it, either entirely or piece by piece, especially its thin side. For if you do not examine it thoroughly, security is not achieved in the incision, lest the water returns.
If however the egg comes out from its skin during your operation time: then when you have completed the cutting, reduce it back. Then sew together the two edges of the skin of the testicles.
Then care for it like other wounds until it heals.
If you find the egg corrupted by blackening or other [signs], then it is necessary to tie the vessels, which are the spermatic cords, fearing blood flow.
Then cut off the testicle with the spermatic cord, and extract the egg: afterwards care for it as we have said.
If water has gathered in two parts, then know that there are two branches: therefore cut the other part equally as you did in the other.
And if it seems to you that the operation is one, then do as follows: afterwards clean the blood. And insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil, or in rose oil: and place outside another piece of wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles, and the abdominal area: and place a double cloth on top, and these are poultices: and bind them with a bandage that has six layers according to this form.
Then let two cloths be taken, and sweated, and filled with ground laudanum according to this likeness: and the ends by which it is pressed should be of felt or damp wool: and they should be bound with a band around the waistband of the breeches: and one end should cover from the anus up to the back, and the second cover the hip area: and the two ends above should be on both thighs below, and the other two ends should be over the two groins, and the entire band should be bound around the waistband of the breeches.
And sometimes this is treated artificially with a cautery instead of cutting with iron: and it is that you take a subtle knife-like cautery, and cut with it the skin of the testicles: and it is ignited as we have narrated: until when the white membrane containing water is revealed: then take the cautery according to this form.
It is assimilated to the Greek letter.
Then pierce that membrane with it, and it is ignited until all the moisture comes out.
Then extend the membrane with hooks, and remove the skin with a subtle ignited cautery, and cut it as much as you can until you root out all of it.
And be careful with the egg, that fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer, involves less bleeding, and is better than the operation with cutting.
If, however, something opposes you at the time of cutting or cauterizing, such as a warm swelling, or bleeding, or anything else: then you must treat what opposes you with the cure that is suitable to it, according to what has been mentioned.
If, however, the patient is timid and does not endure this operation due to its horror: then administer the piercing as I describe it: and it is done.
When it is confirmed to you through what we have said about the signs that the ramex is watery: then you must make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then pierce the abscess on its lower part with a broad spatula: and place the puncture according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide, until all the water flows out.
Then place a cup over the area, and bind it, and leave it so that the remaining water may flow out; then care for it until the wound heals.
If opposition occurs to the flow of water when you pierce it: and if this is only because the white membrane causes opposition at the wound's opening and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary to insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which the water of dropsy is extracted, whose form has been mentioned before: or temporarily add to the operation of the wound.
And know that the water returns and gathers after six months, or around that time. When it gathers again, then it should be punctured in the same manner, and the patient will pass his days.
Chapter LXIII.
Regarding the treatment of fleshy branches.
Know that in the cutting of this fleshy branch, there is fear-leading-to-destruction in many conditions. Therefore, it seems to me that its removal is salvaging from it.
And I am recalling the procedure on it and the nature of the abscess.
I say, therefore, that many abscesses occur in the bodies from which the testicles are formed: and this happens for many reasons, namely.
Or from sharp and bitter excess, which is poured out toward the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found in it: and it is a heavy abscess.
And perhaps it is a stony abscess, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it occurs from the knotting of arteries and their swelling: as has already been mentioned beforehand: or from the swelling of veins.
That which is from the swelling of arteries is recognized by the condition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers. And you should not touch it at all.
That which occurs from the swelling of veins does not spread anything upon compression with fingers.
And now it is possible to perform surgery on this type and on the other flesh: and it is as if you were to cut the skin of the testicles. Then extend the egg upward, and extract it with a white cloth: and free the suspensory ligament from the vessels, and tie the vessels: and cut the suspensory ligament after you free it from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is consolidated with those born flesh, then you must pull the egg and cut it.
And if there is adhesion between something in the scrotum or among the vessels: then you must free that entire adhesion and cut it with a circular incision.
If however there is flesh growth in the area of attachment which is behind: then it is necessary to cut out all of it and remove the egg as we have said.
When therefore your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine: then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LXIIII.
About the treatment of shoots, which is done with vines.
Vitis is an apostem wrapped in a certain convolution, similar to a botryoid, with a softening of the testicles: and it makes movement and exercise difficult for the patient, as well as walking.
And in the treatment of this illness, there is fear, because of that which preceded and was remembered.
But it is necessary, as we say, to perform the operation according to what the first practitioners did.
I say therefore that it is necessary to have the patient sit on an elevated seat. Then push the suspension of the testicles downward. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, near the tubes: and let another assistant hold and stretch them vigorously.
Then make a transverse cut with a broad and sharp spatula directly across the tubes until the tubes are exposed.
Then remove the outer layer from all sides, as we have told you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert into them a needle on which there is double thread, and tie it at the first place where the Vines are injured: and tie it again at the last of them. Then cut them in the middle section straight according to the length of the body, and remove what gathers from corrupted feculent humidities.
Then treat the wound with the treatment of other wounds, in which you generate pus, so that the vessels which nourish one of the testicles fall. For it is not evil through that.
If the Vines happen to all vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be removed with the vessels: so that the egg is not deprived of nourishment because of the incision, and wastes away, or dries up, and is not beneficial with them.
Chapter sixty-five.
Regarding the treatment of intestinal branches.
The outcome of this branching is from the incision that occurs in the extended sifach over the belly in the groin area from the mirach of the belly.
Therefore, the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture is either from the sifach or its extension.
And these two types occur from many causes: either from a blow, or jumping, or shouting, or lifting a heavy object, and the like.
And the sign is when it is from the extension of the sifach. It happens gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly: and it is an abscess equal towards the depth: therefore, the sifach compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it when it is from the section of sifach, because it causes a violent pain suddenly at the beginning: and it is a different abscess, appearing near under the skin: and this is due to the exit of the intestine, and its course to the outer parts of sifach.
And sometimes it exits with the intestine zirbum: and this is named Intestinal Ramex, and zirbia: and sometimes it occurs with flatulence.
And sometimes the feces run into the intestine and are retained there: and it is harmful to the patient: for it causes severe pain, especially when it is compressed.
And in the treatment of this kind of illness with iron there is fear: therefore, one must be cautious about accidents in it.
And the method of the operation is to instruct the patient to draw the intestine with his hand into the depths of his own concavity, if it obeys the return. Then he should lie on his back with his neck between your hands: and lift his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows upward, and cut the entire skin of the testicles lengthwise. Then insert hooks into the two lips of the incision as needed to open the incision with them: and the incision should be of such quantity that it is possible for the egg to exit from it.
Then excoriate the saphakh, and what is under the skin of the testicles, until when the white saphakh is revealed, hard on all sides: then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, into what is between the white saphakh, which is under the skin of the scrotum, and between the second saphakh, and completely separate the adhesion which is in the posterior part of the scrotum.
Then move with your right hand the skin of the testicles towards the inside: and at the same time stretch the white saphakh upwards with your left hand: and lift the egg with the saphakh to the part of the incision: and command the servant to stretch the egg upwards: and you loosen the adhesion which is at the back upon completion of the separation.
And seek with your fingers that there be nothing there of the intestine wrapped in the hard white saphakh. If you find anything of it: then push it downwards towards the abdomen.
Then take a needle with thick thread, made of lynx from ten threads: and insert it near the last saphakh, that is, the tunic which is under the skin of the testicles following the incision: then cut the ends that protrude from the thread until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them over some in the shape of a cross: and tie with them the alsifach, of which we spoke, because it is under the skin of the testicles firmly tied, until none of the vessels that nourish them can send anything to them: so that a warm abscess does not result from it. And place the second ligature outside the first ligature, less than two fingers away from it. And after these two ligaments release from the scrotum, which is under the skin of the testicles, a quantity of the size of a finger: and cut all the remainder according to the roundness, and remove the egg from it.
Then cut at the lower part of the skin of the testicles where blood and pus flow: as we have narrated in what has been mentioned before.
Then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound: and apply the bandage as we have narrated. And sometimes the white scrotum that we mentioned is cauterized after its incision, fearing a flow of blood. For it often happens. And release the bandage until it falls off by itself.
If its falling off is delayed, then bathe it with warm water: and place on it what we have said, until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with the rest of the treatment for wounds, until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
Regarding the windy arm.
In this windy arm, I have not seen anyone who has dared to attempt its treatment with iron.
And at first, they said that it happens as we have narrated in the arm that is with the vine. Which is to bind the vessels after cutting and easily apply something over them: then cut in the middle, and finally treat it with what opens it until the vessels fall: and treat the wound as we have said, until it heals.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the tear which occurs in the groin.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and the place protrudes, and nothing of the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, it is little, and returns at all times: but if time is prolonged with it, a fissure is added in the scrotum, until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And it happens from the extension of the scrotum, which is in the groin, as we have said. Which means that the scrotum is extended; then it softens, and the place becomes inflamed and protrudes.
And its treatment is with a cautery, as was previously described.
And sometimes it is treated with an iron, in this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back under your hands. Then cut the place of the ruptured and protruding inflammation with a horizontal incision, according to the width of three fingers.
Then grasp the scrotum and what is under the skin until the white membrane that is under the following skin is revealed.
Then take the probe and place it on the protruding part of the scrotum, and press it deeply towards the abdomen.
Then sew the two protruding areas above the end of the probe through the scrotum together with a suture; then remove the end of the probe.
And do not cut into the bladder at all, nor stretch the eye, nor anything else, as I have made you know in the treatment of intestinal branches.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds. When you cut the threads, clean it, and restore the wound until it solidifies.
For sisach is contracted, and no prominence is added to the rupture.
And the cautery is better in this place: because it is nearer to healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in some men, because of which the flesh between them is also softened, and its appearance is marred.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is asked to treat it to make the patient lie on their back and cut away all the skin that has been softened down to the natural skin.
Then bring together the two lips with a suture: and if you wish, first remove the excess of the softened skin with three or four stitches, and secure the suture.
Then cut between the sutures.
Then treat it with the treatment of other wounds until it heals and the threads fall out.
Chapter LXIX.
On Castration.
Know that castration is excommunicated by our law: and because of this it would be permissible for me to not remember it in my book: and there is no need to remember it, unless for the two methods.
One of which is that it should be known by the doctor when asked about it: and so that he may know its treatment for those to whom it happens.
And the other method is that we often need the castration of certain animals for our benefit through it, such as rams, goats, and cats, and similar animals.
I say therefore that castration is performed in two ways. Or by attrition. Or by making an incision and cutting.
In that which is done by attrition, the way of operation is: that we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften and loosen, and hang down: then rub them with your hand until they dissolve and do not appear under touch.
In castration by making an incision and cutting, you must hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then ligate the suspensorium, and cut above all the egg with one cut, until when two eggs come out: then incise them after you have defleshed each, and do not leave anything on them except a fine suture over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by friction: for friction perhaps leaves something of the testicles, wherefore the animal desires intercourse.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy.
On the treatment of hermaphrodites of two types.
Hermaphrodites exist in two modes according to males. One of them is such that it appears in the space that follows, or in the skin of the testicles, in the area between the two testicles, in the shape of a female vulva, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine flows from what is in the skin of the testicles.
In women, there is one type, and it is a female vulva above a comb-like structure entirely small, protruding outward: of which one is like a penis of a man, and two are like two testicles.
And the treatment for the three types, two from males and one type from females, is: because it is necessary to cut the additional flesh until the impression of them is removed. Then treat them with the treatment for other wounds.
In the second type of males, from which urine exits, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment for it at all.
Chapter LXXI.
On the incision of tentigines and protruding flesh in women's vulvas.
A tent-like structure is perhaps added beyond what is natural, until it becomes ugly and its appearance is marred: and sometimes it grows so much in some women that it expands like in men, and extends to the point of intercourse.
Therefore, you must hold the excess of the tent-like structure with your hand or with a hook, and cut it: and do not hesitate in the incision, especially at the root: so that blood flow does not occur.
Then care for it with wound treatment until it heals.
The flesh that arises is the flesh that grows in the opening of the womb until it fills it: and it perhaps extends outward resembling a tail: and because of this, some first call the illness tailed. Therefore, we must cut it like we cut the tent-like structure, and treat it until it heals.
Regarding the treatment of Alratica, which is an unperforated female ulcer.
Chapter LXXII.
Alratica is when there is an unperforated female ulcer, or a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental alratica is caused by a preceding illness: and it occurs either from added flesh growth, or if fine, or thick: and it can occur either in the depth of the womb, or on its sides, or on its upper part, or lower part: and it prevents intercourse and conception, and childbirth, and perhaps even menstruation.
And knowledge of that is gained by the sight of the midwife, if apparent labor is near.
And if it is not apparent, then seek it with your fingers, or with a probe.
And if the labor is from a thin membrane and it is close to the two lips: then hurry and break it.
And it is as if you place eggs on the two lips.
Then place the index fingers of both your hands simultaneously, and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread apart. Then extend the two lips with force until the thin membrane is broken and labor is opened.
Then take wool, and soak it in oil, and place it on the area: and let the woman sit every day so that the area does not become hardened differently.
And if the membrane is thick, dense: then it is necessary to cut it with a broad spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
And if the labor is from fleshy growths, then suspend it with hooks, and cut it: and let there be with you medicines that stop the flow of blood without mordancy, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and frankincense compounded with egg white.
Then administer a large lead cannula so that the wound does not heal quickly, keep it for several days: and apply lint from dry linen, then treat with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And sometimes there is born in the matrix the birth of other flesh: therefore they must be cut according to this method: while there is no cancerous aposteme for a cancerous aposteme which is in the matrix, must not encounter iron at all.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and red Bothor in the ulcers of women.
Hemorrhoids are the opening of vein orifices, through which a great deal of blood flows continuously.
When therefore hemorrhoids become old, they turn into thelil: and I have already spoken about their types and signs: and here I will say which of them receive cure, and which do not.
I say, therefore, that hemorrhoids which are at the opening of the matrix and do not appear to the senses: then there is no cure for it with iron.
Those among them that are at the opening of the matrix and which can be sensed, are those that can be cured.
Therefore, you must introduce the woman into a cold room. Then extend the athehelil with scissors, or with a coarse cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then apply a powder over them at the flow of blood from one of the powders of lancing without mordancy: such as acacia, dragon's blood, frankincense, and similar substances.
Then press her feet against the wall for one hour. Then place it in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumach, and pomegranate bark, and galls, and similar items.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back.
If the blood is cut off with it, it is good: and if not, make suction cups adhere to the back, and teats, without scarification.
Then take wool, and soak it in the juice of tarathit, or the juice of arnoglossae, or the juice of alaulat branches, that is, agrimony, with Pontic wine, and make it adhere to the site.
When therefore the abscess quiets, then treat the area with ointments until it heals.
Albarth red is similar to the heads of alhaasse, and it has a rough appearance.
Therefore, you must cut what appears from it, according to what I said in thelil equally: and treat it until it heals.
Chapter LXXIIII.
Regarding the perforation of the uterus that occurs in the matrix.
Many types of abscesses occur in the matrix, such as cancer, stone abscess, ulcers, adubelati, alekilati, that is, herpes, aestiomemus, fistulas, hemorrhoids, ragadiae, thelil, and hot abscess.
And I indeed have already said all these diseases and their kinds, and their signs, and their cures in the division: it is necessary that I speak in this treatise of the warm abscess which occurs in the uterus, when it is among the abscesses that collect pus, and you wish to know how its opening is made with iron.
Therefore, you must consider. Then if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp with its percussion, and flame, and fever: and you see it reddening: if sensation fails over it, then do not hurry with its puncture: and treat it with what aids maturation until when the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a seat which slopes to two seats, and recline, or lie down on her back, and draw her feet together toward the lower part of the belly: and let her thighs be spread apart, and place her arms under her knees, and bind each with a suitable band.
Then let the midwife sit on the right side and administer the instrument with which the womb's opening is pierced.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument, that you insert with the sound the depth of the woman's womb: so that what enters from the instrument is not deeper than the depth of the womb, and injure the patient.
If the instrument is longer than the depth, then it is necessary to place small objects on top of the covering of the womb's depth: so that the entire instrument is prevented from entering into the depth of the womb: and it is necessary to place the spiral, which runs in the instrument, on the upper side: and to hold the instrument, and for the assistant to revolve the spiral until the depth of the womb is opened.
When therefore the abscess appears and is touched by hand and it is soft and tender: then it is necessary to cut it at its head with a broad scalpel.
When therefore the pus is drained, then it is necessary to place on the wound a linen soaked in rose oil: or green oil, which has some astringency: and place the linen, and remove the incision deeply within the womb.
And place externally on the womb and on the sieve clean wool soaked in water, in which crabs have been boiled.
Then it should be treated after two days with an ointment that is suitable for it, until it heals.
And sometimes the womb and the wound are washed by being irrigated with water and honey: then with water in which the root of lily or long aristolochia has been boiled: then return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden inside the womb, then it is necessary that you refrain from treating it with iron, but rather treat it with what we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXIV.
Instructions for Obstetrics, how to treat live embryos that have been expelled in an unnatural form.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know first the natural form of childbirth.
From its signs, therefore, it is that when you see a woman compressed in the lower parts, and desires to breathe in air, and finds relief from what is upon her of the childbirth, and the exit of the embryo is hastened: then know that this birth is according to the natural form, and its exit is head first, with the afterbirth with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When therefore you see these signs, then it is necessary that his belly be compressed, so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when it descends over its head, the afterbirth descends with it, and it is cleansed of those excesses by a good cleansing.
Whoever is born besides this birth is unnatural, unpraiseworthy.
For sometimes the fetus exits feet first, and its body comes out before its head, and one of its feet or hand; or its head and hand come out; or the umbilical cord comes out: and it may turn around its neck, and similar unpraiseworthy configurations.
It is therefore necessary for the obstetrician to be wise and subtle in all these matters, and to beware of error and deception: and I am showing every configuration among them, and how the method is in it, and what it signifies, and to stand by it.
When the fetus exits head first in its natural manner, and it becomes violent for the woman, and the labor becomes difficult for her, and you see that her strength is now weakened: then make her sit on a seat, or let women hold her: and steam her vulva with fenugreek decoction, and with moist oils.
Then the obstetrician should insert a small spatula between her fingers, and use it to tear the afterbirth, and cut it with her nail until the moisture inside flows out: and press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then the woman must be given an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesamin oil.
Then instruct her after the enema to be compressed: and make her sneeze with condisi, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour. For the fetus will come out immediately.
If two hands of the fetus come out first, you must gradually and easily bring them back. If it does not obey at the entrance, then place the woman on a seat and lift her feet upwards: then shake the seat on the ground: and the woman should be held so that she does not fall during the shaking.
If therefore the hands do not come out and the fetus dies: then cut them and extract the remainder of the fetus: and tie its hand with a cloth, and extract it equally: for it will come out.
The embryo exits on its feet. When the fetus exits on its feet, then it is necessary to push them upwards: then gradually turn the fetus: afterwards level it.
Then take one of its feet and extend it gradually.
When they come out up to the thighs, then instruct her to be compressed, and make her sneeze with condisi: for it will come out, if God wills.
And if it does not come out with what we have mentioned, then gradually bring the fetus back until you place it according to its natural position. For it will then come out with an easy delivery.
If it is prevented with all that we have mentioned: then take from the mucilage of alum, and oil of sesame, and dissolved gum: and pound everything in a mortar well: then anoint with it the womb of the woman, and below her belly. Then make her sit in warm water until she achieves hypochondria.
When therefore you see that her lower parts are already heated, then give her a sieve of myrrh: and administer it. When therefore she holds the sieve for one hour, then make her sit on a seat. Then make her sneeze: and hold her mouth and nose: and press the lower part of her belly with a gentle pressure. For the fetus will come out immediately.
The exit of the fetus is over the thighs and hands. When it exits in this manner, then she will be able to gradually insert her hands. Then the woman should lie back on her neck, and let her feet hang down below: and she should be lying on the bed, and fold her hands. Then press on her belly gradually. Then remove what is under her feet from the cushions, until she is prepared on the lower part. If the fetus does not come out, then take her feet, and move them with violent motion. Then press what is above the hypochondrium gradually, until the fetus ascends to the upper parts. Then he should insert his hand and gradually adjust the fetus: and instruct the woman to compress herself until the fetus exits.
The exit of the fetus hanging transversely from the hands. Skill will be required in the reduction of his hand. If he cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed: and shake her legs with a violent shaking.
Then apply the liniment that you have prepared from mucilages.
If labor begins for her, then make her sit on a seat. Then attend to the reduction of the hand, and align the fetus according to its natural position: and make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to compress herself until it exits.
The exit of the fetus over its neck, with hands spread out, and its face is towards the back of its mother. The midwife must hold the hand of the fetus, then gradually revolve it, and align it with ease.
When it is aligned, then place on its mouth what we have mentioned made from oil and mucilages.
Then instruct her to move gradually. Therefore when you have done that, then make her sit on a seat, and command her to lean to the right side. Then command her to hold it in: and make her sneeze when you apply it.
The exit of the prepared fetus on the side. When it descends to the opening of the matrix in this way with the afterbirth, then tear the afterbirth with your nail until it is emptied of moisture.
If it is suspended over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it is not retained, and causes death.
Then push the fetus inward until you place it as is proper: and command the woman to bear down several times: for it will come out with a slight effort.
The birth of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born: and sometimes three, and four are born. However, that is unusual, and rarely happens.
Five is beyond nature, and they do not live at all: and one afterbirth contains them, although they multiply, and are separated by a siphon, distinguishing the tied cord of each of them.
And sometimes they exit like a single fetus does in a natural, easy birth: and they exit in an unpraiseworthy manner, as we have mentioned.
If some of them are difficult at birth, and they reach what we have said about unnatural shapes, then treat them as we narrated: and let it be by a subtle midwife, and do what is done with ease and slowness, and adapt according to every shape with what is prepared for it guided by skill leading to health.
Remember what is formed in the womb from embryos and is aborted.
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb: and it has already been verified by me that a woman aborted seven, and another fifteen, all fully formed.
That which was done by the measurement of the glorious wise man.
Therefore, all of this must be known by the obstetrician. For perhaps she may encounter something similar to that; therefore, she should oppose it with what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
Regarding the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with what I have said in the division on medication, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use manualoperation with handmanual operation
If therefore the woman is of sound health, and there is not with her any from accidents, from which loss to her is feared: then it is necessary that the woman lie on her back on the bed, and let her head be inclined downwards, and her legs raised: and a servant should hold her on both sides, or she should be tied to the bed, so that her body is not pulled out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the womb with wet oils mixed with alum root, fenugreek, and flaxseed.
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages: then she should insert it into the womb with ease. Then she should seek with it the place where the hooks can be fixed to the fetus, and the suitable places for that.
Consider then if the fetus is prepared to descend headfirst: then fix the hooks into its eyes, or on its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or under its chin, or on its clavicle, or in places near the ribs, and under the hypochondria.
If, however, the descent is feet first, then [fix the hooks] on its shins and its middle ribs.
And it is necessary that she hold the hook with her right hand: and place its curvature between the fingers of her left hand: and insert it with ease, and fix the hook in one of those places we mentioned, until she reaches the empty space.
Then fix another hook opposite it, or a third if needed: so that the contraction is equal, and does not lean to one side.
Then it should be extended with equal extension, and the extension should not be according to straightness only, but it should be moved in every direction so that its exit is eased: as is done with a tooth during its extraction.
And it is necessary in that which is between them, so that the extension may be softened. If a part of it is retained, then the midwife must anoint certain fingers with oil and insert them partially to turn with them what is retained.
If therefore a part of the fetus is exiting, then switch the hooks to a higher place: do this until the entire fetus exits.
If therefore the hand exits before other parts and it is not possible to reduce it due to its constriction: then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped over it. Then extract it until it is completely out, and cut it either at the ankle joint or at the elbow: and you should do this for the other hand and both feet.
If the fetus's head is large, or it encounters constriction upon exit, or there is accumulated water in its head: then it is necessary to insert Spatumile spinosum between the fingers, and split the head with it, and extract the water: or break it with an instrument called Almisdac: whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
Similarly, if the fetus has a large head, then it is necessary to cut with algengematu: or extract it with misdach, as we have said. Then draw out the bones with forceps.
If the head protrudes and is constricted at the fork, then it should be incised until the moisture in the chest is released.
If it is not disentangled and does not obey the exit: then cut off the head piece by piece, as much as you can.
If there is an abscess in the lower part of the abdomen, or if there is dropsy in it: then you must pierce it until the fluid runs out.
If the fetus is on its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its direction towards the maternal opening is simple.
If it is constricted at the belly or chest: then you must extract it with a cloth which you have wrapped over your hand: and incise the belly or chest until what is inside flows out.
If the other limbs are removed and the head returns: then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the maternal opening is open, then insert the hand deeply into the womb and search with it for the head, and draw it with the fingers up to the maternal opening: then insert one hook or two hooks into it, and draw it out with them.
If the maternal opening is constricted due to a warm abscess that has occurred there: then it should not be forced, but instead moist and fatty substances should be applied, and plasters administered: and sit in waters that soften and moisturize.
If the fetus is on its side, then it is possible for it to be aligned: then what we have said about a living fetus should be administered.
If it is not possible to do that, then cut it piece by piece and extract it.
And you must not leave any part of the afterbirth inside at all.
Therefore, when you have completed the operation, then administer what we have said about warm abscesses which occur in the wombs.
If bleeding occurs, then immerse in astringent waters, and administer the rest of the treatment.
And I have indeed seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus: then she conceived another on top of it; afterwards, another fetus also died. After a long time, an abscess occurred in her navel, and it swelled until it burst: and it began to discharge pus.
I was called for her treatment, and I treated her for a long time: and the wound did not heal.
I therefore applied to it some strong attracting plasters: and the bone came out from the place. Then after several days, another bone came out. I was therefore amazed by this, since there should not be bone in the belly.
I then thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
I examined the wound and extracted many bones, the woman being in better conditions: and she lived thus for a long time, and discharges a little pus from the place.
And I did not include this foreign element here unless because it contains knowledge and assistance for what the skilled physician administers with hand in the cure.
Chapter LXXVII.
On the forms of necessary instruments for the extraction of the fetus.
The form of the spiral by which the matrix is opened.
Here below is the form of the strictorium, with which the boards are equalized, having two spirals equally at the two ends of two pieces of wood. However, this spiral must be finer than the strictorium: and it should be made either of ebony or buxus wood.
And let the width of the entire piece of wood be almost two fingers: and the edge of each of them is almost one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half: and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two additional pieces of the same type of wood, which are already fixed to both, whose length is half a palm and a little more: and the width of each is almost two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additional pieces are inserted into the mouth of the matrix, so that it is opened with them when you turn the two spirals.
Another form similar to that one, finer and lighter.
Let it be made from ebony wood, or boxwood, according to the likeness of forceps. However, at its end there are two additions, as you see here above: and the length of each addition is almost a palm: and the width of each is two fingers.
When you wish to open the matrix with it, then make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging down, with what is between her thighs open. Then insert those two connected additions into the matrix: and you hold the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with scissors, equally according to the amount you wish from the opening of the mouth of the matrix, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of another vertigo which the ancients called the form of the impeller, by which the fetus is propelled.
The form of Almisdac, by which a large head is crushed: and it resembles forceps, which have teeth at the end, as you see.
And sometimes it is made elongated, like forceps in this form, as you see, which have teeth like a saw's teeth, by which it cuts and crushes.
The form of the hook having one spine.
The form of the hook having two spines.
The form of the spatula having two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two broad spatulas.
All these instruments are used, and the more their types are multiplied, and they are prepared by the craftsman, the faster they are for their operation, and more esteemed among people because of their quantity.
Therefore, do not disdain any of them so that it may be prepared for you. For the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Chapter LXXVIII.
Regarding the extraction of the afterbirth.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, then you must instruct the patient to hold her breath. Then make her sneeze while you press your hand over her mouth and nose. If it exits through this method, it is good.
If not: then take a pot and pierce a hole in its lid. Place herbs that open the matrix os in it, such as reed, rue, dill, chamomile, sage, lignum aloes, and centaury. Take all these herbs or some of them, submerge them in water, and place them over fire.
Then place a tube of reed over the opening of the covered pot, and the other end into the mouth of the matrix: and hold it until the vapor reaches the cavity of the matrix.
Then make her sneeze, as we have said. For the afterbirth will come out easily.
If it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then order the midwife to dip her hand in sesame oil, or coltsfoot mucilage. Then she should insert it into the womb and search for the afterbirth with it. When she finds it, then she should take hold of it and stretch it out gradually.
If it is attached deeply in the womb, then she should insert her hand as we have described until she finds the afterbirth and extracts it gradually straight out, so that the womb does not fall due to a strong pull; rather, it must be moved with ease to the right and left sides; then increase the amount of pulling. For it obeys then, and is preserved, and escapes from adhering.
If the mouth of the womb is constricted, as we have already mentioned: treat it with sneezing and with the medicine from the pot with herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we have mentioned, then be careful not to tire yourself with repeated attempts at extraction.
But it is necessary that which goes out to the mouth of the matrix from it be tied to the woman's hip. Then cleanse her with an ointment of the four-drug mixture. For it will rot her after days, and dissolve, and go out.
However, when it putrefies, a bad smell rises from it to the stomach and head, and harms the weakened area. Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be administered to it.
However, some of the ancients have already experienced fumigations with mustard and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated in the case of retained afterbirth and menses.
Let it be made from a bull's horn similar to aalcama, or from an ox horn: and the wider end should be placed over fire: and the fumigation should be placed on the coals: hold it until that fumigation is consumed: and repeat with another.
Chapter LXXIX.
Regarding the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many children are born with their anus not perforated, which has already been covered by a thin membrane. Therefore, the midwife should pierce it with her sharp finger: and if not, pierce it with an acute spatula: and she should be careful of the muscle, so as not to touch it.
Then place upon it wool soaked in wine and oil. Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
If you fear that it may prolapse, then place a tube of lead in the opening for many days, and remove it when the boy wants to defecate.
And it has also happened that an anal prolapse occurred due to the healing of a wound or an abscess. Therefore, that hardened area should be cut, then it should be treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
Chapter LXXX.
On the treatment of fistulas which occur in the lower part.
Fistulas which occur in the lower part are nodules and thickening which happen near the anus externally: or in the space of one region: and it is one fistula or multiple fistulas.
When that nodule becomes old, it opens, and a watery white moisture or thin pus runs from it.
And sometimes these fistulas are penetrating. Therefore, penetrating fistulas are recognized by what exits with waste matter and gas when the patient evacuates: and perhaps worms may exit from them.
And among these are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder and to the urethra when they are in that space. And among these are those that penetrate to the hip joint and to the coccyx.
From which it is known that the penetrating fistula goes up to the anus and also from the non-penetrating one is that you insert your index finger into the anus: and insert a thin probe of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
If there is twisting in it, then insert a thin probe made of lead into it, or a hair from horse's mane, until you feel the probe or the hair on your finger.
If you do not feel it thoroughly, and nothing comes out of the hole from excretion, nor wind, nor worm as I said: then you know that it is non-penetrating: therefore hurry to the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates to the bladder or to the urinary tract: then its indication is the discharge of urine from it, and the prevention thereof so that the area may be healed with medicines.
If it is penetrating to the hip joint or to the hip bone: then the sign of it is that the probe reaches there if there is no twisting up to the bone: and the discovery of pain around the part, and that pus comes out of it always: and that medication does not work in it, nor does it heal with ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all: and the treatment of them is labor and vanity for him, by foolish doctors, on whom it is formed.
In that which is not penetrating and not old, healing is hoped for with the knife: according to what I tell you, and I have already proven: and it is that the patient lies on their back under your hands: and raise their legs up above their hips, and their hips should be inclined towards their abdomen. Then they will insert a lead or tin probe if there is a twist in the fistula until you know where the probe reaches.
If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must insert your index finger into the anus.
If you feel that the probe has already penetrated on its own when inserted, beyond what you feel between your finger and the fistula itself or the flesh: then you will certainly know that it is penetrating. Do not labor over it, for there is no cure for it, as we have said.
They said, however, that the flesh is healed in some men and that there is hope of benefit from the treatment, which is to heat a fine cauterizing instrument according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before, and to insert it heated into the fistula until it reaches near the anus. Then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the additional filtered flesh, which is similar to the tube of a bird's feather, has been burned.
Then treat it with lint wrapped in butter until the burned flesh comes out; then treat it with ointments that generate flesh and consolidate.
If it is healed, that is good.
And if it is not, then it will never be healed with any other treatment.
And if the probe exits and does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and there is a thick veil of flesh or fistula between them, and you see the fistula following the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you go cutting with the probe that is in the fistula until the incision reaches where the end of the probe arrives, and the probe is released and falls out.
Then clean those filtered flesh that resembles a bird's feather tube, so that nothing remains from them.
If blood overcomes you and dissolves the connection between you and your operation so that you cut those flesh: then it is better and quicker to heal by cauterizing it with fire or with sharp medicine.
For cautery with fire brings good properties, the burning of those added flesh, and the cutting off of blood, and the drying of moistures.
Then treat it with linen wrapped in butter, or crushed fat, until the area emits pus, and those burned flesh come out with the pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments that generate hard flesh: and these medicines have astringent and drying properties.
For when they are restored, then it is already healed: and you do not fear repetition.
If however the fistula has already reached deep into the anus and extends from the excess of the body: then insert your finger into the anus and explore with it.
If therefore you feel resistance, and between you and it there is a veil of sinew or flesh, and it is close to penetration: then there is no operation in that place unless according to the way of confidence and hope.
Which means that one of the three methods is applied to it: either you cauterize it as we said: or you cut it until you reach its hollow, so that it is possible for you to insert linen and treat it closely. And do not proceed much with the cutting so as not to cut the tendon containing the anus, and involuntary discharge may occur in the patient. Then treat it with what we have said.
For it may be healed: or you may extend the membrane itself, and clean it after you cut it up to near the anus, as we have said, using a probe or another instrument with a sharp end. Then clean the filtered flesh that is in the incision as far as you can with probing.
Then attempt the restoration of the entire wound with the incision, and the upper opening where it is healed: and an Fistula remains open on the inner part of the anus, and it will be milder for the patient.
And sometimes the Fistula is sutured in this manner: and it is when you insert a probe into the Fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with the skin and the edge of the anus: then take a probe with a perforated end, which is like a tanner's needle, that is, of those who prepare hides, in this form. And insert into it a thread wound from five threads, and around it. Then insert the probe with the thread into the Fistula until it reaches its cavity.
If it penetrates near the inner edge of the anus, then pull the thread out from that opening: so that you insert your finger into the anus and pull out the end of the thread, and bring both ends together: and tie them tightly, and leave it for one day or two days: and the more the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it well until the flesh between the two ends of the thread is cut and falls off: then treat the wound until it heals.
If however the opening of the fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate by whatever means is prepared for you, unless it is very deep. For it is not within you to do that because of the flap, so as not to cut it.
Then do with it as we have said, until it heals.
The form of the spiked spatula with which the fistula is split, whose curvature is very sharp, and the other part is not sharp, so as not to cut what does not need to be cut, as you see.
Chapter LXXXI.
About the suturing of hemorrhoids, from which blood runs from their incision: and the treatment of fissures.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways. For they are either inside the anus, resembling coal sacs or ember sacs: or they are like grains of a grape. And among them there are small ones and large ones: and blood runs from them always, and there is one, and there are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those which are outside the anus are mostly lacking in moisture, from which yellow water or a little blood runs continuously: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit: and it should be pressed, until the anus protrudes, and the hemorrhoids become apparent to you. Therefore hang them with hooks: or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
If they do not hold the hooks, because of their moisture and softness: then take them with a coarse cloth, or with a mitten made of double wool, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut them, and powder over them after the incision certain warm powders, so that they may serve as a substitute for cauterization. Or cauterize them according to what was precedented in the chapter on cauterizing. Then care for them with the rest of the treatment until they heal.
If the anus does not obey the evacuation, then administer an enema to the patient that contains a slight irritant, so that it washes with what is in the anus, and obeys the evacuation quickly when the patient expels it.
If however the hemorrhoids are external to the anus, then their treatment is light, easy: and it is as you take them with your nail, or take them with a hook, and cut them. Then care for them with what we have said until they heal.
And for those who shrink from incision with iron, then it is necessary to administer their suture in this manner. Take the wrapped thread and insert it into the needle. Then pull the hemorrhoid upward, and make it penetrate with the needle at its root from the other side: and wrap both ends of the thread around the lower part of the needle, and let them be horizontal: and bind the hemorrhoid with a strong ligature. Then knot the thread, and remove the needle.
Do this with all the athelil, and leave one of them untouched: do not sew it up, so that the excess blood may flow out from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote over the anus, and put it on the anus: and instruct the patient to rest. Then leave it until it falls off.
When the athelil fall off, care for them with ointments and the rest of the treatment until they heal.
On the Treatment of Fissures. For they often occur from the dryness of the stool and the constriction of the natural functions.
When they become old and medicine does not heal them, then it is necessary to scrape them with the point of a spatula or with your nail until they become moist, and remove the outer layer that prevents them from healing. Then care for them until they heal properly.
If they do not heal, then scrape them more forcefully than before until they bleed heavily, and remove the outer layer; then care for them until they heal.
On the Treatment of Inverted and Non-inverted Almirmar, and Dry Athelil, and Ants.
Chapter LXXXII.
You should know that Almirmar is nothing but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a nail: and it occurs throughout the whole body, especially in the lower parts of the feet, and fingers: and pain happens because of them while walking.
Therefore, it must be cut around the nail, and held with scissors, or with a hook, and rooted out from its root.
Then care for it: and if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been precedented in its chapter.
From dry athelil, however, there is a small prominence, rough, filtered, round on the surface of the body. And they often occur in the hands of children.
And the treatment of it is to stretch the athelil, and cut it: or tie it with silk thread: or with hair, until it falls. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been mentioned with fire, or with sharp medicine: and now the athelil are rooted out, both inverted and not inverted with the instrument that I shall mention.
Formica is also a small, filtered, thick prominence on the surface of the body, going very deep: and when cold encounters it, it feels like the bite of an ant, and it occurs throughout the whole body: and most of it occurs in the hands.
And the treatment of it is to take a tube from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather: and place that tube over the Formica, until the circle of the tube contains parts of it. Then turn your hand with the cannula until you cut what is around the Ant: and place it deep into the flesh, and root out the Ant from its base.
And if you wish, do it with a cannula of brass or iron, according to this form.
Let the upper part of the cannula be drawn out to a hollow point, so that the grasp upon the finger and its turning may be eased.
And if you wish, cauterize the Ant according to what has been stated about the cauterization of Athelil in the chapter on the cautery.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Concerning the forms of instruments used for enemas in illnesses of the anus, and for relieving the bowels, and colic.
Sometimes an enema is made of silver, or brass, or cast metal, or hammered metal.
And sometimes these instruments are made small and large according to those in which they are used.
Therefore, that which is used in the treatment of small children should be small: and for those whose anuses are weak or painful, so should their enemas be.
Large enema.
Its tube, that is, the upper head where the bag is tied, should be wide according to this manner: and it should have a division so that the bag can be tied as you see, and its lower end which is inserted into the anus should be closed, that is, not open, very soft, drawing towards fineness: and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And let the width of the hole be according to the thickness of the rays, and a little thicker, and let there be a container in which medicines are placed made from an animal's bladder: or from sheep's parchment, which should be in the form of a small asofrati: whose root is one palm.
And let it be pierced with many holes as it revolves, and let the space that is between each hole be the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes strong thread made from raw fiber, which should be of ten strands, or about that number, and attach it to the container like a small asofrati. When the container is placed in it, let it be tied tightly at the head of the enema between two separators with a strong binding. Then administer the enema with it.
And this is the form of the circle and the holes of the container depicted here.
The quality of administering the enema with it is: to fill the container or bladder with medicine that is warmed according to the quantity tolerable by the patient: and beware that it is not too hot or too cold.
Then the patient should lie on their back, and raise their legs upwards: and place under them a cushion, that is, skin upon which people lie, or a linen cloth.
Then anoint the end of the enema with oil, or with sheep's grease, or with fenugreek mucilage, or similar substances. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then let the assistant take the bladder with both of his hands at once, and squeeze it forcefully until he evacuates everything that is in the clyster into the intestine.
Then remove the clyster, and let the patient raise his legs against the wall.
If the medicine forces it to come out, then hold as much as possible. And if he sleeps with it all night, it is more ultimate in alleviation.
If you give him a clyster for diarrhea and its discharge is rapid: then repeat the clyster until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then let the clyster be very fine and mild, such as those with which children are given clysters.
And this should be the form of a fine clyster for which the skin is tight.
Chapter LXXXIV.
I have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds that befit the book, and I will speak here of their treatment with the hand and with medicines according to completion.
I say, therefore, that wounds vary according to the instrument by which they are inflicted and according to the place on which the wound falls.
The things by which wounds are inflicted are often various, such as being hit by a stone, or cut by a sword or a dagger, or struck with a lance, wood, or an arrow, and similar objects.
Wounds however which are made according to places of the body are, like a wound which falls upon the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or spleen: and similar from those members.
And I am telling the treatments of some wounds, so as to set that reasoning and rule on the other wounds.
And I will begin with simple wounds of the head: for the discussion of compound wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
I therefore say. When a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no fracture of the bone: then consider if it is from the throwing of a stone or similar objects, and it has only broken the skin: and the wound is large, and you fear an unfavorable outcome of a hot abscess: then hurry and immediately bleed the cephalic vein: and do not delay this: and draw out blood according to the strength of the patient: if there is nothing preventing bleeding, especially if little blood comes from the wound. And let the bleeding be from the opposite side of the wounded area.
And let the bleeding be from the opposite side of the wounded area. And let the patient avoid fullness, wine, and heavy foods.
If something prohibits bleeding, then let the diet be reduced, and let the patient avoid meats and wines.
And apply to the wound, if a hot abscess occurs, a cloth soaked in rose oil alone or with wine that has a styptic quality.
If however you are safe from warm abscess, then place on the wound, if it is new with its own blood, and air has not changed it, the powder which I will tell of shortly: and if air has already changed it, then place on it some ointments, until it heals.
If however the wound is large, or is from a sword cut, and similar: and its lips do not come together with small pins, then bring them together with suture, according to what I will tell about sutures in wounds of the belly.
If however the wound is already separated from the bone, and hangs loose, and there is no retention of it except by a small sling: then cut it open. Then treat the wound with medicines, and restore hard flesh instead of skin, and advise the patient to nourish themselves with foods that are thick, such as heads, and cooked wheat until it is like porridge: and things similar to these.
If you find putrefaction in the skin, and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut out all the putrefied part and discard it: then treat it.
If however in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows: and it is not stopped by medicines, then apply something over the artery. If then you find it uncut, then cut it with a lancet, or tie it off. If necessity demands that what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped.
If however these wounds are small, simple, then their matter is easy, light: so that you powder on them this powder: for it consolidates them before air changes them.
Method of the flesh-forming powder. Take one part of frankincense, and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unburned lime: grind all thoroughly, and sieve it: and fill the wound with it, and bind it tightly, until it adheres well to it, and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it tightly with bandages, and leave it, and do not loosen it as long as it remains, so that it does not become pus-filled. For the medicine should not be removed until it is healed.
And sometimes the lime alone does this, when you do not have frankincense present, and dragon's blood also performs the same operation on many large wounds, when it is appropriate to place it on them and bind them, and the wounds are fresh with their own blood, which has not been altered by air.
If the air has already altered them in some way, especially when it is during the summer season, then there is no purpose in applying this powder: therefore, treat it with what we have said, so that you place some digesting ointments on them: or place on them poultices made from barley flour, made with water and honey, until they discharge pus. Then treat them with the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
If however a fracture occurs with the wound in the bone, and it is small, then extract it with forceps: and I will now speak of the treatment of head fractures in what is to come.
On wounds of the neck.
If, however, a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound.
If, however, a nerve or artery in the neck is already cut: then if it is a nerve, there is no skill involved except to treat it with substances that have strong astringent properties, such as zinziber and zegi, and similar things. For they harm the nerves and contract them.
And you should not apply anything cold at all to the wound: for the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is higher than other members: and let that with which it is cured be mild from medicines, such as lime washed several times with sweet water and infused with oil, or with rose oil, and turpeth, when it is also washed with sweet water: and other mineral stones in this manner, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, then apply a suture: or compress its edges with bandages. Then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has depth, or a sinus has formed in its lower part where pus has already collected, then puncture it at the most depressed area.
If the artery has already been cut in the wound and its flow of blood follows: then separate or cut it and tie it up: or cauterize it if the necessity requires this.
If the thyroid cartilage has already been cut through, or entirely, and the vocal cords are saved: then bring together the skin edges with sutures over the thyroid cartilage canal, and do not touch the throat, rather level it, and restore it to its natural shape. Then bind it with a suitable bandage, and leave it for several days. Then treat it with ointments that have astringent and drying properties until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it: if there are fragments of bone in it, remove them all, or as many as you can: and what does not prepare, leave it until the wound putrefies, and it separates and its discharge is alleviated.
If the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on it the powder I have mentioned. If bone appears in the wound and forms a fistula: then treat it with what is mentioned in its own chapter.
Regarding the wound in the spatulas.
If there is a puncture from a lance or a knife: and you see its depth, then examine it. If wind or gas escapes from the wound when the patient breathes on it, then you know that the wound is mortal.
If it does not have depth and is fresh with its blood: then do not apply powder to it from the first hour, nor bind it, so that blood is not retained in its depth, and returns to the heart, and kills the patient: but apply a drawing ointment to it, and dissolve it twice a day.
If ointment is not available to you, then apply an old cottar on the wound opening, so that it draws out what comes from its moisture: and make the patient sleep over the wound, so that what gathers in it flows out.
If three days have passed for the wound, or more, and spasms have not occurred to the patient, nor bad palpitations of the heart, nor constriction in breathing, and you see his other conditions good: then know that the wound is healing. Treat it with lint and other treatments until it is healed.
If its healing is hindered and it is now always open, then know that it has become a fistula. Treat it according to its chapter.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat it with what precedes from stitching, if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
If it has already made an impression on the bone and fragments have broken off: then examine the wound and quickly remove those fragments if they are separate. If they are not separated, then leave them until the wound becomes putrid, for their extraction is eased.
The judgment in the treatment of other wounds occurring in the other parts is the same as what we have said.
About wounds of the abdomen, and the protrusion of the intestines, and their treatment.
The disruption that occurs in the abdomen is major, medium, and minor.
From a major disruption, the intestine or a number of intestines sometimes protrude.
Therefore, their insertion and suture is more forceful and difficult.
And a minor disruption also becomes difficult in another way. It follows, therefore, that their reduction is more difficult if you do not promptly return them to their place immediately: because it swells, opens, and enlarges; hence its entry becomes difficult.
Therefore, the medium disruption is better: because with it, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in these two types.
Know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four methods.
Two common sutures are used for the suture of the abdomen and the suture of other wounds of the body: and two other sutures are specifically used for the other wounds. However, they are more suitable for stitching the abdomen: and I tell you each one with explanation, and description.
I say therefore, that when a wound is small, and something of the intestine protrudes from it, and it becomes difficult to reduce it: then this is due to one of two methods. Either because of the smallness of the tear, as we have said: or because there is inflation in the intestine due to the cold air.
Therefore, when it is thus, then you must warm it, so that you submerge a sponge or a wet cloth in warm water alone. Or boil squash, cyperus, and spike with it, and apply it to the intestine until the inflation resolves.
Sometimes it does this with wine that has astringent properties: and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
Therefore, when you see the inflation resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which althea or mallows have been boiled. For by this its entrance is softened with a small thing.
If however its return occurs after this treatment, then find and slightly cut into the tear with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when prepared than surgery: and there should be no coercion to cut after necessity and lack of instruments.
Let one part of it be curved, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the tip should be fine but not as fine as a spatula, rather slightly blunted: and it is that which resembles a calamus, as you see.
When therefore the wound enlarges and enters the intestine, then it is necessary that it be reduced to its natural form in its proper place if possible; for it is better.
When however the tear is wide in the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly if there is a tear in one of the two parts of the belly, then direct your attention and your consideration always to this, that the part which has the wound be higher than the other part.
And thus it is necessary to administer it in great wounds and in medium wounds.
In small wounds, place it according to how it is prepared for you.
Then make sure that a devout assistant is present at your side, who holds the entire tear with his hand: and bring together its lips. Then reveal to him who follows the suture bit by bit: and this is the method of a common suture.
And it is to take a needle, or a number of needles according to the quantity of the wound's width. Then leave the width of one finger, that is, the physician's ring finger, from the end of the tear: and insert one needle with thread at both ends of the skin, passing through to the underlying tissue with both ends until it penetrates from the other side, and you have now brought together two ends of the skin and two ends of the underlying tissue: and there are four layers.
Then tie with double thread around the wound several times from both sides simultaneously until the two lips of the wound are joined by a proper union.
Then measure the thickness of the finger as well, and insert another needle; then tie it with thread, as you did with the first needle. Therefore, do not stop doing this with the needles you need until you complete the constriction of the entire wound.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between thick and thin: because very thin needles quickly penetrate the flesh: and thick ones have difficult entry into the skin: for this reason they should be of medium thinness and thickness.
And it should not be that the needle is inserted at both ends of the nearby skin: so that the flesh is not cut quickly, and the wound is opened before its consolidation, and they are not stretched even with the suture: so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
Then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not harm the patient during their sleep: and place small pieces of cloth from clothes on all sides to hold the ends of the needles: and leave them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this type of stitching with needles is particularly suitable for small wounds. Because one needle, or two, or about that number is sufficient for stitching them.
The second common stitching method is to join the four ends with stitching: the two ends of the skin and the two sinew ends together at once, using a needle on which thread equally thin and thick is wound.
Then when you have penetrated with the needle these four ends, withdraw the needle from the side where you started in the same way, so that the woven thread falls from the upper part of the wound: so that it is a suture, just like the suture of cloth by which cloths are joined, and place between every suture the thickness of a little finger.
But men know this suture.
And with this suture I sewed the wound that had occurred to a man in his abdomen, who had been wounded with a dagger, and the tear of the wound was more than one palm: and about two palms had protruded from the middle intestine, and there was a rupture in the middle of the abdomen.
I therefore replaced it after his intestine had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound healed in about fifteen days: and I cared for him, and he was healed: and he lived many years after that, in his usual condition.
And the doctors had judged that he would not be healed.
And it was miraculous that I did not cure it with an ointment. For I was in a place where no ointment could be found, nor any other medicine. I therefore placed an old poultice on the wound twice a day, and continually washed it with honey water until it was healed.
I will now describe two types of sutures according to the account of the discourse.
And it is that you begin with a sharp suture: and insert the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When therefore the needle penetrates the skin, and goes into the flesh according to the length and breadth of the whole body: leave the end that you inserted the needle on one side, and make it penetrate to the other end from the inner part to the outer part at the other end.
When therefore you make it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this at the same end of the flesh from the outer part to the inner: and leave the end that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate to the other end from the inner part to the outer part: and make it penetrate with your penetration as you make it penetrate in the end of the flesh which is in its part, until it penetrates the whole of it.
Then begin again from this same side, and sew it with the end that is from the other side, and draw the needle out from the skin which it penetrated.
Then return it to that skin, and sew the end of the flesh that is on the other side with this end of the wound: and draw it out from the skin which is on its part, and do this alternately, one after another: and do this turn by turn until you sew the whole externally according to this example.
And the essence of this suturing is to sew the sutures of the skin as they are skins: so that you sew the flesh alternately from one side of the end of the skin: and leave it alternately from the other side until you complete it.
The second kind of proper suture, which Galen said.
His speech was narrated to describe it according to the similarity by which some of the physicians do it, so that they bring together each part to its corresponding comparable part naturally: and they apply the end of the lip to its other end, and the end of the eyelid to its other end. And it is done according to what I narrate to you.
You must fix the needle in the end of the eyelid near you from the outer side, and make it penetrate to the inner side in that place only: and leave the two ends of the lip. Then turn the needle, and make it penetrate from the outer side to the inner side at both ends of the lip, on both sides.
Then turn both, make both penetrate from the inner to the outer side at both ends of the eyelid, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is better than the common easy suture, and it is the suture of which the previous mention was made.
This is therefore the teaching of Galen as well.
And some said. The abdominal suture is corrected with two needles. This is to insert one thread into both of them: and begin with the insertion of the needle, from the side that is nearer to you, and make it penetrate all the way to the other side, according to the suture of those who have equal skin.
And you shall know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the abdomen: then its suture is more difficult than that of the other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the treatment of a wound is the judgment of the other wounds.
This is because when you encounter a fresh wound with its blood before the air alters it: and you reduce the intestine, and restore it to its place, and adjust it: then apply powdered meat-jelly on it.
If the air has already altered the wound: then apply some ointments that are available to you until they produce pus: and let the threads fall out, and let the wound consolidate and heal. Then treat it as is the treatment of other wounds, until it heals.
If the medicines are not available to you, then apply old dung on it immediately when it starts to emit pus: and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it heals.
For you do not need other treatments in most cases when wounds are simple.
If you fear that the wound communicates with the principal members in the injury, then it is necessary to soak a soft wool in oil of moderate heat, or in rose oil: and place it around the areas between the groin, and under the armpits.
If he feels pain, or pricking, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens), then administer an enema with astringent, black, warm wine: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and has caused a discharge penetrating to its concavity.
And you know that which is from the large intestine is of easier healing; and that which is from the small intestine is of harder healing.
And the intestine which is called the jejunum does not admit healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of the multitude of its veins, and their largeness, and because of the fineness of its body, and its closeness to the nature of nerves.
If what protrudes from the wound is cicatricial tissue, and you encounter it fresh: reduce it according to your method of reduction, by which you equally reduce intestines.
If however time has passed, and it has already become green or black: then it is necessary to tie it with a thread above the place which has turned black, so that blood flow does not occur. For in cicatricial tissue there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligature, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that the pulling on it is eased for you, and its extraction in the case of cicatricial tissue, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
 Recall of the wound that occurs in the intestine.
When a rupture occurs in the intestine, and it is small: then it is possible for it to be restored in some people: therefore, because I have seen someone who was wounded in his abdomen with a lance thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old: and a fistula had formed, and excretions and flatulence were discharged from it.
I provided therefore treatment until I was not confident in his healing: nor did I cease to refine it until he was healed, and the place was strengthened.
After I saw the place already strengthened, I was afraid for the patient, that a bad accident might occur in his stomach: and that bad accident did not happen to him. And he remained in better dispositions, eating and drinking, and having intercourse, and entered the bath, and exercised in his diets.
And some of the experienced have already said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be tied according to this method. And it is that you take ants with large heads. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, and place one of the ants that have an open mouth on the two lips of the wound. When it bites on them and closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and does not loosen.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease to do this with each ant after the other according to the extent of the entire wound.
Then reduce it, and sew the wound. For those heads remain attached to the intestine until it is fed and healed, and no harm befalls the patient thoroughly.
And it is now possible to suture the intestine even with a fine thread: which is taken from the intestine of an animal, attached to the needle after it is inserted.
And you take the end of this thread from the gut, and it is cleaned thoroughly. Then tie a fine linen thread wound around its end. Then insert the thread into the needle, and sew with it the gut. Then replace it in the incision.
And this method of sewing with ants and gut is only according to the way of trust and hope.
Know, a wound that is large, wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines: then there is no remedy except for narrowing, and there is no healing of it at all.
Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids and fistulas.
Know, that any wound or abscess when it becomes old and aged, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal, and constantly emits pus, and does not stop: then it is generally called a fistula wherever it may be on the body, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a fistula indeed is according to truth a hardened, filtered knot, white, with which there is no pain, and it has the concavity of a bird's feather: and because of this some call it Risati, that is, a feather.
And in certain hours, it is moist, emitting pus. And perhaps the moisture splits in certain hours. And sometimes this moisture is much, and is little: and it is thick, and it is thin.
And I have already premised in the division, then when I said wounds, that any ulcer which does not heal, nor flesh is born in it, is not such except for one of nine causes.
One of which is either due to the scarcity of blood in the body: or due to its malignancy: or because there is hard flesh between it and its lips, preventing the birth of flesh: or because it is full of dirt and filth: or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter discharged from it is of bad quality: or because the medicine used for its cure is inappropriate: or because corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence, or by the nature of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta: where the digestion of diseases is difficult, and the healing of abscesses is delayed naturally: or because there is one bone or a number of bones in it.
And I have already shown all these causes and their signs, and their treatments with medicines in the division: and it is necessary here that I make you know the treatment of Fistulas and Zukens, which is done by the method of operation with the hand.
Know therefore that a Fistula occurs in all parts of the body. For among them are Fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or skin: or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs: or to any of the vertebrae of the spine, or to any of the composite joints: such as the hand and foot: and among them are those that go to the proximity of the main member and similar ones.
Which therefore of these Fistulas is according to this method, is among illnesses difficult to heal, and does not receive treatment, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
If there is any fistula whose depth does not reach the places I mentioned: and you hope, and trust in its treatment, and wish to understand it, then take a probe of metal or iron, if the fistula extends straight, and explore it with it.
If there is a twist in the fistula, then investigate it with a fine lead probe. Because lead, with the softness of its body, is lightened and curved around the twist.
If the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to indicate on it with a probe. Clysterize therefore one of its openings from its openings.
For the moisture with which you clysterize it goes towards the other openings and runs out from them.
Then carefully inquire according to the way it is possible for you: to know whether there is an opening or nerve, and whether the fistula's depth is far or near: or whether there is one fistula with many openings, and stand over all of this, with your utmost strength: with your questioning of the patient, and by finding pain upon pressing with your hand on the area, and similar signs and causes leading to abscess formation.
Therefore, when you stand on all those true stations, then proceed to the treatment with confidence: and it is that you consider then if the fistula is near and apparent, or in a safe place far from the joint, or from the nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places I have mentioned to you: then cut the fistula according to what has been previously stated in my narration, and remove what is in it from the filtration, and corrupted flesh, which is born at its opening from the flesh, or sinew, and similar things: and treat it until it heals.
If however the fistula is of deep length, and it is straight: then it is necessary to cut it deeply as much as possible for you. Then clean it from all its corrupted flesh.
Then apply linen wrapped in sharp medicines: and insert it until the depth of the fistula that you grasped with the iron: do this several times with it until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the depth of the fistula from corruption.
Then treat it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If however it does not heal by that method, then cauterize it as we have described.
If therefore the cause of the fistula is a bone, and it is confirmed to you: then seek it out, and cut it as I have told you: unless something prevents you from doing so because of a vein, or nerve, or a principal member, as we have said.
If therefore the bone is revealed to you, and there is something of corruption and blackness in it: then scrape it until all of its corruption is removed. Then treat it with what causes flesh to grow on it until it is healed.
If it does not heal, and discharges pus as it did before: then you know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption.
Reveal it again, and thoroughly examine it, and clean it with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If it is healed, that is good: and if not, then you know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which you have not reached. Therefore, there is no skill for you in it, except to leave it to nature.
If a small bone is corrupted and it is possible for you, pull it out with fine tweezers that are suitable for it.
If there are many bones, then carefully pull out all of them, and do not leave any of them with your strength.
If something from the humors opposes you, and there is no fear or mistake in cutting them: then cut those humors and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If you do not have the preparation for removing bones at your time, then apply something to the wound that will cause it to rot: and leave it until what is around those bones rots from flesh and humors.
And guard the wound so that it does not heal over. And let the incision you made in your operation be constricted. Rather, apply to it, if you fear, some tow soaked in ground sulfur with oil: or tow soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some green ointment.
For when those humors rot and the bones separate from them, the removal of them is eased, and their extraction is alleviated.
If however it is one large bone, like the bone of the leg, or the bone of the hip, and similar to those, and what is corrupted in it is a large part: then scrape it thoroughly until that blackening and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
If however what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw through it, and cut it entirely up to the place where the corruption reaches: then treat it until it consolidates.
And I tell you of a case that happened to a man in his leg: that you may set it as an example and aid for your operation.
There was a man of about thirty years of age, to whom pain occurred in his leg, caused by something that moved within his body, that is, from the interior, until the matter reached the leg and swelled with a large abscess: and he did not have an external cause.
Therefore, time was wasted with the errors of the physicians until the abscess was opened, and a great deal of matter came out with it. And his treatment was delayed until the leg became fistulated, and many openings were formed in it: all of which discharged pus and bodily fluids.
Therefore, he was treated by a multitude of physicians for about two years, and there was no skilled practitioner until I was called, and I saw his leg and the matter flowing from those openings in great abundance: moreover, the whole body of the man had already wasted away, and his color was yellow.
I therefore inserted a probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached the mouth.
Then I examined all the openings: and I found them to connect with each other from all parts of the leg.
I hurried and cut above one of those openings until I exposed part of the bone: and I found it corrupted: already eaten away, blackened, rotten, and perforated, until it had penetrated to the marrow.
I cut away what was revealed to me and prepared from the corrupted bone.
And I ensured that there was nothing in the bone except that corruption which I cut off and sawed away. And I had already eradicated it.
Then I placed the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicines for a long period. And it was not consolidated.
Then I probed and exposed above the bone a second time beyond the first exposure: and I found the corruption continuing with the bone: and I sawed away what appeared to me also from that corruption.
Then I attempted its restoration. And it was not restored.
I exposed it again and did not cease to cut the bone piece by piece, and attempted its restoration: and it was not restored, until I cut about one palm's length from the bone, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored him with medicines, and it was consolidated quickly, and healed: and this repetition was not necessary in his operation, and his cutting, unless because of the disposition of the patient's weakness, and the scarcity of his tolerance, and my fear for him of death: for it happened to him at all hours from the excess of evacuation evil faintings.
He was therefore healed with a complete healing: and hard flesh was born in place of the bone, and his condition was made good in his body, and his strength returned: and he moved about in his conditions: and walking did not harm him at all.
If however a prominent bone in an already fractured part of the body has broken: then it is necessary to suture it, according to this method: and it is as follows: take a ligature, and tie it at the end of the protruding bone: and command someone to pull it upwards: and place another thicker ligature made of wool beside the first ligature. Then bind it over the flesh that is below the bone: and extend its end so that you pull the flesh downwards: and you cover the flesh over the place you wish to saw, so that the saw does not harm the flesh.
Place wood or a board under the lower bone appropriately: for when you do this, it does not prevent cutting the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary for the sawing to be over the corrupted area temporarily, so that there is no corruption in the concavity of the bone: and it does not appear to the sense in its appearance, and compels another to take its place in sawing.
If the bone is corrupted and is not prominent, but rather its part is continuous with another part: and the corruption is in the middle of it or in a part of it: then uncover the flesh from all sides entirely. Then place the wood below.
Then saw it from the first side where there is corruption until the sawing continues from the other side: and let the sawing be according to the length from the corruption for a little while, as we have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, cut the corrupted joint itself, and saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
If however the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no remedy but scraping.
If the corruption is in the carpal bones of the hand or in the tarsal bones of the foot: then the matter is very difficult. But it is necessary that you inquire how the corruption appears to you. And scrape it, and clean it according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and with whatever method is corrected for you: when the Vein or Nerve does not oppose you.
And know that the cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their fineness, and their size, and their smallness, and their hardness, and their rarity. Therefore, it is necessary that you prepare every kind of instrument suitable for that operation.
And know that these operations indicate to you the kind of instrument you need when you have thorough study with you. And the knowledge of the methods of this art is the testimony of the methods of illnesses: then you will find by yourself that which is suitable for it from the instruments for every sickness.
And I am confirming for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will place on examples over which you will cut, and the test by which you will experiment on others.
Form of another Saw.
Form of the Joint Scraper. Let the head of this scraper be according to the shape of a star nail head: and its points be according to the shape of the points of elischetfegi.
And it is not suitable unless the heads of the joints are scraped with it when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is wide and large.
Form of the Larger Scraper.
Form of the Wide Scraper.
Form of the Scraper with a Concavity.
The form of another subtle shaving.
The form of another curved end shaving.
The form of a small, subtle probe shaving.
This resembles a file, and the end is like a saw: it is used in many places for the reason of bones.
The form of a shaving that is suitable for the purpose of what is perforated in bones.
Its end is triangular, with sharp ends.
It is made from India. And similarly, all the things we have mentioned should be made from razors, and incisors, and saws.
About the incision of extremities, and theSerratura ossium
Extremities putrefy, either from an external cause or an internal cause.
Therefore, when you have treated that corruption with medical treatment and the cure does not help, and you see the corruption spreading to the limb, which nothing can stop: then it is necessary to amputate that limb until where the corruption follows, so that the patient may be saved from death or a worse malice than the loss of the limb.
And the sign of one to whom that happens is that the limb blackens until it rots: whether the fire burned it, or it rotted after the blackening: until that rot is cut into what follows that limb, and creeps throughout the entire body.
Hasten therefore with the incision of it, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of some venomous creatures: such as the sea scorpion, and viper, and centipede, and similar ones.
If therefore the corruption or sting is at the extremity of a finger, then cut off the finger, and do not give space to the corruption so that it may spread to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it off from the root of the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold of the arm's wrist.
And if it invades it, then cut the arm at the elbow joint.
If however the corruption spreads, and you see it around the elbow: then there is death of the patient in that case. And to administer beyond that in the treatment is an excess of potency.
And similarly do for the foot when the corruption invades a toe, then cut it at one of the joints: and if it takes hold of the arch of the foot, then amputate the entire foot. If however it ascends to the knee, then cut the leg at the joint of the knee.
If the corruption has already ascended above the knee, then there is no remedy for it except amputation, and leaving the patient to death.
And the method of cutting a limb or sawing it is to tie the lower ligament where you wish to cut; and tie another ligament above the place. And the minister extends one ligament downward; and the minister extends another ligament upward. And you separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments with a broad spatula until all the flesh is exposed. Then it shall be cut or sawed.
And it is necessary to place linen cloth on all sides, and the saw should not touch the healthy area: and that an additional injury and a hot abscess do not occur to the patient.
If internal bleeding occurs while you are operating, then cauterize the area quickly: or apply certain powders that stop the flow of blood. Then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I tell you what happened to a man in his foot, the same incident that I am telling you about.
Which is that a blackening occurred in his foot, with a burning resembling the combustion of fire: and that corruption first occurred in his toe, until it began to affect the entire foot.
Therefore, the man hurried to act on his own after he saw corruption setting in with severe pain in the limb, which he discovered due to the pain and burning: and he cut it at the joint, and was healed.
And after a long time had passed, that same corruption occurred in his index finger.
He came to me, and I tried to recover that excess by applying medicine to his hand after cleansing his body: but the excess did not subside, and it began to spread to another finger: until the corruption began in the hand.
He called upon me to amputate his hand: and I refused to do so, hoping to address that excess by myself: and I also feared his death from the incision of his hand. For the virtue of the man was at stake.
After he despaired of me, he returned to his land: and news reached me that he hurried and amputated his entire hand: and he was healed.
And I have not brought this account unless to be of help for that which falls under this kind of illness: and to provide guidance by which it may be understood, and according to which action may be taken.
Regarding the treatment of sinuses, and the nature of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends until it forms a collection of pus: then it bursts or is perforated, and what is inside comes out as pus, and a vacant place remains like a vessel: and the skin that is above it is like a cloth that has become thin: and it does not progress to its ultimate corruption, nor does it affect the mouth, nor the nerve, nor the ligament: it deserves to be called a Sinus: and it is not named a Fistula: however, if its space extends until the corruption affects any of these members, then it is named a Fistula or syke.
And the care is to cut that skin entirely as it rolls up: and especially when it becomes thin, and made like cloth: and you trust that it does not adhere to the place, because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin adheres, and does not result from that final corruption: and if there is thickness in the skin from flesh, then care for it with aclyster: and it is to consider towards the sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus emitted from it has a foul odor: then cleanse it with Egyptian medicine, which is of vinegar, oil, and ziniar, equal parts received, gathered in a vessel: and decocted over fire, until the medicine turns red: and comes to the thickness of honey.
Then take what you need from it: and dissolve it with water and honey, and cleanse the sinus with it: and bind its opening, and leave the medicine in it for a duration of two hours.
Then extract it with pressing: do this for as many days until the sinus is cleansed and the odor is removed.
And sometimes it is cleansed with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you: and it is to take the ash of vine wood, or ash from holm oak wood: and pour water over it. Then boil it, and cleanse with it until you trust that the sinus is washed clean.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ashes water, then cleanse it with water and honey, to which some ground ziniar is already mixed. Or cleanse it with honey and wine mixed together, for it is the property of honey to purify and wash clean: and wine causes adhesion, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
When you do this several times and are confident that the sinus corruption has been removed, then cleanse it with something that promotes flesh growth.
And it is as follows: take some from the dyafinicon plaster and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or cleanse it with certain medicines and other ointments whose properties I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
If the sinus opening is narrow, through which a clyster tube cannot fit: then enlarge it temporarily with iron; or place lint wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment on it until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if the opening is also wide, then bring the edges together with a suture: and leave enough space for the clyster to enter without added obstruction.
And similarly, if the opening from which pus runs is elevated towards the upper parts: then cut it at a lower place within it so that pus may run down from it: for when pus is confined in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from generating in it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the sinus around its lower part as you wish: then try to prepare the area so that pus may run out easily according to how it is prepared for you. Strive so that no pus at all remains in it: and take the binding medicines which are placed on the wound, suitable for what you wish. And spread them over a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that it covers the entire sinus. Then cut with the scissors directly at the opening of the sinus hole, slightly larger than the opening of the sinus. Then spread the mild ointments over another cloth according to the size of the hole: and place it on it at a distance from the opening of the sinus, so that the exit of pus from it is alleviated: and do not remove the large cloth unless after several days one by one.
The one who is on the opening of the sinus is the one whom you remove every hour, so that what accumulates in it from pus may come out: and to know whether what runs out of it as a virus is much or little: or digested or undigested.
And with this, examine again the site of the sinus itself, whether its owner feels pain in it or there is no pain in it, and whether there is a swelling in it or there is no swelling in it.
When therefore your treatment is extended thus, and you see the matter that comes out over the opening of the sinus, then you know that the sinus has adhered or is approaching adhesion: then dissolve it in the morning or on the third day: and when you dissolve the wound, then change to another cloth and renew the ointment.
If however it exits from the sinus after a long interval a fine pus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, since there are those among men who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and among them are those who act contrary to that.
If however it exits from the sinus after many days as undigested pus, then know that the sinus does not adhere.
If therefore the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its condition is prolonged: then add to the drying of medicines, but let the physicians make the medicines moist in their substance and dry in their effect: such as diafinicon ointment, when an excess addition of cumin is added to it.
And from the very last method of treatment, it is to take diafinicon ointment, and dissolve it with rose oil, and spray over it equal quality old wine in its substance.
Then bind it with it, and use it.
And now it does a similar action to this when you do not have diafinicon ointment present, honey, when you boil it until it thickens, and use it. Or take myrrh, and aloe, and frankincense: grind all of it, and powder it over honey while it is over the fire. Then apply it on the cloth, and bind it over the sinus: and apply with honey which you boiled until it thickened: and powder over it the spices, and place it on the cloth, and bind it.
And sometimes administered in that is aristolochia longa, and roots of lily celestial, and it is lily: and flour of herb, and centaury. Use these simples, or combined, grind them, and sieve them: and powder over the honey which I mentioned, and use it.
If the condition of the Sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment: then know that there is corruption deep within it: or it has already made an impression on the bones, or on other hard members, or ligaments: then treat it with the treatment for Fistulas, according to what has been mentioned.
Concerning the treatment of panaritium and ingrown nails, and the incision of the added finger, and amputation.
Panaritium is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand or foot: and it may also arise in the other digits.
When therefore the condition is prolonged and neglected by its healer, and it becomes abscessed with a warm abscess: or it corrupts and emits pus until it corrodes the root of the nail: and it may corrupt it entirely, and the corruption may reach the bone, until there is a foul odor: and the extremity of the digit becomes swollen, and its color becomes dark.
When therefore you treat it with what we said in the division, and your treatment does not heal it: then you must cut with iron all the excess that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For cautery is very helpful.
If the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy, and the growths of the nail already press on the flesh towards the inside, and begin to pierce it, and harm it: then you must place a fine wedge under the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut it with ease, and apply over what remains of the flesh medicines that burn, corrosives, until all of it is removed. Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
If the corruption has already set into the bone, then you must cut that bone and remove it: for it will never heal as long as the corrupted bone remains.
If you see corrosion and corruption spreading to the finger, then cut it at one of the joints, according to what has been previously mentioned. Then care for it until it heals.
If the nail is subjected to abrasion or impact, and severe pain ensues, then you must bleed the patient first. Then cut the nail with a sharp spatumilia in a horizontal section from top to view.
And be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for you will cause severe pain to the patient by doing so, and it will result in additional flesh growing in that place.
Then treat the area with something that relieves pain.
The additional finger that is born on some men's hands is perhaps entirely fleshy: and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail in it: and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or its birth is in some knots of the finger. He who is born on some knots of the finger does not move: and he who is born near the joint of the finger, perhaps moves.
The cutting of the one who is fleshy among them is easy. Which means you should cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
The treatment of the one whose birth is at the root of the joint is difficult. Therefore, abstain from cutting it.
In the one who is born on the finger near the last knot, then you must cut through its flesh first with a circular incision down to the bone. Then file the bone with one of those files suitable for it. Then care for it until it heals.
The joining that occurs between fingers often happens either from the birth of the person, that is, it is born with him, or from the healing of a wound, or from burning by fire, and similar causes.
Therefore, you must cut that joining until the fingers return to their natural form. Then place between them linen, or cloths soaked in rose oil: so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate between them: or place between them a thin sheet of lead until the area consolidates as it should.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs between certain fingers and the palm, then cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
Regarding the Incision of Vitium.
Uites are convoluted veins, thick, full of melancholic superfluities which occur in many parts of the body: and they most frequently appear in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers and workers, and those who carry loads.
Therefore, you must administer body shaking from black bile several times with strong shaking.
Then bleed the patient from the brachial vein.
The treatment of them with iron is according to two methods. One of them is to cut them and extract the black blood. And the other method is to elevate the vein and remove it entirely.
The incision of it is according to this method. Soak the leg first with hot water extensively until the thick, feculent blood is dissolved. Then bind the leg of the patient from the upper part of the thigh down to the lower part of the knee with a strap. Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three places with a wide incision.
Then draw, that is, extract the blood in your hand from the lower part of the leg up to the top, and it is necessary for the phlebotomist to bleed the patient from the upper part first. Then cut the nail all the way down: until a quantity of blood emerges that you judge sufficient and that the patient's strength can tolerate.
Then bind it: and instruct him to abstain from foods that generate black bile: and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and if it harms the patient.
The extraction of it is according to this method. Shave the leg of the patient if there are many hairs on it. Then introduce him to the bath: or foment his leg with warm water until it reddens and the veins swell: or exercise him with strenuous exercise, if a bath is not available, until the limb warms up.
Then cut the skin directly along the vein's length: either at its end near the knee, or at the lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks, and scrape the vein from all sides until it is visible to the sense: and it appears when you see it turning from red to black. When it emerges from the skin, you will see it white like a string.
Then introduce a probe under it until when it is raised and emerges from the skin: suspend it with a blind hook, gently.
Then cut another section near that section with three fingers. Then remove the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then raise it with probes as you did, and suspend it with another hook, as you did at first.
Then cut another section, or multiple sections, if you need them. Then raise it, and cut it with the final section near the heel.
Then pull it to the section which is above it.
And do this until you pull it out from the upper section, or higher than all the sections, until when it comes out entirely: then cut it.
If it does not obey you to be pulled out and raised: then introduce a needle with a strong double thread, and tie it, and pull it out: or introduce a probe under it, and rotate your hand in all directions until it comes out. And be careful that it is not cut. For if it is cut, it becomes very difficult for you to raise it, and great harm comes to the patient from it.
Therefore, when you have pulled it out entirely: then place wool soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil, on the wound site: and care for it until it heals.
If the vein is contracted, having a twisting which coils towards the sides, and it is not straight as we said: then you must incise over it on all parts of its twisting, and at the places of its coiling.
Then suspend it with hooks until you raise it entirely: and be careful at your cut over it that you do not cut the vein or injure it: for it will be difficult for you to raise or extract it. Therefore, keep your caution.
Form of an incident in which a vein is healed.
Form of a blind hook.
It does not have a curve like other hooks, nor does it have a sharp end to avoid injuring the vein: and it has a thick, flexible shape, gentle: because if it were thin, it would cut the vein with its thinness: rather, let it have excessive thickness, as we said.
On the extraction of a vein from the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in warm lands, such as Al-Andalus, and the land of Arabs, and in dry, warm lands, lacking moisture, that is, where no herb or tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from the putrefaction which occurs under the skin, like the occurrence of snakes and ascaris worms within bodies, and worms generated between the skin and the flesh.
And the sign of the onset of this vein's event is that vehement inflammation occurs in the leg. Then the place is cut open. Then the vein begins to emerge from that place of incision, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When therefore its end appears from it, then you must wrap a fragment of lead over it, whose weight is from one fourth of a drachm to two drachms, and tie it to the knot itself: and leave the lead hanging down from the leg.
Whenever anything emerges from it to the outer part, wrap it in lead, and tie it up. If it extends too much, then cut part of it off, and wrap the remainder. And do not cut it at the root before it comes out entirely. For if you cut it, it contracts and enters the flesh: and causes an abscess and putrefaction in the area, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it must be handled gently and extracted gradually until it comes out entirely from its end, and nothing of it remains in the body: and from this vein in some men comes out something that is five palms and ten long. And it has come to my attention that it came out of a man who was twenty palms long.
If it happens to be cut during your treatment: then insert a probe into its opening, and pierce it with a long hole, along with the body, until all the material inside is evacuated: and treat the putrefaction of the area with medicines for several days. Then treat the abscesses themselves.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the ankle joint, or on the foot itself: and it has multiple openings, and a branch emerges from every opening.
Treat it therefore as we have said in the division, and along with what has been mentioned.
Regarding the incision for worms generated under the skin, and it is called Bouina disease.
This disease is called Bouina disease in some regions among us because it often affects oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and the flesh.
And it moves throughout the entire body, ascending and descending: and its presence is noticed during its movement from one limb to another, until it breaks through the skin wherever it emerges.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. Like worms and serpents, that is, earthworms, and roundworms in the stomach.
And it is feared because of its maliciousness. Because when it moves within the body and rises to the head, and reaches a place: then it may open up there and emerge, and destroy the eye: and this often happens.
Therefore, when you wish to treat it and extract it, then it can only be done during its movement and when its presence is noticeable.
Therefore, you must bind what is above him and what is below him with a strong binding ligature. Then cut above it, and remove it.
If it is deep in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a hot cautery on the spot until it dies.
And what is more feared is its corruption, by which it corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If you see it has already reached the head near the eye, then bind below it the eyebrow with a good constriction. Then cut above it, and remove it.
And it is necessary for the patient to purify his body with medicines that dissolve foul putrid humors.
And let him beware of foods that cause putrefaction.
Concerning the incision for the disease Nakir.
This disease is called Nakir in our land: it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs, then shifts from one limb to another.
And indeed, I have already seen it, as I tell you. I was summoned to a sick woman in certain villas. And she exposed her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the rope-like vein of the arm.
And after I remained for one hour, I saw one inflation proceed with a bladder, like a worm proceeds, ascending to his shoulder faster than it can be: so that it is like quicksilver, when it runs from place to place.
Therefore, the pain departed from that place and fixed on the shoulder.
Then I sat for one hour, and it ran through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
Then he told me that it was moving throughout his whole body, as I saw.
I marveled at the speed of its transformation from one member to another. And indeed, before that, I had not seen this sickness with my own eyes in such a manner according to this way. However, I have seen many who find the pain change from one member to another; and I did not see it with my eyes as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think it to be anything except that the woman was one of those who have dry bodies and exposed veins; hence this wind-changing appears to the senses.
And it is necessary that they do not appear in this manner in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins.
Therefore, when you wish for its treatment and the patient feels that pain: then if it is apparent to your eye as we said, then bind above it and below it quickly: and cut above it until the confined wind exits: and cauterize the place.
If however you do not see it with your own eyes: then treat it with shaking of the body, and with that which expels wind, and soothes it with foul pills, and pills of fennel, and similar.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows vary according to their types, and according to the places into which they fall from the body.
Their diversity is as follows: some have large tips, and small ones: and concave, and deaf. And among them are those which have three angles. And among them are those which have tongues. And among them are those which have barbs.
Those, however, which fall according to the limbs into which they fall, are in two ways. For either the limbs are concave principal limbs, such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and those similar to these. When therefore it falls into any of these limbs, and signs of death, which I tell you afterward, appear to you, then you must avoid extracting that arrow from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in most cases. And when those bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the limb, then extract it, and treat the wound.
For the signs of the brain when an arrow falls into it and penetrates the bone, and exits through the siphac which is above the brain, are: for there occur from that severe pain, and blindness, and vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and swelling, and redness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile. And perhaps blood comes out from the nostrils, or the ears. And perhaps speech is impaired, and the voice is destroyed. And there comes out from the place of the wound a white moisture similar to pus. And there exits from it something similar to a watery state of the flesh.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not exit.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left nipple: and one feels with it as if it were fixed in a hard substance, not in an empty space. And perhaps the arrow has a movement similar to the movement of the pulse: and black blood runs from the wound. And following that is the coldness of the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore that death undoubtedly approaches.
And the sign of the arrow when it wounds the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound: and the vessels that follow the neck swell, and the color of the patient changes. And he exhales a great, deep breath: and seeks the attraction of cold air.
If the arrow falls into the membrane that is in the chest: then it is near the ribs: and a great breath with intense pain, with a sigh, occurs: and all the shoulder limbs move.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested from the food exits from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the abdomen and is fixed in it: something of feces exits from the wound, or a tumor, or an intestine that is already torn. Therefore, there is no hope for his cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder and urine exits: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger on the patient: then you know that it is mortal.
The other members, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and shoulder blade, and helper, and spine of the back, and collarbone, and thigh, and shin, and those similar parts are treated according to many arrangements: when the arrow does not find an artery or a nerve: and the arrow is not venomous.
And I tell you what I have seen regarding these arrows, so that you may apply it to your treatment.
This is because an arrow fell into a man's lacrimal of his eye, at the root of his nose. I extracted it from her other side, under the fat of her ear: and she was healed, and no harm came to her eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which fell into the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I could only reach a small part of it with which it adhered to its wood: and it was a large arrow among the arrows of Turkish bows, with soft iron, in which there are no ears.
The Jew was healed, and no harmful accident happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one that has barbs. I sewed over it between two fingers: and it was already submerged in his throat. I carefully extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his abdomen: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, I sewed over the arrow: and I operated on it, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no harmful accident happened to him.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound had healed over it. After seven years had passed, an arrow emerged from the root of his hip bone.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow fell into her abdomen, and the wound healed over it, and the arrow remained inside her; and none of her conditions were changed, and the woman did not find any harm from it in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow fell on his face: and the wound healed, and it remained, not causing him much pain: and there are many similar cases to these.
And I extracted an arrow from a man who was one of the King's leaders, which had fallen into the middle of his nose, and it had already deviated slightly to the right side: and the entire arrow was hidden.
I was called therefore for his treatment after the arrow fell for up to three days. I found therefore the arrow wound very tight.
I examined it therefore with a fine probe, and did not feel it: and he indeed felt a puncture and pain near his right ear. I suspected therefore that it was that puncture from the tip of the arrow.
I treated the area with a plaster that had attracting and dissolving properties, confident that the area would form an abscess, and reveal to me a sign of the arrow, so I could cut above it: and nothing happened in the area indicating that the arrow had reached its location.
I therefore applied a plaster to it for many days: and no accident occurred, and the wound was healed in the meantime: and he remained weak from its extraction for a space of days, until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I therefore applied a sharp and corrosive medicine to that wound for many days until it was open: and when I probed it, I felt the fine tip of the arrowhead adhering to the wood.
Then I applied that sharp medicine to the opening of the wound until the tip of the arrow became visibly apparent: and I spent with him a period of time around four months.
Then after the wound had enlarged, and it became possible for me to insert forceps into it and move it, and it did not obey to come out: then I did not cease to refine and devise methods of ingenuity on it, until one day I began to work on it with properly made forceps, according to how their form will appear at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose does not restore itself. I therefore restored it, and the wound was healed, and the sick person was made whole in health: and nothing at all harmed him.
And I tell you the nature of the extraction of certain arrows: that you may set it as a rule and meaning on what I have not said.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended with narration: nor does the book comprehend it, and the wise artisan compares little with much: and that which is present over that which is absent: and finds a new operation and a new instrument among the descents of foreign things of this art when they occur.
I say therefore, that arrows do not depart from the limbs in which they are fixed, except in two ways. Or by attraction from the place from which it entered. Or by the opposite part of another.
And that which exits where it entered is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place: and it is attracted and exits.
If it does not obey exiting from the time it falls: then you must leave it for several days until the flesh around it putrefies: and its attraction is lessened, and its exit.
And similarly if it is fixed in the bone and does not obey you to exit, then leave it for several days: and repeat it with attraction and motion every day until it exits.
If it does not obey you to exit after days, then you must drill around the arrow in the bone itself on all sides with a fine drill until the area around the arrow is enlarged. Then attract it, and extract it.
If however the arrow is already hidden in a part of the body and is concealed and hidden from perception: then seek it with a probe. If however you feel it, then remove it with some instruments which are suitable for its removal.
If however you cannot reach it because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow embedded deeply: and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein there: then incise over it until the wound enlarges, and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
If it has ears by which it can be held, then free the flesh fixed to it on all sides with every means you can employ, and use methods if it cannot be freed from the flesh by separating the ears and twisting them until it comes out.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow, wherever it is, then use the twisting of your hand, with forceps to all sides, until you make it come out: and be very careful to avoid breaking the arrow, so that its removal does not become difficult for you.
If you cannot do it within one hour, then leave it for several days until what is around it putrefies. Then repeat it: for the skin will heal. If however the flow of blood opposes you, then administer what we said about the treatment in its chapter: and guard your skill from cutting the vein, or nerve, or chord.
And apply your skill in every way possible to avoid the Arrow: and do it with ease, tranquility, slowness, and firmness, as I have told you.
And it is necessary that you do when you pull out the Arrow, that the patient be positioned according to the shape in which he was at the time of the Arrow's impact. For it is more beneficial. If however it is not possible for you to do that, then administer what is possible for you from the positions.
But the Arrow which exits from the opposite side of the other part, or already protrudes somewhat to the exterior, or causes the tip of the Arrow to bulge through the sensation from the upper part of the nearby skin, and you see it prominent: cut above it, and let the incision be according to the amount that forceps can grasp in it.
Then pull it out: for it becomes easy to remove.
If however it is lodged in the bone, then rotate your hand according to the roundness, until the Arrow impresses on the bone and enlarges its own space: then pull it out.
And if not: leave it for several days: then try again until it comes out.
If the arrow shaft is in it, then push it with it.
If the shaft has fallen off and you wish to administer thrusting: then introduce a concave instrument to it, so that its concavity enters into the tail of the arrow: then push it with it.
If the arrow is concave, then push it with an instrument entering into it. For the arrow is alleviated by that.
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to make concave all the flesh where the poison is: if it is possible for you to do so. Then treat it with whatever is appropriate for that.
If the arrow falls in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side: and it is close to what you touch with a probe, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and be careful of cutting a vein or nerve, and extract it.
Then sew the wound, if you see it, and treat it until it heals.
And this is the form of the forceps with which arrows are extracted.
Let the ends be similar to a bird's beak, which are made like blades: when they grasp the arrow, they do not release it.
And many types are made from them, large, small, and medium, according to the quantity of the size of the Arrow, and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its narrowing.
Form of the Concave Force.
And the form of the force of the deaf.
This is the end of the deaf as with the radius, so that its entry into the concave arrow is alleviated, and it is propelled with it.
About the bloodletting of veins.
The veins that are accustomed to be bloodletted in the body are thirty.
Of these, in the head there are sixteen: two pulsating veins, which are behind the ears, called the two Herbae: and two arteries, which appear on both temples: and two veins which are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called Aspicientes: and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead: and the vein which is at the end of the nose. And two Guidegi, which are in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. And these are the veins which are called Algecherich. And two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins which are bled in the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalica, and it is on the outer side: and the common people call it the head vein. And the Fusca. And it is the Median vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalica: and the common people call it the body vein. And the Basilica, and it is placed on the inner side: and it is also called Titillicaris. And the common people call it the vein of the belly. And the Funis brachii, and it is placed above the bone: and it is the one in which bleeding is performed, and it is the one which appears above the thumb with clear manifestation.
And the Saluatella: and it is the vein which is between the ring finger and the little finger: and it has two branches.
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins. One of them is the one which is under the curvature of the thumb on the outer side. And the second is the Saphena: and its location is near the heel on the inner side. And the vein Ness: and its location is at the heel on the woodland side.
And in the other leg there are three similar veins.
On the bloodletting of two veins behind the ears.
The bloodletting of the two veins which are behind the ears is beneficial for old catarrhs, hemiplegia, sahafati, and old bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bloodletting it is according to what I narrate. And it is, that the head of the patient is shaved: and his occipital area at the site of the two veins is rubbed with a coarse cloth by good friction. Then the patient should constrict his neck with a cloth until two veins appear. And their locations are behind the ears at two depressed areas of the head. Seek them with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, mark that spot with encaustic.
Then take the knife scalpel, and it is called the Incider. Then insert it under the vein into the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut the vein with the skin by an intersecting incision. And the length of the incision should be the width of two joined fingers, or about that: and let as much blood flow as you wish.
Then bind it with poultices, and leave it until it heals.
And already at the beginning of the book, the incision of them and their cauterization have preceded.
The benefit of bloodletting the two arteries which are in the two temples is for ancient hemiplegia: and for false sodoma, and persistent ophthalmia: and for the course of sharp humors flowing to the eyes.
And the method of bloodletting them is as I tell you. Let the patient constrict his neck greatly until two veins appear clearly to the sight: and their pulse is made evident under your finger. Then mark them with cauterization.
Then lift the skin over the vein upwards with your index finger, and insert the lancet piercing from below, and lift the vein upwards. And cut it as you did with the other two veins: and let the blood flow according to the amount necessary for your case.
Then release the patient's constriction, and place your finger on the vein for one hour. Then apply a bandage and poultices on it, and bind it tightly with a strong constriction: and leave it until it heals.
And already at the beginning of the book, the mention of them, and their incision, and their extraction have preceded.
The benefit of bleeding the frontal vein after bleeding the Cephalic is for old ailments of the face: and for hemigrana, and redness: and ugly sores.
And the quality of its bleeding is as I tell you. The patient should constrict his neck with a ligature until the vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called the Fossorium.
Place the sharp point which is on the head of the Fossorium directly on the vein, and strike over it with a comb or with another instrument in its manner; and let the blood flow in the quantity you desire. Then release the ligature of the patient and press it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a broad lancet. However, it should not have a sharp end like other lancets, but rather a broad end. And bleed it transversely because the mouth is nearby, and the lancet might break there when it is thin.
The benefit of the two veins which are in the two tear ducts of both eyes is for the eye from scabies and redness: and film in the eye, and ailments of the face.
And the quality of their bloodletting is that the sick person should constrict his neck with a strap. Then bloodlet them: and you shall stand over his head.
And the bloodletting should be done across the length slightly with a small, somewhat broad bloodletter, for there is no flesh in that place. For if the bloodletter has a delicate tip, it may break.
Then let as much blood flow as you need. And place a cloth over them, bind them for one night, and then loosen them.
The bloodletting of the nasal veins is beneficial for acute fever, severe headache, and facial ailments such as hemiplegia, and the redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of its bloodletting is that the sick person should constrict his neck. Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a fine, long bloodletter: and insert it in the middle of the nasal septum, between the parts that divide the nose vertically. Because the vein does not appear there to the senses, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And you should keep your hand with the bloodletter for a moment: and let the blood flow according to your need. Then bind it for one night. For it is restored quickly.
The benefit of the two Guidege bloodlettings is for constriction of breathing, and the onset of leprosy, and melancholic illnesses, and impetigo and bad sores, and corrosives, that is, serpent-like herpes.
And the quality of their bloodletting is such that the patient should bind himself under both sides of his neck with a bandage: and the practitioner should stand above the head of the patient, and the patient should be sitting on a seat.
Then the bloodletter should cut the vein to the length of a broad incision temporarily. Then draw from the blood a moderate quantity, or according to what you see is necessary for that. Then do likewise with the other vein.
Then remove the bandage, and bind the two veins with a moderate constriction: so that the patient is not choked. And leave it until morning. For the wound is healed.
On the bloodletting of veins by Algeberich. The benefit of Algeberich's bloodletting is that it helps with alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums: and bad sores: and cracks in the lips, and bad ulcers, even those that are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of their bloodletting is that you make the sick person sit before you: and hold his neck with a rope. Then turn his lip back, and look at the two veins: one is on the right side of the lip, and the second on the left side of it: and the indication of both is by the blackness of both. And that is true: because around them are small veins, black. Cut therefore both with a penetrating incision.
If however there is doubt upon you, and you do not know which of them it is: then aim at the incision of the larger of them, and the more apparent of them.
And similarly do with the two veins which are in the upper lip: and indeed the custom greatly agrees with this: and cut the two veins which are in the lower lip.
Regarding bloodletting of the vein under the tongue after cephalic bloodletting. The benefit of bloodletting the two veins which are under the tongue is that cephalic bloodletting is for obstructions which are in the throat, and sickness of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
And the method of bloodletting them is that the sick person should sit before you in the sunlight: and lift his tongue, and look under the tongue on one side for a vein, and on the other side for another vein: and the color of both tends towards blackness.
Bloodlet therefore from both: and be careful not to hesitate in bloodletting them. For under it are arteries, and perhaps a flow of blood may occur from those arteries.
The three veins which are bled at the elbow are those in whose bleeding a custom has run through all people.
And their bloodletting is done in two ways. Either by pricking with a broad myrtle lancet: or sharpening to a fineness: or cutting with a knife-like lancet, and it is called Alnesil. And this is its form.
And among them are broad and fine varieties according to the width of the veins and their tightness. The form of the myrtle lancet is broad, as you see. And it is suitable for opening concave veins, full veins, protruding veins, visible veins, thick veins, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this lancet is of lesser breadth and finer at the tip.
And it is suitable for bloodletting of fine veins that contain fine yellow blood.
However, the Basilica vein, which is one of these three veins, is beneficial for bloodletting. Because it extracts blood from illnesses which are under the throat and neck, from that which follows the chest, and the belly: and it is fitting for the bloodletter to be cautious with it, to beware, and be in fear of it, for an artery is beneath it. If therefore he errs and adds to the bloodletting puncture, he will cut that artery, and a flow of blood will occur. Therefore, it is necessary that the bloodletter should not puncture it with the bloodletting needle; rather, it should be cut with a scalpel.
If the basilic vein does not appear with a clear manifestation, then it is necessary to avoid it and switch to another, or seek some branch of it, or bloodlet at the forearm instead. For it is evident, and cut it with the bloodletting scalpel, as we have said.
If you wish to bloodlet from it, then it is necessary before constricting the arm, to touch the area until you recognize the pulse location. Then mark the spot with ink, afterwards bind the arm, and cut the vein with a concave incision using the scalpel, as we have said. And be careful that the incision does not fall away from the location of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the band, swelling at the place you marked with ink, then that swelling is the swelling of an artery: avoid it therefore.
If you see the blood at the bloodletting spurt like a boy's urine, and it is fine and red, then you know that it is from an artery. Then therefore hurry, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger. If therefore the blood is cut off (for it is often cut off), then bind the arm, and release it: and let the patient avoid moving it: and let it be under fear.
And let him not move it for several days until it is healed.
If however the blood is not cut off, and overpowers you: and your medicine is not present at your moment: then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For its extremities contract, and the blood is cut off.
Or take the bark of fig, and dry it: take one half, and bind it over the place of the vein's constriction properly, with a bandage and poultices until the next day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good. And if not: then treat it with that which precedes the memory from the place of powders cutting off the flow of blood: and the cutting off of its blood is not difficult in most conditions, because of the small place of the wound, and the possibility of binding from the arm.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the Fusca vein is that it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body: therefore, because it is composed of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalica, as we have said.
And it is fitting for the bloodletter to do so, that she be above fear from her bloodletting, for under it is a nerve. If therefore he adds to the bloodletting puncture and finds a nerve, stupor occurs in it, and its healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it is not healed thoroughly.
And this nerve often appears to the sense. If however it is hidden in some men, and is subtle, and does not show: then you must place your bloodletting where you bloodlet, a cut with Alnesil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If a vein is between two nerves, then find the vein along its length.
Regarding the cephalic vein. Bloodletting from the cephalic vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and contributes to illnesses of the eyes.
And it is proper in this vein, if you wish, to bloodlet it by piercing with an olive lancet, or with a myrtle lancet: for it is safer than all veins, for there is no artery or nerve beneath it.
However, it is fitting for you in bloodletting to avoid the armpit with the lancet and seek a softer spot: and it does not harm if it is not found on the first attempt, so that it may be repeated upon it several times with bloodletting.
However, it may become abscessed in some men when it is not bloodlet from on the first attempt, but that abscess does not harm it significantly.
On the usefulness of bloodletting, and the precautions to be observed in it. The quality of bloodletting, and its consequences depend on it, you must consider in its correction.
Therefore, the first thing you should know is that bloodletting is not administered except for the preservation of health, its persistence, and caution against the onset of illnesses.
And let bloodletting be performed on one of the three veins in the elbow, namely the Cephalic, and the Basilic, and the Cubital. And let bloodletting be performed at the beginning of spring on an empty stomach, in spring and summer: and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
And let bloodletting be performed on the first day, or on the third, after three hours have passed since daybreak.
Bloodletting which is administered in illnesses does not have a fixed time: but when convenience and necessity call for it, whether at night or day, and at any hour, and at any time.
And it should not be that children be bled until they have passed fourteen years. Nor should a pregnant woman be bled, except from the fourth month up to the seventh. Nor should seniors who have already passed sixty years be bled.
Therefore, when someone wishes to be bled for any reason, it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines before bloodletting with a mildclyster if there is much retained stool in them: so that the veins do not attract putrid and harmful superfluities from the intestines during bloodletting to the principal members.
The patient should not be bled when he is completely sated, that is, when he has nausea-inducing fullness; nor when he is drunk, nor as he recovers from drunkenness, until those conditions are removed from them. Nor the patient with dropsy.
And caution should be taken not to perform bloodletting again after colic, vomiting, diarrhea, sexual intercourse, labor, exercise, wakefulness, fasting, and anything that weakens the strength of the body or the organism.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before that, if the blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medicines: if it is possible for him to do that.
Then let him enter the bath, if nothing prohibits it: or let him engage in some exercise, so that the blood may be refined.
And place his bloodletting on the chest, around the third hour of the day, as we have said: and strive so that his chest may be evacuated of all harmful animal conditions that day, such as constriction, anger, and fear: and from all bodily conditions, such as labor, pain, and superfluous discharge, and things similar to these.
And let him have present at his seat things with which human custom has run due to their aromatics, odors, and spiciness and similar qualities according to the extent of possibility.
Then let the bloodletter sit on a pillow that is higher than the pillow for bloodletting: afterwards, let him extend his arm, and the bloodletter shall rub it twice or three times with his hand. Then tie the ligature with a strap, and wrap it twice.
And let the binding be moderate, for when the binding is unequal, whether by excess in tightness it impedes the flow of blood; or by looseness, it also impedes the flow of blood.
Then after the binding, it is necessary that the person to be bled friction his hands together near the vein, until the veins swell and become apparent to the sense.
Then the bloodletter should clean the vein with a little oil, in the old proper way.
Then he should place his left index finger on the vein at the spot where he wants to perform the bloodletting, slightly: so that the vein does not retreat, and the strike is not missed. For there are veins that you find like a fleeing string during bloodletting: and among them is one that is full of air: and when you place the lancet on it, it contracts under the lancet, and the bloodletter is deceived, and the lancet does not open the vein: and if it opens it, it is constricted: therefore, the bloodletter must be steady and careful in all these matters.
Then he should put down the lancet. If therefore the vein is opened with one attempt, then it is good. And if not, then repeat it with another attempt slightly below that place or above it quickly: provided the place does not become inflamed.
If it becomes abscessed or the patient swells, then leave him for a day or two days: and do not tighten the bandage. For it may attract the warm abscess. Let him not enter the bath.
Then let him repeat phlebotomy, if he wishes.
If the opening is small, or blood flows thinly: and you fear that the quantity of blood will not come out as you wish: then repeat phlebotomy at the same puncture straightly, and add a little to the procedure.
And do it with haste before the place becomes abscessed, for an abscessed place is in many people a minor operation.
If you see that it is already abscessed, then do not repeat phlebotomy on it at all, for nothing excuses it to you. And place something from the dregs of oil on it, for it alleviates the flow of blood. And it is better in this place than the oil itself, and than other ointments.
And similarly administer the dregs of oil in all your phlebotomies where you bleed veins to stop the flow of blood: and this is done with mithridate, alfaraque, and sagzenea, when one of them is placed on the spot.
For blood becomes thinner and dissolves when it is thick.
If a large abscess occurs at the site of phlebotomy, for it often happens, especially to one who is not bled except that once, or if the vein opening is small, then hurry and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated, on the spot: and bind it for an hour: for it dissolves.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has exited from that vein itself, with its completion, or from another vein.
If some blackness or greenness remains in the place after several days, it does not harm: and if you wish, put something of aloes, or dissolved myrrh on it: or something from the juice of menthastrum, that is, calamus or similar to it.
And many times swellings and eminences occur around the phlebotomy at Basilicae.
Place therefore your hand on it, then if you find softness at the place where you compress it, then that eminence is bad. Be careful, therefore, to put something on it from what we have said. For perhaps the blood of an artery may flow from it.
But make a poultice for it with something that has astringency, so that the area may harden. Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And it is necessary to withdraw blood from every person according to the measure of their strength. And what appears from the color dominating over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it turns red: and similarly if you see it thick: then let it flow until it becomes thin: and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for the one who is full, strong, and requires bloodletting once, to enlarge the vein incision, and the side should be bled: and in the one who is weak, it should be contrary to that.
And it is necessary to draw it from the veins, and that the opening be narrow: and better in bloodletting of a vein is a transverse cut, not a puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from blood flow and nerve cutting: and it is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting lengthwise and widthwise.
And for one who is accustomed to faint at bloodletting, it is necessary that they eat before bloodletting a little bread soaked in pomegranate juice: or secaniabin, if it is heated: and you should extract from them blood in three places, or four.
And if it is of a chilled complexion, then let them take before bloodletting bread soaked in honey syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, or in fragrant aromatic syrup.
If fainting occurs during bloodletting, and the cause is excessive loss of blood: then it is necessary that they drink water with meat, and a delicate fragrant syrup: and use aromatics with algalia, and anoint their chest with it: and use the other things we mentioned in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
Who wishes to bleed his arm and release his blood a second time: it is necessary for the one whose bloodletting is for substantial evacuation, and whose strength is weak, to release blood gradually according to the extent of his strength over consecutive days.
Whoever wants to bleed his arm again, and he is strong: then let him do it after seven or nine hours from his first bloodletting.
Whoever wants to draw blood from his body to the opposite part to which it declines: it must be bled on the second day or the third.
In whose body there is already much heated blood, and it is sharpened, and causes fever to occur: it is necessary that blood be let from him once, and a great quantity be drawn from him: and the incision should be enlarged until syncope occurs: after you have been preserving all the conditions of bloodletting: and to place your hand on his pulse at the course of the blood, so that death does not occur instead of syncope. For it often happens that the bloodletter is ignorant, and negligence occurs.
And it is not advisable when you want to bleed an arm a second time, and the vein's opening is already closed, and the blood's exit has become difficult, to press on it with violence, and to quickly extend it while bent. For that is very bad; rather, leave it until it is bled a second time.
Or remove with the sharpness of a lancet what has coagulated from the blood at the vein's opening, and place something dissolved salt in water on it. And place something from theriac alfaroch, or sagzenea on it, and apply it with gentle pressure until the blood flows out.
If however already a vein has become an abscess, then leave it alone, and do not cover it, until the abscess settles.
If the necessity provokes to release blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then either perform phlebotomy at that same location, or in the other arm in another vein.
The arm is phlebotomized at the location of the Fusa and Basilica veins, when they are not found and are hidden, because it is composed of them.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is such that the patient should insert his hand into warm water until the vein becomes red and appears clearly.
Then it should be tied above it with a bandage with slight constriction in the middle. Then phlebotomize it gradually transversely, not widthwise, nor lengthwise: and let the incision be wide, and let your phlebotomy where you phlebotomize be at the joint of the hand for a moment.
If the flow of blood is prevented, then again put the hand in warm water, and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your purpose.
If, however, you are in the summer days, then you are excused from putting the hand in warm water repeatedly. And indeed, the flow of blood in warm water is greatly utilized during the winter season.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins because there is no pulsating vein or nerve beneath it.
The phlebotomy of the right hand of Salveta is beneficial for illnesses of the liver.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is to bind the wrist with a bandage, or with your hand, after you introduce it into warm water, until the vein swells and is clearly demonstrated to the sense. Then puncture it transversely. And if you cut it entirely, it will not harm it in any way.
And be careful not to leave your hand with the phlebotomy needle. Beneath it, the nerves of the fingers are exposed without flesh.
Then return the hand to warm water, and let the blood flow into it. For if you do not return it to warm water, the blood will coagulate at the vein's opening and be prevented from flowing.
Therefore, when you have extracted the necessary amount of blood, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not congeal quickly.
And similarly, you should do the same with every tight branch.
The benefit of the phlebotomy of the left hand is that it is helpful for illnesses of the spleen: and similarly perform the phlebotomy of it as you did in the second equally.
The benefit of the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein is for illnesses that are in the lower part of the body, such as ailments of the uterus, retention of menses, diseases of the kidneys, and old sores of the thighs and legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of bloodletting is such that the sick person should insert his foot into warm water: and make friction upon it until the veins swell: and bind above the joint of the foot with a ligature. And the place of the veins is near the heel, appearing towards the big toe: and many branches branch out from it on the surface of the foot.
Therefore, bloodletting should be done in the larger branch of it, or near the heel at its convergence: for it is better and safer.
If you bloodlet from it on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves which are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And place your bloodletting instrument across the vein, as if you want to cut it: and let the bloodletter be Nesil.
If however the flow of blood is prevented, then soak his foot in warm water: and allow the blood to flow into it until it is evacuated.
If the bloodletter misses the vein on the first attempt, then repeat the bloodletting slightly higher up, for the area is safe, and you need not fear any harm from it when you are careful of the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly with the Saphena of the other foot equally.
The location of the Sciatic veins, as we have said, is near the heel on the outer side.
And the benefit of its bloodletting is for the pain of gout, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient should enter the bath and hurry: and bind his leg on the side of the ankle up to four fingers above the heel with a thin long thread: for it does not appear except for this reason.
When therefore it appears, then bloodlet from it according to whatever method is possible for you, either diagonally: and this is better, or cut it with an incision, or sever it with a cut. For its location is safer, and it is very hidden in most people.
For its location is safer, and it is very hidden in most people. If you do not find it and it does not appear at all to the senses: then bloodlet from one of its branches, and that is the one which appears on the back of the foot, towards the little toe: and be careful of the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you wish.
Then loosen the binding, and place skin over the site of bloodletting, and bind the area. For it heals quickly.
Regarding ventosation, and the quality of its use.
Ventouses are made from horns, and from metal, and from glass.
And ventosation is performed in two ways. With scarification and extraction of blood: the other is ventosation without scarification.
And this ventosation which is without scarification is performed in two ways. For it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And for windy conditions which are treated with scarification and bloodletting, there are fourteen places on the body. One of them is Ventosatio Alnocrati, and it is at the back of the head: and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck: and windy Alhagdahim, and they are two plates on both sides of the neck simultaneously: and windy under the chin, and it is below the jaw on the lower part of the mouth: and windy of the two spatulas: and windy Alachosos at the end of the tail: and windy of the two armpits, and they are in the middle of the two arms: and windy of the two thighs: and windy of the two kneecaps.
And Ventosatio indeed does not draw blood from you from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and because of this, strength does not diminish from them, as is the case with bloodletting. Nor should ventosatio be administered, whether with fire or without fire, in any diseases that arise from excess, until the whole body is purged.
If necessity provokes to Ventosation due to illness or habit, we administer it at any time at the beginning of the month, at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at whatever time it may be.
This is because there are people for whom when blood multiplies in them until they need its extraction through ventosation, they find heaviness and sodahan in their head.
And among them is one who finds swelling and redness on his face, his head, and his neck. And among them is one who finds itching on his face, and forehead, and darkness, and dullness in his eyes.
And among them is one who scrapes the place of his wind rash. And among them is one whose laughter multiplies. And among them is one who finds the taste of blood in his mouth: or the tongue swells, and he spits out blood. And among them is one whose sleep multiplies. And among them is one who sees in his sleep blood and redness, and the slain, and wounds, and things similar to these.
When therefore we see any of these things, and especially if it is in the middle third of the month: we then prescribe that a wind rash be induced, after two or three hours have passed.
The remedy for wind rash on the neck is: for it helps with heaviness in the head, and what flows to the eyes. But it should be done after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this wind rash is in place of cephalic bloodletting.
And it is not permissible for one of a cold temperament to use it, or for one who has catarrh. For it causes him great harm.
And for that reason, the elderly should not use it, and those who have cold diseases in their head should not use it either.
But he who becomes habitual to it, forgetfulness is generated upon him.
And for that reason, you should instruct the cupper to momentarily place his hand with the cupping vessel towards the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Cupping or Alkehel is in place of black bloodletting and general bloodletting, and for that reason it benefits shortness of breath, constriction of breathing, windpipe splitting, cough, and fullness.
And it is necessary to move the cupping vessel Alkehel momentarily because if it is placed lower, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
Cupping with alhagdahim, however, benefits accidental pains in the head, eye diseases, migraines, piercings, and pain in the roots of teeth: and it is in place of general bloodletting.
And you should instruct the cupper not to press his hand with scarification so as not to hit an artery and cause a flow of blood.
Cupping under the chin benefits alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth: and it takes the place of bloodletting from the points between the two lips.
Cupping of the spatulae benefits alchafacham, which occurs from obstruction and heat.
Indeed blowing on the inner parts of two flasks provides the same benefit as bloodletting from three veins, Basilica, Fusca, and Cephalica: for it draws blood from all those tiny veins which are in the flesh: and these tiny veins draw from other veins thicker than themselves, until the drawing reaches the three veins.
And you must instruct the Ventosator not to proceed too much in scarification: for the place is devoid of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
The ventosa which is applied over alchausos provides relief to hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
And you must instruct the Ventosator to use a large ventosa, and let it be of air: for the place requires strong suction, and perhaps delicate Ventosae may break: and it should be scarified with a large scarification.
Ventosae of the legs provide clear reduction: for they draw blood from the entire body, and alleviate old pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder: they provoke menstruation, and help bothor and ademenul: and serve in place of bloodletting from two saphenous veins and alhorcobeni.
However, they greatly weaken the body and cause syncope to occur in many people.
And the benefit of the Ventosae of alhorcobeni is similar to the benefit of the Ventosae of the two legs.
The quality of the placement of Ventosae is to first place the ventosa empty and draw with moderate suction: and do not prolong the placement of the Ventosae, but place them quickly and remove them quickly, so that the humors come to the place with equal arrival: and do not cease to repeat and continue this until you see the place already redden and swell, and the redness of blood appear: then scarify, and repeat the suction gradually. Then consider in the arrangement of the bodies.
For he who is of tender flesh and sparse pores, you should scarify him once, not more: so that the place does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the bloodletter to enlarge the scarification and make it slightly deep: and to moderate the suction in ease, speed, and gentle motion.
If there is thickness in the blood, then you should scarify him twice. In the first phase, the way is opened for the refinement of blood and its aqueous quality: and in the second phase, for the thorough extraction of thick blood.
If the blood is very feculent, then let there be a third scarification: so as to achieve the ultimate.
And finally, when we want to extract blood gradually or for a short while, one scarification is sufficient for us. If we want to extract much blood, we scarify with multiple scarifications.
And if we measure that the blood is thick: then it should be scarified with deep incisions: and the limit in scarification is the depth of the skin.
What should be administered from oils during the placement of bloodletting, and what the person undergoing bloodletting should beware of.
For him whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are tight, the areas for bloodletting should be anointed with oils that are opening, soothing, and resolving: if it is in the summer season, such as almond oil, or violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil from pumpkin seeds.
And if it is in winter time, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or saffron: and things similar to these.
And if the excess is thick and cold: then let the oil be of rue, or oil of balsamite, or oil of alkanet, or oil of dill: and things similar to these.
And if the windiness is of large pores, tender flesh: then it is necessary to prohibit oil, and these areas should be washed after windiness with rose water, or with cold water, or with water of solatri, or with water of cucumber, or with water of portulaca: and things similar to these.
He whose blood is of much moisture, should wash the windiness with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and sumac: and things similar to these.
Whose excesses are thick, should wash his windiness with old wine, or with water of samsuci, or decoction of dill, or chamomile: and things similar to these.
And it is necessary to be cautious about windiness in a bath, or near the bath; rather, it should be administered an hour or two hours after exiting the bath.
And it is not advisable for someone to sleep after windiness.
What is it that should regulate windiness or bloodletting before windiness.
And after that, you should first consider: then if the windy or bloodlet person is choleric, and sharpness and inflammation overcome his blood: then they should take cooling things, such as pomegranate syrup: and also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and sikanjabin, and rue: and things similar to these.
And place his foods chickens, and sheep meats, and prepared foods with herbs: and things similar to these.
And for one whose complexion is cold, he should take in drink syrup of honey, or of almaua, or alsecaniabin made from seeds: and he should take fragrant wine that is between old and new: and he should be instructed to use moderation in food. And place his food chickens, and canebir: and sparrows, that is, small birds: and pigeons should be seasoned with issiad.
And it should be that the drink on the day of bloodletting and venesection is more than food: and it should be that in some men's drinks there is given during certain hours tyriaca alfaroch, or medicine of musk, that is, muscata, or alesselithe before bloodletting: and before phlebotomy, or after: so that the principal members are strengthened, and the blood is refined. And they should not take it in heated drink.
Regarding Windiness without Scarification. Windiness without scarification, however, is Windiness that is placed upon the liver, and spleen, and gout, and upon the stomach, navel, and areas of the kidneys, and the anus: because these members do not tolerate scarification upon them.
And they are not sought for anything else except the transmission of blood from one member to another: such as placing Windiness upon the breasts in the illness of nasal bleeding. And we use them to resolve cold invisible swelling in the limb: just as we place swollen on the belly, and navel. For it rarefies the limb, and heats it, and removes pain because it resolves that swelling.
It is also placed on the kidneys when obstruction or stone occurs in them. For by the power of its attraction, it may open obstruction or remove the stone from its place.
And it similarly acts when placed on the liver and spleen for swelling to be treated in both of them.
And these swellings are treated empty with only incision. And sometimes they are treated with fire.
And sometimes they are used full of warm water in pleurisy ailments: and this is done by filling the cup with hot water alone, or water in which herbs suitable for the condition have been boiled.
The method of applying the cupping vessel with fire.
Let the diameter of its opening be two fingers wide, as we have formed it: and let its depth be half a palm: and let there be a small hole on its side at about the middle, according to the size through which a needle can enter: it should be made of copper or citrine, with thick, smooth, equal, clean edges: so that it does not harm the limb when placed upon it: and let there be a transverse rod of copper or iron in its center where the candle with fire is placed.
And now it is made very large and inflated, larger than we mentioned, and slightly smaller than that, according to the illnesses and age of the one who uses it.
For the bellows of children and those who are thin are different from the bellows of men and those with thick bodies.
The quality of placing this bellows with fire on the limb is to light a strip of linen with fire properly, or a small candle from wax: and place it in the middle of the crossbar which is in the middle of the bellows: so that the fire is lit around the lower part of the bellows, so that the body of the sick person is not burned.
Then it is placed on the limb: and a finger should be over the hole that I mentioned, until when we hold the bellows: while we need to, remove the finger, and vapor will escape through that hole, and the bellows will immediately release.
Then light the linen strip according to its manner, and repeat it, if you need to do so.
In the bellows which is used for the illness of pleurisy with water, there is no crossbar, nor a hole: and it is not used except that it is filled with water and placed on the limb only.
And this is its form.
And this bellows, the larger it is, so that it can hold much water, is better.
Concerning the
Leeches are not administered to many parts, except those members where the placement of cups is not possible due to their small size, such as the lip, and gum, and similar areas. Or on parts denuded of flesh, such as the finger, and nose, and similar areas.
And the quality of using them is: to use leeches that are from sweet waters, clean from putrefactions.
Then let them be released day and night in sweet water until they are hungry, and nothing remains in their stomachs. Then the body should be purged first with bloodletting and with cupping. Then cleanse the patient's limb until it reddens. Then place them on it.
Therefore, when they are filled and fall off, and it is possible to apply suction with a cupping vessel at the same location, then this is ultimately more beneficial: and if not, then cleanse the area with vinegar. Then with plenty of water, it should be rubbed and squeezed.
If the flow of blood continues after the leeches fall off and it seeps out, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the seeping stops.
If the blood flows excessively, then sprinkle powdered cumin or gallnuts, or similar astringents on it until the bleeding stops.
Or let halves of peeled beans be placed on the site: and leave them until the beans adhere in place, for the blood is congealed.
And it is necessary if the repetition of bloodletting is required, when possible, to change the places.
If bloodletting is prohibited due to suspense, then the area should be cleaned with fresh blood. Or pierce with a needle in the places until some blood comes out. Then they should be applied, for they adhere immediately when they sense some blood.
When you want them to fall off, sprinkle something on them from ground aloe, or salt, or ash: and they will fall off immediately.
This Chapter is also often necessary in the art of Medicine, and it is the restoration of fractured and dislocated bones.
Know, O Sons, that foolish doctors and the common folk boast about this Chapter, and those who have never inspected an ancient book or read a letter from it.
And for this reason, this method is deprived from the sciences in our land. And I did not comply with that good at all, and I have not attained from it what I have attained unless due to the length of reading ancient books, and studying their understanding, until I extracted knowledge of it from them.
Then I adhered to experience and study throughout my life.
And now I have described to you from that in this Chapter all that my knowledge contains: and beyond what passed my experience, after I shortened it for you, and freed it from the burden of lengthiness, and abbreviated it to the point of abbreviation, and showed it to the extent of deviation: and I formed in it many forms of instruments used in it, as it is with the addition of deviation, just as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
We must say in the prologue of this Chapter the summaries of the discourse and the chapters, to whose understanding the artisan is first compelled to stand upon their truth: namely, so that you and those who are quick may know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say, therefore, that when a fracture, or dislocation, or torsion, or fall happens to someone, then you must first hasten to bleed him and loosen him, or both at the same time: unless something prohibits it, such as weakness of strength; or he to whom one of these things happened is a child or an infirm old man; or it is a time of extreme heat or severe cold.
Then he should be content with his food, cold vegetables, and meats of birds, and goats: and forbid wine, and fatty meats, and to fill up with foods and all food which fills the veins with blood. Until when you are secure from a warm abscess, and you do not fear the discharge of matter to the limb: then the sick person should return to his initial regimen with which he was accustomed.
When therefore the broken bone begins to heal, then it is necessary that the sick person be fed nutrient foods with much, thick, heavy nourishment, in which there is viscosity: such as food made from cooked wheat with water, and roots, and heads, and feet, and bellies of cows, and eggs, and fresh fish: and thick wine, and similar things. With this regimen, the fracture is healed more quickly and better.
And you should know that broken bones, when they are in men who are in their early old age, and the infirm, cannot be joined and consolidated according to their nature always, because of the dryness of their limbs: and they consolidate and join those which are at the end of softening, like the bones of small children.
However, nature connects over the broken bone from all sides something similar to glue, in which there is thickness, by which it adheres and binds it, until they are glued together, and bound together, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was at first, until nothing prohibits it from its functions: and for this reason it is necessary that you provide the sick person's nourishment with foods in which there is heaviness, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
And you shall know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of limbs: for the fracture of the leg is different from the fracture of the skull bone: and the fracture of the chest bone is different from the fracture of the back bone: and similarly all other limbs exist distinct from each other: and I come with a recollection of every type of fracture exposed in its Chapter distinguished from another. And the types of fractures of the bone also differ among themselves.
For its fracture is arched, besides which shards may occur in it. And sometimes its fracture is along the length of the bone: and its fractures are splintered, that is, shards, and projections proceeding, as they are in a reed, when it is cut with a knife for writing. And not proceeding: and there is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head: and there is a fracture, a small fissure.
And every type has its own method or instrument for its restoration, according to which its recollection will come, distinguished in their respective places.
And by which the fracture of the bone is recognized is its deformity and its prominence: and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you compress it with your hand.
When therefore there is no apparent deformity in the place, nor sound at your touch when you touch the bone with movement, nor does the patient find great pain: then there is no fracture there, but it is possible that there is a deformity or a small fissure: therefore it is not necessary to move it with hand and compression at all, but place upon it medicines of which its recollection comes, after the moment that befits the place: then bind with a fine bandage.
And you should know that when the site is curved and split into two, besides the infections that may occur in it, nevertheless all parts are removed from their companion: then it is necessary for you to begin at your appointed time for its correction, evening out itself before a warm abscess occurs.
And if a warm abscess occurs in it, then leave it for several days until the abscess rests. Then level it according to whichever method can be done based on its tenderness and nature.
And you should know that the restoration and leveling of it is easier than that of bone, in which infections occur.
Then treat it according to how the memory of its treatment comes to you.
And if there are infections in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this fractured limb from both parts, if it is a hand or foot: or with your hand if the limb is small: or with two ropes, or with one rope and your hand.
And let your position be such that you place the limb on an equal site according to its natural shape until the parts of the fractured limb are extended: then strive to return those additions with all ingenuity and in whatever way you can to their places: and beware according to your strength, lest excessive pain or injury occur through your operation: and strive according to your strength to apply one of the two bones with its companion in the best forms.
And it is necessary at that time for you to attempt and touch it with your hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it, and equalize it according to the extent of your skill.
And beware strong extension and forceful compression, as many foolish ones do. For they often cause a hot abscess or contraction in the limb through their operation: as we have already seen many times from their procedures.
Then apply after equalization, and proper operation, and constriction of that limb, and rest, and tranquility: and advise the patient about it. And make him beware not to move it during his waking hours, and in his sleep regarding his turning, and stirring, and in his excretion, and all his movements with his utmost strength. And let him beware that the position of the limb is not one that causes pain. Which means that when he feels pain or injury in the positioning of the limb: then it is necessary to change it to another position where he does not feel pain.
And beware that its position is equal and straight so that no distortion occurs in the limb when it is restored.
And the nature of the constriction of the fractured limb is as I narrate.
Know that fractured limbs differ in their smallness, and their magnitude, and their form.
Therefore, those among them that are small, such as the arm, and the finger, and the toe, and similar to them, then it is necessary that there be a wrapping of a soft, fine cloth. Which of them are thick, like the thigh and leg, must have a wide, hard wrapping.
For the wide bandage connects the large limb and tightens it evenly from all sides so that no spot enters it.
Then begin after your evacuation to apply an appropriate liniment to that place, on soft tow over the site of the fracture. Then begin to wrap the bandage over the site of the fracture with three or four layers, according to what the limb deserves: and hold your hand firmly with the bandage.
Then proceed with it to the upper part from the site of the fracture, and hold less tightly than your previous tightness with which you tightened the fractured site. Then move away with the wrapping from the site of the fracture gradually, and loosen the tightness little by little until you reach a large part from the healthy area.
Then take another strip and wrap it again over the fractured area with layers. Then proceed with the wrapping to the lower part from the fracture. And let your work be in the tightness of the wrapping and its loosening, according to what we said in the first upper wrapping.
Then place between the wrappings with soft tow or cloth, with which the bent part of the fracture is aligned, if there is a bend: and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then wrap another strip over it. Then place the properly made splints over these wraps immediately, if there is no swelling or hot abscess in the area.
If there is swelling or an abscess, then place on it something that will sit on the abscess and reduce the swelling; and leave it for several days. Then tighten the splints over it.
And the splints should be made from the halves of a wide, shaved, and wisely formed cane, or they should be made from the wood used for sieves, which is made from pine, or geraid, that is, palm branches, or calingi: and the width of each splint, according to this form, should have the same shape.
However, it is necessary that the splint which is placed over the traction be thicker and wider than the other splints: and the length of the splint should be according to what is suitable for the member in size and smallness.
Then bind over the splints with another strip according to the same tightness as the first. Then bind it with threads properly, according to what we have said about tightness: and it is that your binding over the site of the fracture should be tighter: and the further away from the fracture, the looser the binding should be.
And it is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and they should be made of soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the work of foolish ones who use twisted linen cords, it is a great mistake: for the binding becomes too tight with them beyond what is suitable.
And thin threads again do not suit: because you do not achieve with them what you want through tension.
And it should not be less than a finger's width between the beam and the beam.
If the patient is injured by the ends of the beams after they are tightened at healthy sites: then place under them soft tow or carded wool until nothing is harmed from that.
When there is a fracture with a wound, and a rupture occurs in the skin, I will come to it with its description in the second chapter due to its particularity.
And you should know that not every fractured limb should be bound with beams on the first day. This is because when the limb is large, you should not place beams on it until after five days, or seven, or more, according to your safety from the risk of a hot abscess.
And this is the method of plasters with which the ancients restored fractures and dislocations.
 Method of a shortened common plaster that restores fractures, suitable for most complexions, especially women and children: because it is such that neither heat nor cold overcomes it.
And it is done by taking the millstone dust, which is the flour residue that hangs on the walls of the mill near the motion of the millstone: and prepare it as it is, except that you sieve it with egg white: and set its consistency not too thick nor too thin. Then use it.
Method of another plaster for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion. Take almess, and laudanum, and acacia, and enula, and mugwort: and the juice of all  X, myrrh, and aloes both  V, and alethil  XX, pound them all, sift them, and mix them with alethil water: or with egg white, if the constitution of the patient is heated. Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, restores broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Method of another plaster which also benefits fractures and torsions. Take mugwort, and mess, and white hollyhock, of all  X, myrrh, and aloes both  V, acacia  VI, Armenian bole  XX, pound them all with thorough grinding, sift them, and prepare them with water or egg white: and administer them.
Method of a plaster for joints and bones separated from their places: and alleviates pain occurring in them, and bone cuts, and fractures. Take suet wool, and soak it in vinegar and boiled oil: and place it on the area.
And in this plaster there is no power of restoration, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess: and it properly relieves pain.
The method of the plaster which restores the broken bone. Take the leaves of the fig of the deaf, and the leaves of the wild poppy: and grind all, and make a plaster from both.
The method of the shortened plaster, applied for the restoration of a fractured bone: and when you want the dissolution of the remaining abscess. Take the root of althea, and chamomile, and flowers of violet, and flour of the herb, of all one part each: grind all, and prepare with wine, if the limb is not heated.
If it is heated, then prepare it with water of humid coriander, or with water, and use it.
The method of another stronger plaster for dissolution, than this first one, when a hard abscess occurs at the restoration of the limb. Take the root of althea, and seeds of flax, and pomegranate flowers, and sweet clover, and mallow, and flowers of violet, and chamomile, of all one part each: grind all, and prepare with willow water, or with sweet water, or with wine. Use all of this according to the heat of the limb, and the cooling thereof.
Hippocrates, however, did not say in his book that anything should be placed on a fractured limb during its restoration, except for a plaster made of wax and oil: nothing else: and he described it to be a balance between thickness and fineness.
But Galen thought that over the fractured limb during its restoration there should be placed things which have a drying heat, such as myrrh, and aloes, and frankincense, and similar to them of those we have mentioned.
Method of the plaster that helps with the injury and pain. Take myrrh, and chickpeas, and human hair cut into pieces, or bird feathers, and coltsfoot, and salt in equal parts: they are to be ground, sifted, and prepared: and a plaster is to be made from it.
The amount according to which the bandage should remain, and then be removed, is such that you should consider whether there is no pain, nor itching, nor movement of the fractured bone from its place: then do not remove it for many days. If there occurs in the place a violent itching, or disturbing pain, or swelling: then hurry and remove it immediately, and take off the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth, or a soft sea sponge, wet: and submerge it in warm water, and wash the area with it until the itching subsides, and the pain calms.
If there occurs in the place a violent itching, or disturbing pain, or swelling: then hurry and remove it immediately, and take off the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth, or a soft sea sponge, wet: and submerge it in warm water, and wash the area with it until the itching subsides, and the pain calms. Then let the limb rest for one hour. Then place wool soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil, on it: and bind it there for one night, until you are sure there is no hot abscess, and the swelling of the limb subsides, and its pain is removed.
Then apply it to a fine binding, and a small plaster: and do not bind it tightly with your first bandage, and keep it fine until it heals.
If you see that the abscess, and redness, and pain, and swelling, and all symptoms are now completely removed, and you need a plaster and binding, then treat it again as you did at first equally.
If nothing of what we have mentioned has occurred to the limb, then do not wash it unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is left for twenty days, do everything according to how the limb appears to you from its washing, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the coagulation of flesh approximates over it: then also add more to the binding than your whole first binding: and also increase the food of the patient according to his previous recollection.
If you see the place of the fracture already drying out and becoming thinner than it should be: then know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. So wash it with warm water every time you clean it, and do this for all three days, and lighten the binding slightly.
Through this operation, nourishment flows to the limb, and it heals quickly.
However, what foolish restorers do with a fractured limb by another method when it is not restored at first as it should be, and is restored crookedly, is an error from their operation, and a great fear: and if it were right, the ancients would have said so in their books and acted upon it.
And I have not seen any trace of them doing that at all, and it is better that it not be done.
On the treatment of an accident to the head.
The types of fractures are diverse, and its forms are many: and its causes are distinct.
For there is a fracture caused by a blow with a sword: and the blow removes the bone entirely until it reaches the saphac, which is under the bone, just as an axe affects wood: and because of this, this type of fracture is called Axial.
Or the sword cuts through part of the bone, and cuts its surface, and the cut does not penetrate to the end of it: and this type of fracture is called Kalan, that is, Absolute Elevation.
And it is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture which is a grinding or wearing down: and its cause is a blow with a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also penetrating, which approaches the membrane that is under the bone: or it is on the surface of the bone: and it is a wound of these two fractures, either small or large.
And there is a fracture that is hidden in the bone like a hair's subtlety: and it is a small crack, and because of this, this type of fracture is called Capillary.
And among them is a fracture that occurs from a fall or a blow with a stone, or similar things, which cause the bone plate to intrude inward, and a concavity is formed: like what happens to copper basins when they are struck and part of them indents inward.
And that happens most especially in the heads of moist bones, as are the heads of children.
And separate attempts are made for all these kinds of fractures, and I will come with a recollection of the whole of that in its proper place.
And we know all these kinds of fractures by examining them, and investigating them with probes, and removing the corrupted flesh that is on them.
The capillary kind is recognized by this, that it is discovered on the bone, and cleaned, and anointed over it with encaustic: for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, first consider the symptoms of the patient: then if you see from the symptoms that it clearly indicates fear, such as vomiting of cholera, and stiffness, and loss of consciousness, and cessation of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and protrusion of the eyes, and redness of them, and similar ones among the symptoms in most conditions, doubtless it is not cured: and if you see symptoms that do not frighten you, and hope for recovery: then begin his treatment.
Which means, if a wounded person comes to you right after being wounded: and it is during the winter months, then it is necessary that you focus on the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all conditions.
And if it is during the summer months, then it is necessary that you hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what is under the bone from the membrane becomes corrupted, and those symptoms we have mentioned occur.
If the fracture of the bone has already reached the membrane touching the brain, and it is with fragments, and with traction: then it is necessary that you cut away the shattered and worn part, according to what I tell you.
And it is as though you shave the head of the wounded: and expose over the bone in whatever way possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light over the injury.
If it happens that during the exposure of the bone there is a flow of blood or a warm abscess: then apply what is necessary to it. And it is as though you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil: and make the wound cease, until the abscess settles, and you are secure from the flow of blood. Then begin in the treatment of the bone, and its removal.
And this is done according to one of two methods.
One method is to cut the bone with an instrument of sharp edge: and this is its form.
Then apply another cutter after the narrower one for a moment: and this is its form.
Then apply yet another cutter wider than the second one.
And the second method is to have a number of different cutters with you: some of which are wider than others, and some of which are shorter than others: and let them be sharp at their ends, and let them be made of iron or steel: and use them easily in striking over the bone, so that it does not shake the head and harm it.
If the bone is strong, hard: then you must pierce around it before you administer the cutting with drills which are called non-penetrating drills: and they are not so named unless because they do not pass through the boundary of the fleshy bone to that which is behind it: therefore, the drill has a round end above that which is under its sharp head, similar to a margin, and a small circle prevents sinking and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting for you to take from these drills a great number, each of which suits the thickness of the bone, until you have a drill suitable for every skull: whose sharp end's length and brevity should be according to the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three species of drills, or trephines.
The quality of piercing around the fractured bone is: to place the drill on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then change the drill to another place, and place it so that there is the thickness of a rod or about that between every hole.
Then cut with the knives what is between every hole in the bone: and make it finer than you can on that from the end of lightness, as we said, until you root out the bone, either by hand or with some other of the instruments you have prepared for this: such as tweezers, and delicate chisels.
And you must be cautious with all care that the drill or the knife does not touch anything from the sinew.
When therefore you circle around the hole by piercing and it is separated from the siphac, if it is continuous with it, and you extract it, you must scrape and level the end of what remains in the bone with another similar cutting instrument. However, it must be thinner and finer than other cutting instruments.
If any part of the small bones remains and is troublesome, then remove it easily with the instrument you have. Then care for the wound after that with licinium and the ointments we have mentioned.
And another method of the operation is easy, entirely free from fear: which Galen mentioned and praised highly: and this is his saying. It is necessary for you first to begin uncovering the part of the bone where the fracture is more severe and evident: until when you have uncovered that part, and placed under it the end of this lens-shaped cutting instrument, which has this form.
And the lens-shaped part, being blunt, does not cut anything: and the sharp edge of it running along the two sides in length, as you see: so that the lens-shaped part is placed against the siphac, with its sharp face cutting into the bone.
Then strike on the cutting instrument from one side with a small mallet until you cut through the entire bone easily, as it turns: and you shall be secure about the flap, that no accident happens to it which you fear entirely.
And if the medic were not more foolish and ignorant than others, nor asleep, then if anything of the flap remained attached to the bone in some places, he would cut it away from the bone with the end of the lens-shaped cutting instrument, and free it easily. For it is freed from it without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the panniculus, and what is severed from the bone is its surface, and roughnesses and subtle thorns remain in it: then you must rasp that roughness and root out those thorns with delicate rasps of which you have prepared a number of various sizes, so that you may be able to administer the most suitable and correct ones of them according to what the operation leads you to, and the bone itself, and its shape. And you must administer according to your judgment, with which of the rasps you first rasp the bone, wider with those rasps. Then use the finer one after it.
And you must administer according to your judgment, with which of the rasps you first rasp the bone, wider with those rasps. Then use the finer one after it. And do not cease to do that continuously until you reach the point of administering the finest and most subtle of them all.
In each of the other small capillary fissures and subtle fractures, you must administer care according to what leads to its correction.
And it is a matter that is not hidden from anyone who has any interest in this art, and stands on what we have written and shown in great fractures.
If the panniculus detected is retained when you rasp the bone: then you must take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another piece of cloth, doubled or tripled, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth: and make it as light as you can on top of it so that it is not too heavy.
Then apply over the broad ligament; and do not tighten it except to the extent that it holds the wound only: and leave it with this care for one day or two days, until you are secure from a warm abscess. Then remove it, and apply after it medicines with which there is excessive dryness: such as lily roots, and flour of the herb, and frankincense powder, and aristolochia, and similar to them: and it is that you make from these medicines a powder, which is sprinkled over the wound when they are dry.
And universally apply to it all medicine whose property is to cleanse and not to irritate. And beware according to your ability, that the wound in your care be clear: neither let there be in it ointment dirtiness, nor filth.
And beware according to your ability, that the wound in your care be clear: neither let there be in it ointment dirtiness, nor filth. And do not allow pus to accumulate in it at all: for when pus accumulates on the brain covering, it corrupts and putrefies it, and great harm befalls the patient thereafter: and it often happens in baldness of the head, when the bone is cleansed from it, especially when its care is neglected, blackening appears on its surface.
Therefore, consider then, if the patient experiences the conditions we have mentioned, you shall know that it is certainly perilous.
And if blackening does not occur except from the medicine that is applied to it, and it is in the power of that medicine to cause that blackening: then you must take one part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and line the cloth with them. Then place him on a shiffin: afterwards care for him with suitable treatments until he is healed.
On the restoration of the nose when fractured.
You should know that only the two upper parts of the nose, or one of them, can be fractured; because there are two bones in these areas. Since the lower part is made of cartilage, it does not fracture but may suffer abrasion, distortion, and flattening.
If one of the two parts is fractured, then you should insert a small finger into the nostril and align the fracture with your index finger and thumb from the outside until the nose returns to its natural form: this should be done skillfully and easily. And beware that your operation does not cause pain to the patient.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be aligned using the tip of a slender probe.
If the fracture is in both parts, then do the same: and hurry with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day when the inflammation has subsided.
Then insert a strip of linen cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part: or insert two strips if the fracture is in both parts: and let the strip be thick enough to fill the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers said that licinia should be infused in butter, and changed every day. That indeed does not seem right to me; rather, it is necessary that licinium be infused in the white of an egg, mixed with millstone powder. Then apply the licinium until the bone is set and the cartilage hardens.
And sometimes a goose feather is inserted into the nose instead of licinium, after it is wrapped with a soft cloth: and it happens that it holds the nasal fracture more strongly, and does not prevent the patient from breathing.
And this thing is not necessary. If you wish, do that: and if you wish, use licinia.
If it happens that the nose is affected again while you are treating a warm abscess, apply plasters to the nose with cerote, or with suet infused in rose oil, or a little of dyaquilon.
If, however, a warm abscess does not occur, then it is necessary to apply plasters made with sesame flour and incense powder mixed with the white of an egg. Then place a soft cloth over it, and do not bind the nose with anything at all.
If the bones of the nose are fractured slightly or crushed, then it is necessary to cut over them and extract them with instruments that are suitable for them. Then sew the incision, and treat it with what promotes fleshing and strengthening, using appropriate plasters or ointments.
If a wound occurs between the nose, then it is necessary to treat it with lint: and administer a lead tube until it heals.
On the restoration of the lower jaw when it is fractured.
When the lower jaw is fractured and the fracture is not with a wound: then look if the fracture is on the outer side only, and it is not broken into two, and it curves inward: then its diagnosis is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert the index finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient: similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the index finger of the right hand: and push with it the prominence of the fracture from inside with ease to the outside with your other hand from the inner part of the bone properly, and with it equalize it.
If the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then it is necessary to apply traction from both sides, according to straightness: until its equalization is possible.
If, however, the teeth have already been loosened or broken: then bind those that you hope will remain with gold thread, or silver thread, or silk. Then place wax over the fractured jaw. Then place a doubled cloth over it, and put a properly made large splint over the cloth: or a piece of sole leather equal in length to the jaw.
Then bind it from above according to how its bandage is prepared for you and apply it suitably until it is not destroyed: and instruct the sick person to be calm and at rest: and give his food mild drinks.
If however you think that something has already changed in its appearance to some extent: then hurry and remove it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from it, and make a poultice of mill dust with egg white, or with sesame flour, after you have removed the wax: and place soft wool over the poultice.
While therefore the poultice remains attached to it and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it alone, do not remove it until it heals: or bind the fracture. For this fracture is often bound for three weeks.
If during this time a warm abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times for its reduction, until the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, take note. For if a fragment is already separated from the bone or from the socket: then be meticulous in this, to remove those fragments from the socket with what is suitable for you among the instruments for their removal.
If however the wound opening is narrow, then enlarge it with a lancet according to the amount necessary for you.
Then when you have removed those from the socket and nothing remains of them, sew the wound opening if it is large: and if not, apply a poultice suitable for it to promote fleshing until it heals.
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
The collarbone is most often fractured on the front side near the shoulder, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.
For it is either broken and separated into two parts, besides which contusions may occur: and it is easier to restore it.
Or it is such that contusions occur in the bone: and it is more difficult to restore.
Or it is such that there is a fracture with a wound.
And the procedure when the fracture is without a wound is to have two assistants present, so that one of them holds the support following the broken collarbone, and the other extends the neck towards the side.
Then equalize the fracture with your fingers until its form is as it should be: and there should not be any prominence or concavity in it.
If you need more extension, then it is necessary to place a sphere of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit. The size should be according to your requirement. Extend and elevate the collarbone, and compress the sphere with your hand until you equalize the fracture as needed.
If you cannot pull the end of the collarbone outward because it has sunk deeply, then the patient must lie down on their back. Place a moderately sized pillow under their shoulder and have an assistant press the shoulder downward until the sunken part of the collarbone is raised upward. Then correct and equalize the fracture with your fingers.
If however you feel a splinter from the collarbone and it moves: then it is necessary to cut over it and remove the splinter with ease.
If however it is retained in the bone, then skill is needed in cutting it with one of the files which you have prepared for this, after you place under the collarbone the instrument that keeps sifach: and it is an instrument made of wood or iron. And this is its form.
It resembles a spoon that does not have a concavity.
And its width should be according to what you need from the size of the bone, and its smallness. Its length should also be according to what is possible for you in the operation.
And it should have two ends, as you see: and one end should be wide, and the other narrow.
If however the disruption of the wound which you made when you extracted the bone splinter is wide, and it is threatened by a warm abscess: then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear a warm abscess: then fill the wound with cloths and lint according to the amount of the wound's tear.
If a warm abscess should occur, then soak a cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine, and place it on top of it.
A narrowing of the bone when it is without a wound and without a cut is such that you place on the bone a poultice made from mill flour with egg white. And place a soft tow on it. Then place the ball under his scrotum, if you need that. Then take the himematem, that is, the roll which the Saracens use, which should be very long: and its width should be one palm, or about that. Then place a doubled poultice on the tow and plaster. Then take a strip from a thin board, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then wrap it in a cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the strip in the place of the himematem that falls over the fracture and area. Then place the himematem over the fracture as it is rolled, and wrap it around his neck, and under his healthy scrotum, and under his injured scrotum: and adjust it over all parts, and in a way that you see the binding holds the fracture tightly: and this is what should not be hidden from you, and everything should be such that the strip does not move off the broken area. And for this reason, it is necessary to look after the patient every day. Whenever the bandage softens and you see that the strip can now be removed: then adjust it, and tighten the bandage.
Then place the patient's scrotum on his back, and put a small pillow under his scrotum at night, so that his support is lifted from his side with it. The fracture of the fork should be raised by elevating the shoulder.
Either bind his arm to his neck: and do not loosen the bandage, unless an accident occurs from itching or from a swelling, until twelve days have passed.
Then renew the poultice, if you see that it is needed. And add to the binding, and leave it until it is restored and healed.
And the fracture of the fork is bound and strengthened as much as possible within twenty-eight days: and sometimes it happens in some men in a shorter time.
Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the spatula.
The spatula is rarely fractured, and if it is, it occurs at its wide part: and only the edges of it are broken.
When therefore that part is fractured, and it is broken in the middle of it, and it is not recognized except by touch: then according to the shape of the fracture attempt its preparation. And restore it to its natural shape in any way that is possible for you.
Then apply flour dust mixed with egg white to the area, and place a soft cloth over it, and cover with a poultice made of doubled cloth. Then place a wide strip from a thin board over it according to the size of the entire spatula, or slightly larger than it.
If however there is a concavity at some place of the Spatula, then equalize that concavity with soft tow, until the astella descends according to equality.
Then bind over it with linen bandages, with appropriate constriction, and the firmness of the astella, until it is not moved from its place.
And consider the bandage every day. Whenever the bandage is softened, tighten it, and equalize the astella if it moves from its place: and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
And the Spatula is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When this number is completed, then loosen the bandage: and you will be in safety. For it is made of bones whose union is not feared, nor their separation.
If a fragment protrudes from the bone and pierces beneath the skin: then cut over it, and remove it. And do as we have said in the case of a clavicle fracture from the reduction of a hot abscess, if anything happens from it.
On the restoration of a fractured rib.
The chest is sometimes fractured in the middle of it, and this rarely occurs. Its extremities are frequently fractured and crushed from its accidents.
When its middle is fractured, which inclines towards the lower parts, and there occurs severe pain to it, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps he vomits blood, and a concavity is declared in the broken bone, and it is not hidden from the sense, Its restoration is that the patient should lie supine on his back: and place between his spatulas a pillow.
Then press his shoulders, and bring the ribs together from both sides or sides with your hands: and adjust in its alignment, in every way that it is possible and appropriate, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
Then place a poultice and lint on it, and put an oblong piece of thin board from willow or chalking, or those similar in lightness over it after you wrap it in cloth. Then adjust in binding it over the fractured bone, so that it does not move: and go with the bandage around to the back several times, and tie it with a proper knot.
Then examine the bandage at all times, and whenever it loosens, tighten it: and if the necessity of it provokes its removal due to itching, or corrosion which occurs in the area, or pain, or swelling: then hurry and remove it, and take off the poultice, and correct what happens with its method of cure.
Then apply the poultice again if you see it is necessary: and attach it with a knot until it heals.
On the restoration of ribs when they are fractured.
Know that the fracture of the ribs does not occur except in the thick parts following the back, and from their extremities on the front side. And attrition does not occur to them unless because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sense during the examination with fingers.
And its restoration is done in such a way that the fracture is evenly aligned with fingers according to the possible manner, until the shape is even, as it should be. Then apply plasters and bind the fractured ends with a splint, if it requires that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined inward: then the patient suffers severe pain and puncturing, like the puncturing that occurs to one who has pleurisy: therefore, because the bone pierces the membrane, and also the patient suffers difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting much blood: and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients have devised many ingenious methods for this: among them are those who say that you should give the patient foods that generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the abdomen becomes inflamed, expands, and pushes the fracture outward.
We, however, abhor making a quick cause to produce a hot abscess unless it occurs. If, however, it has already occurred, then address it accordingly.
And some of them said: place something ventosa over the area, then suck it with strength, and it is similar in reasoning. However, it is feared that it attracts windy excesses to the place due to the condition of weakness.
And some of them said: it is necessary that the place be covered with wool which has already been submerged in warm oil: and poultices should be placed between the ribs, until it is filled: so that the bandage is even when you wrap it according to the roundness.
Then the patient should be treated for pleurisy with food and medicine.
If a strong thing that the patient cannot tolerate constrains the patient, and the wound pierces the membrane with a damaging puncture, and we are concerned for the patient: then it is necessary to cut above the location and expose from the broken rib. Then place upon it the instrument that preserves the seam, the memory of which has preceded: and cut the bone with ease, and cut into it.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound if it is large with stitches: and treat it with plasters until it heals.
If a hot abscess should occur in the meantime, then hurry and infuse poultices in rose oil, and place them on the area: and treat the patient with what is suitable for the abscess.
In the meantime, he should also lie on the side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Regarding the restoration of fractured vertebrae of the back and neck.
Fractures sometimes occur in the neck vertebrae, and wear rarely happens to them: and similarly with the vertebrae of the back as well. When therefore this happens to someone, and you wish to know whether he will be healed or not healed: then have confidence. For if you see his hands already softened, and numbed, and dead: and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor contract them: and when you contract them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, he does not feel that, and does not feel pain in them: then you know that he will not be healed, and in most conditions it is mortal.
If he moves them and feels the contraction with fingers and the pricking: then you know that the neck of the bone is safe, and that the patient will be healed with treatment.
If it happens to the vertebrae of the back in a similar manner, and you wish to know whether he will be healed or not: then examine his feet: if you see that they are softened, and what happened to the hands also happens to them: then when he lies on his back, flatulence and excretion occur involuntarily: and when he turns onto his stomach, excretion occurs involuntarily: and when he turns onto his back and wants to urinate but cannot: then you know that it is mortal. Therefore, do not labor in his treatment.
If however nothing of that happens to him, the case is lighter.
And the treatment for what happens from that is to attempt the reduction of the abscess with heat: so that you place on the vertebra crushed rose oil alone: or with eggs of a roasted owl.
Place it upon the area several times a day until the hot inflammation subsides; then apply one of the strengthening, drying, and binding plasters to the site and bind it with a bandage; and instruct the patient to use rest and calm. Nor should he sleep on the side where he feels pain until it is healed.
If it happens near the worn bone or something that is already separated from it, then you must cut over the skin and remove it. Then bring together the two edges of the wound with a suture if it is large. Then treat it with some flesh-forming ointment until it heals.
If the last bone of the spinal column is fractured, and it is the end of the tail: then you must insert the thumb of the left hand into the anus, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible, and perform the second alignment.
Then place it on the area and remove it; and treat the wound with the previous treatment until it heals.
Regarding the restoration of the anchor.
Chapter XI.
The bones of the ankles are rarely fractured. If they are fractured, then the fracture is not complete but a comminution at their extremities: and they are split lengthwise and displaced inward: and the patient experiences pain in the area, and there is bruising: and the leg that is fractured becomes numb.
And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over it until you stand over the fracture how its figure is.
If the fracture is only at its extremities, then equalize that fracture according to what is prepared for you by equalization until it resembles its natural figure.
If the fracture is along the length or already inclines towards the interior, then make the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture is prepared. When therefore you have equalized it, place a plaster on it; then place a stick of wood or leather on it; and bind with a bandage on which you do not fear the displacement of the fracture nor the removal of the stick.
And equalize the concavity of it with what fills it until it is held by the bandage according to equality; and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their healthy side.
If a warm abscess occurs to him, then cease from extending it and its restoration until the warm abscess subsides; and place on it what makes it subside as precedes, then return to its restoration; and bind it as appropriate.
If there is pus in the bone or if it is crushed, extract it.
Regarding the restoration of the helper's fracture.
The helper is that which is between the elbow and the head of the spatula.
If therefore it is fractured, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One of which is: to take a piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this form that follows.
And let two bands be tied at the two ends.
Then it should be suspended from an elevated place: and the patient should sit on a seat. Then he should throw his fractured arm over the wood, until it reaches the armpit, where the curvature of the wood is attached in the middle.
Then hang something heavy above it, so that it may stretch downward. Then the physician equalizes the fracture with his hands simultaneously, until the fracture returns to its proper position.
And the other method is to have the patient lie on their back: and suspend his arm from his neck with a band. Then command two assistants, so that one of them holds what is above the fracture with his hands: and the other holds below it, and each extends to their respective part.
And if you wish for a stronger extension, then bind below the fracture with one band: and above it with another band: and each of the two assistants should extend them to their respective parts.
If therefore the fracture is near the end of the shoulder, then it is necessary to place one band under the armpit, and another under the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow: then it is necessary that a bandage be placed on that place, and on the elbow itself.
Then equalize the fracture with ease without effort, until when the fracture is equalized as it should be, and is applied with good application: then bind it, if a warm abscess does not occur.
If a warm abscess occurs, then release the binding until the seventh day. And place upon it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess quiets: then bind it: and the method of binding it is to place a plaster over the fracture.
Then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster. Then let the arm be bound with support, and place his open hand on his shoulder.
And place a cloth and bind the arm with support, so that the arm stays in its proper place: if nothing prohibits you from it, and nothing is altered from the fractured bone.
If you fear that something may be altered from the fractured bone, then use splints: and it is done by placing a splint over the fracture itself which is wider and stronger than the other splints. And place the width of a finger between each splint: and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture with an additional three fingers on each side.
Then bind over the splints with the bandage as I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your binding on the place of the fracture should be tighter. And the more the fracture is elongated, the lesser the binding should be.
If you see the placement of splints and binding as we said, at the hour when you restore the limb immediately, then do so: and if you fear a hot abscess, then remove the binding and splints until the seventh day, as we said.
Then observe the bandage for all three days, so that itching or swelling does not occur, or food is prevented from reaching the limb due to the excess tightness of the binding. Therefore, correct all of that according to what we said.
If however you are confident that nothing will happen from it: then do not loosen the bandage unless after three days or more.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his hand on his stomach: and place under the support a cushion filled with wool evenly.
And observe at every hour of the night or day that the shape of the fractured limb is not loosened or the bandage softened. Therefore, correct all of that with your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order we have mentioned, so that the food is light at first, until the wound begins to heal: then it is necessary to make the food coarser.
For it is customary that the support and leg be bound for forty days: then it should be loosened, and a bath administered, and treated with ointments that correct it.
If the fracture is foul and ground down: then do not remove the bandage and splint until fifty days, and until two months.
On the restoration of a fractured arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two forearm bones.
One of them is smaller: and it is the one that follows the thumb. And the other is larger, and it is the one that is placed below the smaller one on the lower side.
Perhaps only the larger forearm bone is fractured, or the smaller one: and perhaps both are fractured at the same time.
When the smaller forearm bone is fractured above, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower forearm bone is fractured, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when both bones are fractured at the same time.
If the bone that is fractured is the upper smaller forearm bone, then it is appropriate for the doctor, in its restoration, to apply a slight extension with ease, until it is straightened.
If the larger forearm bone is the one that is fractured: then it is necessary to apply a much stronger binding.
And it is necessary to position the hand in shape during its restoration, and to extend it on a pillow. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers; and let the lower joint be common to all the fingers or the rest: and the patient sitting squarely on himself, and let the pillow be before him, or directly in front of him, in height, so that the patient does not encounter labor.
Then let the surgeon extend the arm from the lower part, either with his hand or with a bandage. And another surgeon shall extend similarly from above.
Then the doctor aligns the bone until he restores it to the best shape possible.
If there are fragments in the fractured bone, then endeavor to restore each piece to its place by your skill.
If there appears a separated piece and it pierces the skin, and you have no hope of restoring it: then incise over it, and remove it according to the method we have described previously.
If the fracture is with a wound, I have already made a separate chapter on this, therefore take the treatment from there.
If a warm abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then line a cloth with cerote made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be between thick and thin: and bind the cloth tightly over it with a fine bandage until the abscess is calmed: then remove the cerote, and apply a plaster prepared from mill powder with egg white. Then place the splints, and let the splint that is placed over the fracture itself be somewhat wider and stronger.
And you shall know that the number of stars in the arm is six in most dispositions: whether the fracture be in one socket or in two sockets at once.
Then place your binding over the site of the fracture stronger and more forcefully, and somewhat more with the binding towards the upper part of the fracture, or towards the lower part of it: or place a milder binding for a while according to how the preceding recollection at the beginning of the chapter directs.
And let the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture be soft cloths, moist: and not hard, rough. And let the thread with which it is bound be of flax, properly medium between fine and coarse, as we have mentioned.
And consider the limb and the binding after days. And if something happens which requires correction, such as itching which occurs in the limb: then it is necessary to foment the limb with warmed water until that itching ceases, and leave the limb unconstricted until it rests, then bind it again.
And if the binding is already softened, and the bone already removed, and similar things to these: then correct all of it with your skill, and examine again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightness of the binding, then it is necessary to soften it for a while and leave it for several days until the nourishment reaches it, then bind it again.
But if none of the things we have mentioned happen to the patient, then it is not necessary to remove the binding until after twenty days, or around this time.
Then suspend the patient's hand to his neck. And let his neck be straight, and be guarded by its strength from agitated movements. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days. All of that depends on the dispositions of complexions, and the dispositions of strength.
On the restoration of fractures of the hand.
Know that fractures rarely occur in the knuckles of the hand and the joints of the fingers. And it does not happen to him, unless through frequent friction.
When therefore a fracture or wear occurs to the sole, then it is necessary that the patient sit upright: and before him there should be a seat according to equality. Then place his hand on it extended.
Then the servant extends the broken bones, and the doctor aligns them until they are joined properly.
Then it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, if a warm abscess does not occur. Then place a splint on top according to the length of the area: and you have now wrapped it in a linen cloth.
If however the fracture is near the lower part around the sole of the foot, then make something like a sphere from cloth: and instruct the patient to press upon it with his fractured foot: then bind it with a long cloth.
And let the splint be of leather, in which there is flexibility, so that the leather may be applied with the body of the foot: and bind it according to what is necessary.
If however the fracture is on the outer side, then it is necessary to place a splint on top, and another splint below on the sole: and let the hand be placed straight and open. Then place the binding, as the hand is rotated: and extend between the fingers with a band.
If a fracture occurs to any of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, align it according to what is necessary. Then bind it with the sole: and if you wish, place a straight, small splint on it, so that the fracture is raised and not moved.
If however the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle, and index, or little, and ring finger, then align it and bind it with the healthy finger that follows it: or bind all according to continuity: and this is better. Or place on it a small splint, as we said for the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after the application of warm poultice: and oppose with what is necessary when something happens to it, according to how its description is repeated.
On the restoration of the fractured hip.
The hip bone is often fractured, and it is evident to the sense: for it turns to the inner and posterior part.
And its restoration is done in such a way that a band is applied above the fracture, and another band below the fracture. And the patient shall lie down on his face.
Then the attendant shall stretch all the band to its part according to equality: and this, when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
If the fracture is near the root of the hip bone, then the band should be placed at the part of the pectineus muscle, so that the extension falls upward: and another band below the fracture.
And so similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then the band should be placed near the knee, so that the extension is downward.
Then the physician equalizes the bone with both of his hands until he restores it according to the similarity of its natural form: and the bone is joined with a good union.
Then it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, unless the member has developed an abscess. If an abscess does occur: then leave it for several days until the warm abscess settles, then return to your treatment.
The binding of it should be done thus. You must wrap over the hard fracture, that is, the bandage: and double it two or three times: and let there be excess from it remaining. Then wrap the leg until the heel reaches the root of the thigh.
And insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee to the lower part, and let the ends of the thread come from the upper part of both sides. Then wrap over the leg and thigh what is excess from the bandage.
Then place on the thigh at the site of the fracture the splints, and put one of them on top of the leg bone.
Then fill the spaces between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the binding is even.
Then begin with a strong binding from the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four wraps. And the farther you extend with the binding from the site of the fracture, let your binding be looser and softer, and gentler.
Then pull on the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and the leg. Bind therefore with both three splints which are on top. Then proceed with the two ends of the thread to the lower part until you reach the ankle. And with both pull also the ends of the splints from the other side: so that the binding does not move from its place.
Then release the binding on that while it remains, so that no corrosion occurs to the member, nor abscess, nor swelling, and things similar to these. If something happens from that. Hurry then with its solution, and correct everything that happens from it, according to what we have said many times.
If there is a fragment of bone in the bone that causes pain: then it is necessary to equally remove it, if it is possible for you. And if not, find on that and remove it: and treat it as previously mentioned until it is healed.
And sometimes this hip fracture is bound, besides adding splints to it, as we have said in the aid and arm.
However, in the restoration of such a fracture, the patient does not become lame. And if it is restored alone, besides applying the other leg to it, then it is necessary that the one to whom it belongs limps always.
And know that the hip is bound for fifty days, or a little is added, or a little is subtracted: all of this depends on the diversity of complexions and other conditions.
On the restoration of the fractured kneecap.
Know that fracture of the kneecap rarely occurs, but wear often happens to it.
If indeed a fracture occurs to it, then not otherwise than either a And it is with a wound, and without a wound. And it stands over the whole of it with sensation.
And the restoration of it is such that what has been torn apart from its parts is aligned with fingers until it is gathered together and joined as much as possible by alignment and ease, and construction.
Then apply a poultice of sesame flour or meal with egg white: and place a round splint on it if you need that: and bind over it with a suitable bandage for that.
Then consider all the treatments we have mentioned in other fractures: such as a warm abscess, and things like that: so as to oppose every accident with what is appropriate to it until it is healed.
On the restoration of a fractured leg.
Know that the legs are two bones, of which one is thick and is named the leg bone: and the other is slender and is named the fibula.
And it happens to both types of fractures as it happens to the two bones of the arm: and because of this, its restoration is like the restoration of the arm equally, and the procedure is the same.
If both bones are broken at the same time, the leg is turned in all directions.
And if the thinner bone is fractured, turn the leg to the front part.
And if the thicker bone is fractured, you find it below: and it is one of those that are not hidden from you.
Then administer extension, and equalization, and ligation of the splints according to it equally.
However, it is necessary, if the fracture of the leg is a nasty fracture, having many septic conditions: that there be less extension, and milder alleviation by you.
And in the leg there is something of the operation similar to the arm: and it is that when you equalize the splints, and complete all your operation, then take two bands from pine wood, which is used in making sun shades that are placed under boards: and they are made from palm ribs: and choose from them those which have a small thickness, and neither should they be from the thin ones: and their length should be according to the length of the leg from the knee downwards.
Then wrap a cloth over each one with two wrappings according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side, and the other on the other side: and they should be from the knee down to the foot.
Then bind the two bands at three places from both ends and the middle. For when constriction is prohibited, the leg tilts to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And now a cradle made of wood according to the length of the leg should be administered, and the leg should be placed in it, so that it keeps it from movement.
And it is very important that you do this in a fracture when it is accompanied by a proper wound.
Then consider the leg throughout the day, and be diligent with the same last degree of care to prevent abscess, or swelling, or other similar issues. If any of those things happen, then apply to it what is necessary until it is healed, if God wills.
On the fracture of the bones of the foot and toes.
A complete fracture does not occur in the heel.
Fractures sometimes occur in the bones of the foot and rarely in the toes as well; and they do not suffer anything but abrasions in most cases.
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and you see those bones elevated above their natural position, then let the patient place his foot on prepared ground, as if walking.
Then stand and place your foot on the area that is elevated from those bones; then press or tread on it until it is leveled and returns to its proper position.
Then apply a plaster and place lint over it; and put a small board under the arch of the foot, which has two flat ends.
Then bind it to the foot with a suitable bandage after you wrap it with cloths and other necessary materials.
Therefore, after three or four days have passed, then loosen the binding. For you will find bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated. Therefore, the operation on them is as you see.
If some fingers are broken, then restore them and align them as I have described to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint on the finger according to the length of the finger, and let it be slightly wider than it; then place under the foot the board I have described to you, and secure it with a suitable binding.
If however what is broken of the bones is two, or three, or more, then place on every finger a splint of its size, wrapped in a linen cloth: and secure the board on the lower part of the foot: and let it stand on one end of the board outside the sole of the foot, so that it holds with good retention.
And it is fitting for you, so that you do not forget, to consider all that I have told you about other fractures from the accidents we have mentioned: and address each accident with what is necessary.
Regarding the fracture of a woman's vulva, and the pelvis bone, and a man's virga.
When the vulva of a woman is fractured, then make her sit squarely. Then tilt her to the side of her back slightly, and hold her backward.
Then the midwife should fill her vulva with cotton until it is full: and it should form a sphere in the vulva from it.
Then shake the woman, and raise her back gradually. For that exits the gut until it becomes like a sphere in front of the vulva gate, and the broken mouth returns.
Then place the poultice on her back. When she wants to urinate, remove the gut easily, then urinate: and insert it back in the manner you first introduced it; then return to her original poultice.
Do this for seven days, or so, for the mouth itself is restored.
And if you wish, take the bladder of a sheep, and attach a reed tube to its opening, and insert the entire bladder into her vulva. Then blow into the tube with force until the bladder inflates inside the vulva, for the fracture returns.
Then it should be filled with gut and remain for several days, as we have mentioned, until it heals.
And when the mouth of the Pectinis of a man or woman is fractured, then administer for its restoration and alignment what we have mentioned for the Anchae bone.
And the rectum is not concealed in these nearby fractures that slightly affect it, especially in one who has some practice or use.
And understand my book well, for the fracture itself indicates to you the correct way in many arrangements for its restoration and binding: therefore, understand.
But when the man's penis is fractured, take the neck of a goose: and insert the rod into it. Then place over it a wrapping of cloth, and wrap it up, and leave it for three days, or around that time, and it will be healed, if God wills.
On the restoration of fractured bones when there is a wound.
It is appropriate for one to whom a fracture with a wound has happened, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone, or the auxiliary bone, or similar to it, that you should hurry and bleed him immediately: if the conditions for bleeding are indicated to you, as we have mentioned before.
If the wound is bleeding, then you must hurry to treat it by sprinkling ground zedoary over it: if you do not have anything else available.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day: and do not delay it, unless an abscess has occurred.
If an abscess does occur that is hot, then delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess has settled. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you would cause harmful complications to occur.
If the fractured bone protrudes above the skin: then you must endeavor to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with ease and a slight extension.
If however the extension and alignment of it are not prepared by your hands: then reduce it with this instrument. And it is an instrument that is made of iron, whose length is seven fingers, or eight: and its width is according to the size of the wound. And for that reason, it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them according to the amount needed for that part of the treatment in every kind of fracture.
And let it be round: and let there be a small thickness in it, so that it does not double under pressure on it during the time of the operation: and let it have sharp ends, which have edges at its ends. And let the upper part of it be thickened from the middle of it down to the lower part.
And this is its form.
It is necessary in this operation to place the sharp curved end of it on the protruding end of the bone: and push it with it once, until when the bone returns and aligns by some alignment.
Therefore, attempt to align the ends of the fracture closely together.
If the ends of it are finely fractured and do not receive good hold by the instrument, then it is necessary to cut the end of that bone until the instrument can grasp it.
If you cannot reduce them at all with what we have mentioned, then cut it with one of the cutting instruments we have described that is suitable for it: or saw it with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
Then scrape what remains in the bone from roughness and tiny shreds.
When therefore the bone is reduced, and the patient finds after its reduction a very severe painful hurt, then you know that the bone did not return to its natural position.
Do therefore that. For you provide great assistance to the patient when the restoration you perform on the bone is completed.
Then dip the cloth in astringent, black wine. And especially if it is in summer. And you shall not place wax on the wound, nor anything containing oil: so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption in it.
Then apply the splints at the end of your treatment for the restoration of the bone. And leave the wound exposed: so that you cut with scissors a hole in the bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be cautious with all care, so as not to press the wound with the fracture. For foolish doctors have often done this: and it has caused death, or corruption, or pus, that is, suppuration, to occur in their patients. And let your binding be gentle, mild, different from the binding of other fractures.
If the wound is severe, or it is a large wound, and you fear some bad occurrences that we have mentioned might happen to it, and you find pain in the suspended area: then it should not be covered with splints. And make involutions from hard cloths at the site of the splinters, and bind it with them.
And when it is after one day, or two days, and you see the wound beginning to generate pus: then remove the cloth you placed over it with wine. Then apply licinia, and ointments with which it is our custom to treat wounds: such as the four-drug ointment, and those similar to it.
And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage. And examine the wound every morning and evening until it strengthens and heals.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that pus may flow down to the lower parts with ease.
If many days pass by the wound and it does not strengthen, nor does the pus separate from it: then you know that there are small bone splinters therein. Therefore, it is necessary to examine the wound with a probe. How many of those splinters have been separated, remove them, and extract them. And those among them that are not separated and pierce the limb, causing pain, attempt to cut them out and remove them in any way possible for you.
If gangrene or ecchymosis, that is, discoloration, or other signs of corruption and putrefaction befall the wound: then it is necessary to oppose each of them with what is appropriate for it according to the treatment previously described in its chapter.
And from that in which it is necessary for my speech to stand, and to whom you make your mind present when the bone is broken, and protrudes above the limb, such as the hip bone, and helper bones, and similar ones from large limbs, is that you do not presume its attraction, for often death results from it, rather leave it until it putrefies.
For perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Then therefore treat the wound if it seems right to you: and if not, leave it.
Regarding the treatment of nodulation in a fractured limb.
This nodulation often occurs in the limb during the healing of a fracture. Especially those near the joints: and the figure of the member is disfigured by it. And it may prevent the limb from its natural function.
Therefore, consider if the nodulation is recent: apply to it medications that have astringent properties, such as aloe, frankincense, myrrh, gum Arabic, acacia, and similar ones.
So that you take some of these or all of them: and mix them with astringent wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar: and place them on the nodulation on lint, and bind them tightly over it.
And leave the binding, and do not remove it for many days. Then untie it, and do another, until the knotting is removed.
Or apply it over the sheet of lead properly. For lead has the property of removing everything that is feared from the members.
If the knotting has already turned into a stone and is tight, and necessity urgently requires its removal: then incise above it on the upper part of it, and cut off the prominent excess; or scrape it with some scrapers until it is removed; and care for it until it heals.
Regarding the treatment when it is restored, and a subtle member remains after it, not according to its nature.
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and a subtle, weak member remains after it: then this does not occur unless for many reasons. One of which is the multitude of loosening and tying of the bandage not as it should be: or due to the excess tightness of the bindings, until the nourishment is prevented from flowing to the member: or due to the abundance of excessive embrocation at an inappropriate time: or due to the lack of blood in the body of the sick person and their weakness.
And the treatment for it is to feed the sick person and make their body tender until the blood multiplies in it. And administer a bath. And bring joy and happiness to him.
Then place pitch on the limb: so that the pitch may draw much nourishment to it. And continually apply a warm water rub to it until the nourishment circulates, and it returns to its natural form.
On the treatment of fractured bones when they heal crookedly.
When it happens that after the restoration and healing of a limb, there is a crookedness, prominence, or knotting of the fractured bone, and the form of the limb is marred by this, yet the limb is not hindered in its natural function: then you should not heed the advice of him who thinks the limb should be broken again.
And there have been many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land.
And this operation is indeed very disgraceful, leading to death or great fear, and thus it is mortal.
But if the limping and knotting are recent: then it is necessary to apply a warm water rub, in which softening herbs have been decocted, such as the leaves of marshmallow and its root, and sweet clover, and similar things. And a poultice should be made for it with a softening plaster, such as properly prepared diachylon.
Or take the mucilage of the root of marshmallow, and mix it with chicken fat or sesamum oil: and apply a plaster with it.
Or take fat figs, and pound them with pigeon dung, and similar things which are called medicinal reducers of hardening.
And sometimes the knot is loosened with frequent, old, and gentle friction, which is done with wet hands. And the movement of the limb should be administered to all parts at all times.
If however the curvature has already preceded, and become strong, and transformed into stone, and the necessity for its treatment with iron has been provoked: then it is necessary that the upper part be cut, and the continuity of the bone be loosened, and what is superfluous from the knot or bone be cut with delicate incisors: and ease be administered to it with care and attention.
Regarding the discussion on dislocation.
Dislocation is the departure of some joint from its place. Therefore, it is prohibited from its motion, and the figure of the member is disfigured. And it causes severe pains and injuries to the patient.
When therefore dislocation befalls someone, then it is necessary to hasten its restoration: do not delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the area may become inflamed, and possibly the reduction of the dislocation with it.
Therefore, during the time of its inflammation, it should not be moved or extended. For it often causes spasms and painful injuries.
But when that happens, then you must hurry to bleed the patient. Then it should be left until the swelling rests.
Then the limb should be rubbed with warm water and oil. Then it should be reduced with ease.
And let the entire limb be treated with what will be mentioned in its proper place.
I have indeed already arranged the chapters on dislocations, even as it precedes in fractures, from the upper part of the body to its lower part.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two jaws are rarely dislocated slightly.
And the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways. For either they are moved from their places slightly, and are loosened for a moment. Or they are dislocated completely and entirely until they loosen toward the chest, until the patient's saliva flows and he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is involved with speech.
When the dislocation is slight, then it often returns to its proper position by itself with little intervention.
If it is a complete, entire dislocation, then the reduction must be administered quickly, and should not be delayed at all: and it is that the assistant hold the patient's head: and the physician inserts his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocated jaw between the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side. Or he should insert two of his thumbs at once, if the dislocation is from both parts. And the other fingers of his hand should be outside, with which he equalizes.
And instruct the sick person to clean their jaws and prepare them fully for eating on all sides. And the doctor should align the jaw and push it until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at once: then apply evaporation with warm water and oil until the reduction of both becomes easy: do not delay the reduction of both in any case, as we have said.
When they return and are aligned, and the mouth of the sick person is closed, and they do not soften: then place upon them small pieces of cloth with plaster made from wax and rose oil.
Then it should be bound easily with soft bands.
And let the sick person sleep on their back: and let their head stand between two pillows, so that they do not move it to the right or left: nor should they attempt or be forced to chew anything: rather, let their food be given by a gentle sip, until when the pains are removed, and the jaw is bound: then let them eat what they want, and let it be administered easily.
Let them not strain their jaw during eating and drinking, and yawning, until the jaw is bound and healed.
If the reduction of both jaws becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their places: then often fevers and constant thirst result from this: and perhaps the sick person's stomach is loosened, and perhaps they vomit pure bile.
When therefore you see that: then know that it is a loss, and many times the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the humerus.
The collarbone does not dislocate from the inner side because of its connection with the chest. And it sometimes dislocates to the outer side: and this is apparent to the senses.
And its restoration is for the patient to lie on their back and extend their arms. Then force the area with your palm strongly, for it will return to its place.
Then apply a poultice on it, and bind it tightly.
The ends of it which follow the elbow and are connected to it do not dislocate, except rarely. If it dislocates at some time: then it is necessary to reduce and align it as we have said, and prepare it accordingly.
Then apply a poultice on it, and bind it tightly. And instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until healed.
And with this same method, the extremity of the humerus is reduced when it is also displaced from its position.
On the reduction of dislocation of the humerus.
Know that the humerus is not dislocated except in three ways.
One of which is that it is dislocated towards the outer lower part. The second is that it is dislocated towards the chest. And it may also be dislocated towards the upper part of the humerus: and this happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate towards the back, because of the spur. And it does not dislocate towards the front, because of the nerves.
And it is dislocated and protrudes most towards the lower outer part, especially in those whose flesh is sparse. For it protrudes quickly in them and reduces quickly.
In those whose flesh is abundant, the opposite is true, namely that it protrudes with difficulty and reduces with difficulty.
And it may happen that some people suffer a blow or fall, and the humerus becomes inflamed with a hot swelling and is thought to be dislocated because of this.
Therefore, you must examine it until you stand on the certainty of it, and then proceed with its treatment.
And the dislocation is known when it is towards the lower outer part: and you distinguish between a dislocated humerus and a healthy humerus. For you will find a clear difference among them, and you will find a concavity in the head of the humerus, and below the deltoid, upon touching the head of the humerus, it feels almost like an egg: and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move it in all ways.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards: then you will find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easily done when it is recent, or the patient is a child.
And its reduction is for the assistant to raise the hand upwards. Then place your thumbs below its deltoid, and raise the joint with strength upwards to its place: and the assistant raises his hand and extends it upwards. Then place it below, for it returns quickly.
If it does not return by what we have said, and many days have passed since the dislocation first occurred: then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water, and a massage that softens and soothes should be administered, such as if the roots of hellebore, fenugreek, and sweet clover are boiled in water, and applied.
Then the patient should lie on his back: and a sphere and wool should be placed under his deltoid, which should be equal in softness and tightness.
Then the physician should place his heel on the sphere, and raise the head of the humerus with force, and pull the patient's hand downwards.
And if you wish, bring him back according to this method: that is, have a man who is taller than the sick person present, and let him stand on the side, and insert his shoulder under the armpit of the sick person: and lift his armpit upwards until the sick person is suspended in the air. And another servant should pull the hand of the sick person to the lower part of his abdomen. If the sick person is light: then it is necessary that something else be suspended with him to weigh him down: for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is also reduced according to another method: that is, a long piece of wood should be fixed in the ground, whose head is round in shape: like the sleeve of a mortar: which should not be thick nor thin. Then place under the sick person after soft cloths are placed on top of the head of the wood: and let the sick person stand according to the length of the wood.
Then extend his hand downward from the other side, and stretch his body with force from the other side: for the joint returns to its place quickly.
If the reduction is difficult through all that we have said, then use this treatment: take a piece of wood whose length is the quantity of two arms, and its width the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness the quantity of two fingers: let it have a round head so that its entry into the armpit may be eased, according to this form.
Then soft cloths are bound over the round head so that the weak wood is not harmed.
Then it is placed under the patient's armpit, so that the hand or arm is extended over the wood down to the lower parts: and the wood is bound over the support and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then the arm is placed on a step of the ladder across its width, and the hand is extended downward, and the rest of the body is left suspended from the other side. For the joint immediately enters.
When therefore its entry is complete in whatever way it is possible: then it is necessary to place a sphere of equal size made of wool under the armpit. Then place a poultice prepared from mill dust with frankincense, and egg white over the entire shoulder, as it is applied from above.
Then bind under the armpit with a suitable bandage: and wrap the binding over the poultice from above: and attach his hand to his neck, and leave it, without moving his hand for seven days.
And it is necessary that the patient's food be limited until the limb is strengthened: because it is faster for its healing.
Then it should be loosened after seven days, or five, and exercised with movement. If therefore it is firm and does not soften, then it is healed.
If however the joint dislocates frequently, due to moisture that affects it, or for some other reason: then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three holes to it, according to what was mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
If all this is done and the bandage is removed after seven days and the joint is not confirmed, and the plaster and binding are reapplied several times and it does not firm up, and falls off, and cannot lift itself upwards: then you know that his nerves which are at the shoulder head have already been cut, or extended, or softened: and you know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Dislocation which occurs towards the chest and nipple, or reduction to the back, is performed with impulse and extension by hand: until it returns, and the rest of the binding and care are administered, until it is healed.
If after healing there is heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use the bath frequently until that heaviness is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
On the treatment of elbow dislocation.
Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty, and similarly returns with difficulty as well: and it is dislocated in all directions, and especially towards the front or the back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: for it falls under sight and touch, regardless of whatever shape it is dislocated into. And when you compare the dislocated elbow with a healthy one, it is clearly evident to you. For the joint is concave, and it cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch its shoulder with it.
And it is necessary that you hurry and reduce the dislocation immediately before a warm abscess befalls him.
For if a warm abscess befalls him, the reduction becomes difficult: and perhaps it is not healed at all, especially when it is toward the back. For it is worse than all other kinds of dislocations, and they are of more severe pain: and often death comes with it.
And the restoration of it when it is one of those that can be reduced, is to extend his hand with two hands: and his arm should be spread out, and the doctor's hands should be above the elbow and below it, and he should push the joint with his thumbs simultaneously, or with the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or if the dislocation is to the front: then it returns thus, that he doubles his hand with his own hand, until he strikes the dislocated elbow with the base of his palm.
If the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer a very strong and powerful extension: and it is that two assistants extend the arm: and two assistants hold it as well, so that it is not moved during the extension.
Then the arm should be rotated in all directions after a long doubled cloth or a wide bandage is wrapped over his hand.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with oil: so that it is one of those things that help in lubricating the joint with ease. Then push the joint with a strong force until it returns.
And after its reduction, it is necessary to place on it a plaster that has astringency and drying with egg white: and bind it with a suitable bandage. And suspend the arm from the neck of the patient: and leave for several days.
Then it should be loosened. If therefore the joint is fixed in its place, then loosen the bandage from it, and leave it.
And if you see the joint not well bound, then apply the plaster again, and bind it with a bandage, and leave it for several days until it is bound. Then loosen it.
If however heaviness befalls him after the reduction of the joint, and the position is in motion: then administer moisture in bathing, and subtle friction, and compression, until it straightens, or place on the joint fat from the ilium, that is, the fatty tail of a ram. Then it should be bound and leave it on day and night. Then remove it, and immerse him in a bath. When therefore he sweats, then friction the joint with moderate friction. Then apply on it the juice of alelia once, and second, and third time with each bath until it is softened.
And if you wish, place cow dung on it, moist and heated with butter, and bind over it.
Do that several times. For it is relieved and returns to its normal state.
On the treatment of dislocation according to Albucasis.
The joint of the arm and hand is often dislocated, which is called Mahassem.
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy. On the contrary, of the other joints. However, it is necessary that the reduction of its dislocation be done quickly at the hour when it is dislocated, before the place becomes inflamed or a warm abscess occurs in it.
And the reduction of its dislocation is to place the dislocated arm of the infirm hand on a board, and the assistant should extend his hand: and the doctor should place his palm on the prominence of the joint, and push it until it returns.
However, it should be considered if the palm has already receded to the belly of the hand: then the infirm should place the back of his hand on the board at the time of extension and reduction: and if the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, then the position of his hand should be inward on the board, that is, the inner part of his hand should be placed on the board so that the doctor's hand falls over the prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, that is good: and if not, then bind it with a soothing plaister to prevent inflammation: and leave it, do not repeat it.
For if it does not tolerate, nor can you do anything about its reduction, after the days have passed, nevertheless the joint remains according to its crookedness: and it does not harm the sick person anything, except that the hand is weakened, and cannot grasp something: then know that the nerves are cut or worn away.
Therefore, there is no ingenuity in it, except to be cauterized near its origin. And perhaps it does not contribute anything to it.
Therefore, when Almahassem does not return, then apply to it the plaster which we have mentioned. Then it should be cauterized and left for five days: afterwards it should be loosened and left, and the hand should be exercised.
If however its movement is deprived, and something heavy happens to it: then soften it with warm water and friction several times until it is softened.
Regarding the treatment of the displacement of fingers.
When one of the fingers is dislocated in any direction, or one of the fingers to the back of the palm, or its front: then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the tip of the finger and suspend it toward the side to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend it and extend it until it becomes straight on that day.
Therefore when it is night, bind it according to this account: and do not cease to loosen it during the day: and exercise it with movement: and bind it at night.
Do this for several days until it tightens.
And similarly treat it if the hand is dislocated towards the abdomen: and bind it to that part, and perform your first treatment on it until it heals.
And similarly treat it when it is dislocated to other parts.
On the treatment of dislocations of the vertebrae.
When a complete dislocation of the vertebrae of the back or neck occurs, or when many vertebrae are displaced from their places, then there is no treatment for it, because death approaches the patient.
And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion escapes without will, and cannot hold it: and often some of his limbs are weakened, or both of his legs, or both of his arms, or one of them: or one vertebra is displaced from its place.
For it often happens that they are displaced to all four parts.
That which is displaced backwards is called humpback.
The treatment, however, is to consider then, if the humpback occurs from childhood: then there is no treatment for it, nor any healing at all.
In those that occur from a fall, or blow, or similar things, the ancients have already spoken at length about the methods of treatment. Of which much does not return with profit.
I have indeed abbreviated from that, of which little is excused from much due to its proximity to my intention: and in my explanation wherein I explained it, and formed its instrument in a different way from how they showed and explained it.
I say therefore, that in the humpback condition which occurs on the front side, there is no remedy, nor healing from it.
And similarly in that which occurs on both sides as well.
And it is not cured by them, except that which occurs on the back properly, with what I narrate: and it is that the infirm should be extended on his face on an equal podium near the wall: and a wet straw should be spread under him, so that his chest is not injured.
Then a straight piece of wood fixed in a socket in the ground should be placed at the end of the podium near his head: and another piece of wood near his feet at the other end of the podium: and the assistant should hold the wood, and it should not be firmly fixed in the socket. And another assistant should hold the other one.
Then wrap over the head of the infirm and under his armpits a soft, strong band: and extend the end of the band to the wood that is by his head: and tie it there.
Then bind another band above his thighs, and above his knees, and at his ankles. Then gather all the bands together, and tie them to another stick that is at his feet.
Then let all the ministers extend the band to the part of the stick, and let not the two sticks be removed from the places in which they are fixed: however, they should not be fastened as we said.
And the physician should place his palms on the spine with force until it returns: or he may place a board on it. Then attach his feet to the board until it returns.
If it does not return through this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms. And make a hole in the wall we mentioned that is near the patient, into which the end of the board can be inserted. Then place the middle of the board on the spine. And let the physician place his feet on the other end. And let him pull firmly until the spine is constricted and returns to its place.
Then if you wish, operate with a wrench that is wrapped with your hand: and it is, as you fix into the ground near the head of the patient at the end of the footrest two sticks whose length is one arm: and near his head at the end of the footrest two sticks.
And the length which is between all the wood should be one palm: and now a hole has been made everywhere where the turn runs: and all the wood should be firmly set in the ground very much, so that it does not move at all.
And a round wood is inserted: and it is a turn where the ligament is rotated in two holes of two woods.
And at its end is a hole, in which the wood is fixed, whose length is one palm with that which revolves: and in two other woods is similarly that.
Then tighten the ligaments which you tightened on the chest of the patient to the turn which is at his head: and the ligaments which you tightened on his legs to the turn which is at his feet.
Then let the assistant stand by every turn, who turns his hand with leather, with which the turn is rotated: and the doctor aligns the vertebrae according to what we have said.
This is the form of the turn that follows.
Then after the vertebrae return and the place is aligned, then it is necessary to apply a drying plaster with egg white. Then the tow. Then place over the plaster a strip of board, whose width is three fingers, or about that. And its length should be the amount that covers the hump and extends over the healthy vertebra part.
Then it should be bound with the bandage we mentioned. And let the patient use a subtle diet until he is healed.
And if something of the prominence remains in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary that medicines which soften and soothe be administered, with the application of the plate we mentioned for a long time. And now it is applied with that sheet of lead.
And sometimes a prominence occurs in the last vertebrae of the spine: and it is thought that by it there is a dislocation, and it is that bone which now protrudes. Therefore, it should not be presumed to use this medicine on him: for it may cause death.
Concerning the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
Know that the joints of the ankle and the shoulder joint do not occur except by dislocation only: nor does what happens to other joints due to slight displacement and concavity happen to them.
And the ankle joint dislocates in four directions. It is that it dislocates towards the front and towards the back.
And it dislocates most towards the inside: and slightly towards the front and the back.
And the treatment of its dislocation towards the inside is as follows: when you align the healthy leg of the patient with the injured one, it appears longer: and his knee protrudes more than that of a healthy person, and the patient cannot double his foot near the groin: and the area following the groin becomes inflamed with a warm swelling, because the head of the femur has now reached there.
And the sign of him to whom a dislocation outward has happened is that his symptoms are contrary to these symptoms.
And the sign of him to whom a dislocation forward has happened is that he stretches the healthy leg according to its fullness: however, he does not double it without pain which is in the knee: and if he attempts to walk, he cannot step forward on it: and his urine is retained, and his groin swells, and in walking there is a dragging of his heel.
And the sign of him to whom a dislocation backward has happened is that he cannot straighten the knee, nor can he double it before doubling the groin: and his leg is even shorter than the other: and the groin is softened, and the head of the femur is at the place of the ilium.
The reduction of these types of dislocations is to consider then, if the dislocation is old, which already has been present for some time with the one having it. Then if you administer its reduction, and it remains according to its position: then there is no cure in it at all. Therefore, it should not be entirely presumed for him.
In the case of one whose dislocation is recent, and it is from one of the four species of dislocation: then hurry to this, to rotate the joint, and extend it inward and outward, and move it right and left: for perhaps it will return, and will not require further treatment.
If it does not return this way, then you must prepare a strong assistant, and have him extend his leg from the lower part: either with his hands or with a bandage, which should be tied above his leg over the knee: and another assistant should reach over and place his hands under the ligaments. Then bind with a gentle bandage over the root of the thigh, and hold the end of the bandage with the other hand.
And let the extension be either from the front part of the groin to the shoulder part, or from the back part to the back area.
And let the extension of all be at once, until the sick person is lifted with their body from the ground, and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is a common type among the four types.
If therefore the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary for every type to do what I will say about the proper cure.
In its proper reduction when the dislocation is inward, it is necessary for the sick person to lie on their healthy side. Then place the bandage over the root of the thigh, between the head of the femur and the area beneath the groin. Then extend the bandage upward from the groin area to a higher part of the body, toward the shoulder area.
Then let another strong assistant take his arms, and compress the thick part of the diseased thigh, and extend outward with a forceful stretch. For it now returns to its place.
And this type is easier than the other types of treatment by which this member is reduced.
If it slips out of your control and does not obey you for entry with this type of treatment at all, then it is necessary to bind both feet of the patient simultaneously with a strong, gentle bandage over both heels and both knees: and let the length of each be equal in quantity to four fingers; and let the sick leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
Then let the patient be suspended over a beam in the house: and its length from the ground should be two arms' lengths.
Then command a strong youth to support the head of the thigh: and let him be suspended with the patient; and another youth should push, supporting the thigh with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
In returning it to its proper place, when the dislocation is outward, it is necessary that the patient lie on a raised platform, as we have described in the case of one having a hump. And a band should be applied above his diseased leg and on his chest.
Then two beams should be placed, one at his feet and the other at his head. Then a beam should be added in the middle of the raised platform, firmly fixed: on which wrapped wet cloths should be placed, so that it does not harm the patient: and there should be a beam between his thighs, so that it is not pulled downward during extension.
Then let all the attendants pull at their respective parts, and the doctor equalize the reduction with his hand.
If it obeys the return, it will be good.
And if not, place it on the board and press it as we said in the case of hunchback, equally. However, it is necessary that the patient lies on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is forward, then it is necessary that the patient's leg be extended quickly: and this is according to the same description on the raised platform: and the doctor should place his right hand palm on the patient's groin. Then compress it with the other hand, and with that compression place it extended downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is towards the back: then it should not be extended downwards, and he should be raised off the ground: rather, he should be placed on a hard surface, as should be done also if his hip is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about lying on two hips: and he is on his face, and the ligaments are stretched: according to what we have recently said.
And it is necessary to apply compression with a board also on the place to which the joint protrudes, when the reduction is completed as required.
And the sign of its return is not hidden from you: and it is that you extend the two legs of the patient: and when you see them equal, and the patient can pull his leg and stretch it without difficulty: then know that the limb has returned as required: then join the two hips, and apply a plaster, and bind with an imemati, that is, a wheel: so that the hip does not move in any direction: and let the patient rest quietly for three days or four.
Then loosen the bandage and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in standing, then know that the dislocation is now fixed: therefore allow the patient to walk.
And if you see any softening: then return, and plaster it, and bind it according to your first binding: and leave it for three days as well.
Then loosen it and make it slow in walking on both for several days until it is well strengthened.
About the dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated outward, inward, and downward, that is, backward.
And it does not dislocate forward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you instruct the patient to apply his leg to his hip. If it does not adhere to the hip, then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of its dislocation is to make the patient sit straight, so that he may extend his leg if he can over it, and place your back against his face: and put his foot between your feet.
Then hold his knee with your palms and place them straight across his knee over your fingers. Then apply with your palm the two sides of his knee with strength. And another assistant should extend his foot until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of its return is that the leg adheres to the hip easily, not with difficulty.
Then apply plasters to it, and make the leg adhere to the hip. Then bind them together with wool for three days, or four. Then loosen them.
And the patient shall not walk for several days until healed.
If the reduction is refused to you, then administer a strong extension with bandages, of which the method was previously described in the treatment of anchae, until it returns.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the calcaneus.
The calcaneus is sometimes slightly displaced and sometimes dislocated completely. And its dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the calcaneus swollen, protruding to the side to which it is dislocated.
The treatment for its slight displacement is easy restoration: it is to extend it gently with the hands and equalize it until it returns.
In treating it when it is completely dislocated, it is necessary to have the patient sit upright: and a strong assistant should hold him firmly from behind, at the middle of his back.
Then hold with your right hand the foot from its upper part, and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot where the heel is.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. Then with the left twice.
Then extend with the left, and push the chest of the foot with the right towards the leg without effort.
Do that twice, as we have said.
Then push the chest of the foot towards the leg on the third try, and you pull the awl.
If it returns in one try, or in two tries according to this method, and you see the foot even, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation on it: because it returns.
If the reduction of it is prevented by what we have mentioned: then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and fix a stake in the ground very firmly, so that it falls between his thighs: and now you have wrapped a cloth over it, so that it does not hurt the patient.
Then the assistant should take hold of his thigh: afterwards the assistant should extend the other foot, either with his hands or with a band that ties above the ankle. Then the assistant should extend fully against the extension of his colleague: and the stake should stand between the two thighs of the patient holding him so that his body is not pulled downwards during the extension.
Then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy leg downwards. For the dislocation returns quickly.
When the dislocation returns and its proper healing is evident to you: then apply a plaster and tow, and bind it firmly with bandages, and tie the foot to the leg with a bandage.
And you must be cautious or fearful of the nerves that are above the posterior heel, so that there is not a strong binding over them and injures them.
Then leave it for two days or three. If the binding softens, tighten it; then loosen it on the third or fourth day: and prevent the patient from walking for forty days. If however he attempts to walk before that period, there is no security that the dislocation over it will not dissolve, be corrupted, and not receive treatment afterward.
If a warm abscess should occur to him, then it is necessary to apply for its reduction what we have previously described elsewhere in the treatment, and fomentation, until it is removed.
Regarding the dislocation of the toes and its treatment.
It is necessary that what is dislocated among them be aligned with slight extension without effort: and this indeed is not difficult, but rather easy.
If the dislocation is in some of the joints of the foot's arch: then it is necessary for the patient to sit with his foot on an even place on the ground, or on a board: and he should stand as if walking.
Then you stand and place your foot on that which protrudes from those joints. Then press it with your foot with force until it returns and you see it now even, and no protrusion appears in its place.
Then place under his foot's belly a board which takes the whole foot, which has two heads. Then bind it tightly for three days. Then loosen it, and make him rest from walking for many days, until it is healed and secured from displacement.
Regarding the types of dislocations with wounds or fractures.
When something of that kind occurs and you attempt its treatment and restoration, death often follows: and therefore one should not presume to treat such a condition unless he is wise in the art through long experience, merciful, pious, cautious, not bold, nor presumptuous: and that he use at the outset medicines which calm inflammations, only warm ones: and leave the patient to divine judgment. Unless you think or hope for salvation from peril with the mildness of the illness, and in which there appears some hope. Therefore, attempt its reduction immediately at the beginning of the matter, before a warm inflammation occurs.
If the limb returns as we wish, then administer a treatment that calms the inflammation: and treat the wound with what is appropriate from drying ointments.
If the dislocation is with a fracture, and separate fragments occur in the bone, then attempt their removal, and do what we have said for simple injuries resulting from them in their respective locations.
And beware according to your ability, and guard yourself from entering the way of fear: according to which my preceding instruction was given to you.
For it is better for you with your Creator, and more enduring for your glory, and safer for your body among them during your time.
