preface.txt
Oh you, very dear sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the last in the science of medicine along with its completion, and I have finished it through its expositions and explanations. And it has come to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely, "surgery."	AFTER finishing for you, my sons, this book which is the part of knowledge dealing with medicine in its entirety; and having made it as clear and explicit as possible, I thought it well to complete it for you by adding this treatise which concerns surgical operating.	0.77818525
And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and completely forsaken, the science has perished and been cut off, with nothing remaining but the small descriptions in the books of the ancients that hands have moved. From this have come errors and vanities, intentions have been closed off, and science has been distanced.	For the skilled practitioner of operative surgery is totally lacking in our land and time; so that the knowledge of it is on the point of being blotted out and its remains lost; and there is nothing left of it except a few traces in the books of the Ancients; where, however, it has been so corrupted by the hands of scribes, and subjected to error and confusion, that its meaning has become obscured and its value diminished.	0.78293014
Now it seems to me that I want to revive it along with the organization of this treatise according to the way of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and I will present the forms of cautery instruments, and other tools of the work with the addition of their explanation and preparation, as needed.	Therefore I decided to revive this art by expounding, elucidating, and epitomizing it in this treatise; and to present the forms of the cauterizing irons and other operative instruments, since this is an adjunct to explanation and a vital necessity.	0.79412174
And because no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is distanced. Therefore, it is necessary for one who takes it up to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, the number of bones, the movement and veins, both moving and resting, and the location of their exits.	Now this is the reason why there is no skilful operator in our day: the art of medicine is long and it is necessary for its exponent, before he exercises it, to be trained in anatomy as Galen has described it, so that he may be fully acquainted with the uses, forms, and temperament of the limbs; also how they are jointed, and how they may be separated; that he should understand fully also the bones, tendons, and muscles, their numbers and their attachments; and also the bloodvessels, both arteries and veins, with their relations.	0.8478328
And because of this, Hippocrates says that name with name is much, and with work is little; especially in the art of hands.	And so Hippocrates said: 'Though many are doctors in name, few are in reality, particularly on the surgical side.'	0.7009197
We tell you in the introduction to this book that whoever is not knowledgeable of the aforementioned things should beware of falling into error and killing people; as I have seen many times those who undertake this science and abandon it without knowledge and experience.	We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book. For he who is not skilled in as much anatomy as we have mentioned is bound to fall into error that is destructive of life. Thus I have seen many laying claim to this knowledge and boasting of it, but having neither knowledge nor experience.	0.7743814
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut an abscess of scrofula on a woman’s neck and cut the arteries of the neck; so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.	I saw an ignorant doctor incise a scrofulous tumour in a woman's neck; and he cut certain arteries in the neck so that the woman bled until she fell dead before him.	0.8425416
And I saw another doctor who removed a stone from an elderly man, and the stone was large; he took away a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.	And I saw another doctor presume to take out a stone from a man of advanced age. The stone was large; he rushed blindly at the task and extracted the stone and with it a piece of the bladder itself; and the man was dead in about three days.	0.93453294
I had already been called to extract it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut, he would die.	I had myself been previously called in to extract the stone but from what I saw of the size of it and the condition of the patient I judged that the outcome would be so.	0.70986515
And I saw another doctor who treated a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and along with the break, there was a wound; and the ignorant doctor tightly bound the fracture over the wound with strong bandages and did not leave any room for breath, and left it like that for a time; and he commanded that it should not be untied; and it remained like that until the leg and foot were completely swollen and came to ruin.	I saw another doctor who had a regular salary from one of the high officers of our country for medical treatment. There had occurred to a negro boy of his a fracture of the leg near the heel, together with a wound; the doctor rushed in, in his ignorance, and bound up the fracture, over the wound, very tightly, with pads and splints, not allowing the wound to breathe. He then let him go as he wished and then dismissed him for some days bidding him not to loose the bandage. Eventually his leg and foot swelled and he was close to death.	0.8606775
I was called to him, and I hastened to untie the leg; and when I had untied it, he was at peace and felt no pain.	I was called in and made haste to loose the bandage, upon which some ease and reduction of the pain followed.	0.64446294
But the corruption was already established in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread through the member until it was completely lost.	Nevertheless, gangrene had already taken hold on the limb and I could not hinder its progress; it. continued to extend in the limb until he perished.	0.6996958
And I saw another doctor who opened an abscess that had become cancerous, and then inflamed it further through the malice of his treatment.	And I saw another doctor incise a malignant tumour; after some days the place broke out in open ulceration, thereby adding to the misery of the patient.	0.7855063
For a cancer, when it is pure from melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be removed.	For a cancer that arises from a melancholic humour should never be touched by the knife unless it should happen to be in a part of the body which may be removed thoroughly and in its entirety.	0.7503409
And therefore, dear sons, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is, work where there is danger in many conditions; and I will show in each place in this book where there is fear and danger.	Wherefore you must know, my sons, that operative surgery is divided into two parts, namely, where operation is associated with the health of the patient, and, on the other hand, where it is for the most part fraught with danger. Throughout the following book I point out wherever I have described an operation that is accompanied by fear and danger.	0.71578145
Therefore, it is necessary for you to be cautious so that foolish doctors cannot speak ill of you.	It behoves you to be wary and to shun such, lest the ignorant have an opportunity to reproach and slander you.	0.5158822
So take up your arms with caution, and treat your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you come to health and are praised; and leave the terrifying diseases of serious healing; and take away your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other in glory.	Show, then, caution and care for yourselves and gentleness and perseverance for your patients. Take the best road that leads to health and a happy outcome. Illnesses that are very threatening or difficult to cure, leave alone. Purify yourselves of anything which you fear may cause doubt as to your religious life and your secular life; for this will perpetuate your good name and will elevate your fortunes in this world and the next.	0.76637405
Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on a bad disease, lest you be called a foolish doctor."	For Galen once said in certain of his admonitions: 'Do not treat mischievous maladies lest you get the name of mischievous doctors.'	0.87489474
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.	I have divided this treatise into three books:	0.9002188
The first chapter is about cauteries by fire and by sharp medicine, and the chapter is arranged from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools of cautery, and all that is necessary for the work.	BOOK ONE. Concerning the actual cautery; and cauterization by caustics. It is divided into chapters set in order from the head to the feet. The shapes of the instruments are shown and the iron cauteries and all things necessary for operating.	0.77465504
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is arranged with the forms of instruments.	BOOK TWO. Concerning incision and perforation; blood-letting and cupping; wounds and the extraction of arrows and the like. The whole is divided into chapters in order; and illustrations of instruments are given.	0.81874895
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and distortions, and similar things; and it is arranged from the head to the feet, and about the forms of instruments.	BOOK THREE. Concerning the setting of bones; dislocations; the treatment of sprains and the like. This is similarly divided into chapters set in order from head to feet, with illustrations of instruments.	0.7600605

chapter-1.txt
Before we remember the work, it is necessary that I speak of the quality of the help and harm of each complexion.	Before we expatiate on the actual operation of cautery it is necessary to mention its advantages and disadvantages and the temperament upon which it is to be used.	0.52001685
I say that the quality of the help and harm is the most complex and subtle science and the hidden secret; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they have agreed on it; and their words suffice me little, for I fear the length.	I say that a discourse on the advantage and disadvantage of cautery is a long one, a subtle learning, a hidden secret. A great number of wise men have spoken on the subject with differing opinions. Lest I should be over long I have reduced their opinions to a summary.	0.7489753
I say that cautery universally helps every complexion where there is matter, except for two complexions: that is, a hot complexion without matter, and a dry complexion without matter.	Now I say that the cautery has universal application for every ill constitution, whether organic or functional, with the exception of two: the functional hot temperament and the functional dry temperament.	0.6568447
In a hot and dry complexion with matter, some have said that cautery is of great help; and others have said the opposite: that cautery is not suitable for diseases that come from heat and dryness.	About the organic dry temperament the Ancients differed, some saying that cautery helps in a constitution of this kind, while others said the opposite: that cautery is of no use in a disease caused by heat or dryness; for fire is naturally hot and dry and it is obviously absurd to treat a hot dry sickness with a hot dry remedy.	0.81216294
For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated for hot disease by heat, nor by dryness; and he who says the opposite says that cautery greatly helps hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of a man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.	But he who holds the opposite view says that actual cautery may help in the case of such hot dry illnesses as arise in the human body; for when you compare the human body, humid as it is, with the nature of fire you find the human body cold.	0.76294374
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it sometimes by experiment.	I myself from much experience agree with this last opinion.	0.6038104
And in any case, let it not be taken up except by one who has proven it and who knows through long use the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and the conditions and causes of their diseases, and the circumstances and the span of time; we have no fear of the other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the doctors gathered and agreed on the cautery.	However, no one should attempt this operation unless he has had long training and practice in the use of the cautery, and is fully acquainted with the various human temperaments, and the character of the complaints in themselves; their causes, symptoms, and duration. Concerning the rest of the temperaments there is no reason for fear, particularly the cold and humid distempers; all medical men are agreed and none differs concerning the utility of the cautery in such cases.	0.84706247
And know, sons, that cautery with fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery with burning medicine.	Now you should know, my sons, that the actual cautery and its superiority over cauterization with chemical caustics is one of the secrets of medicine.	0.7303888
For fire is simple, and comes only to the member that is burned, and harms other members little.	For fire is a simple substance having no action except upon the actual part cauterized; nor does it do more than slightly harm any adjacent part.	0.681277
Burning medicines move from one member to another, causing diseases of serious healing to come to the member; and by chance, they kill the patient.	But the effect of cauterization with caustic may spread to parts at a distance from that burnt; and also in the part cauterized it may give rise to a disease difficult to cure or even fatal.	0.5622593
The fire, due to its high quality and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is an excess.	Whereas fire, on the other hand, on account of the nobility of its nature and its superiority has no such effect unless it is overdone.	0.7654793
And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and based on the truth of things; and therefore I apologize for the length of the discourse, for it does not please me to withhold the secret that is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.	That has become clear to us by experience through length of service, devotion to the art, and acquaintance with the facts of the matter. So I need not prolong this discourse. Were it not inappropriate to this my book I should relate to you a deep secret concerning fire, the manner of its action on bodies and its expulsion of diseases; with a reasoned philosophical discourse too subtle for your understanding.	0.75842965
And know, son, that they agreed on the time when cauteries should be done, and chose springtime.	Know also, my sons, that the Ancients disagreed also as to the fit time for cautery, affirming that spring was the best.	0.6740861
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the arising harm is mitigated by the help of cautery; and especially if the cautery is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for a time lest greater malice come to the member.	Myself, I say that the cautery is suitable at all times; for whatever harm may arise from the season of the operation is utterly outdone by the benefit deriving from the cauterization itself; especially if the cautery is applied to pains that are severe, grievous, and swift, brooking no delay, because of the fear that the consequences may be more grave than the slight harm from the season.	0.8089904
And do not ever think, dear son, as foolish doctors do; for the disease that is cured by cautery does not return; and they say so; but it is not as they think, because cautery is a medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors that are the cause of the pain, and it is more effective than medicine because of the speed of its effect, and because of the virtue of its work and its power.	Nor let enter your minds, my sons, the groundless notion of the laity and of ignorant doctors, that the complaint cured by the cautery never comes back later; do not cleave to this opinion. The fact is not as they think; for the cautery is homologous to the drug which alters the constitution and dries up the humidities that give rise to disorders. But the cautery excels the drug by the rapidity of its success, the strength of its action, and the potency of its powers.	0.8473121
And it is possible that the disease sometimes comes according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its power; and the superfluities are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in a place where there is little superfluity and moisture, like cauteries of teeth for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens little.	It may be that the disease will return at some time according to the temperament of the patient, and the persistence and virulence of the disease; and from the formation of a mass of superfluities in the body; from his neglect of himself in acquiring them from food; and from causes of a similar nature. Of course, if the disease to which the cautery is applied be a slight one, and in a part only slightly liable to superfluities and humidities, as, for example, the cauterization of a molar tooth for toothache, and the like, then it may happen that the pain does not return; but that happens rarely.	0.8673463
And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cautery is effective after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cautery is the last of medicine because when we administer ways of cures for any disease and they are not effective, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective. Then it is clear that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.	Another common saying is that the cautery is the final remedy; which is true, but not in the way which they mean. For they believe that after cauterization no treatment, either with or without medicine, will help. It means something precisely the opposite: after various treatments have been applied to a certain disorder without success, then last of all we apply cauterization and this proves effective; whence comes about the saying that the cautery is the final remedy—not in that sense in which it is popularly held by the laity and by many ignorant medical men.	0.8187748
The ancients said that a cautery instrument of gold is better than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the excellence of its substance; and they said that the place of cautery does not become rotten, but this is not true because I have proven it, and I have found it true in some men; and a cautery of gold is more effective than one of iron, as they said.	The Ancients have stated that cauterization by gold is more effective than by iron. Now they said that on account of the temperateness of gold and its noble character. They also stated that the site of cauterization does not become purulent, but that is not absolutely so; for I myself have experience of that and have found that it happens in some cases and not in other cases.	0.84553707
However, when you heat a gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly; and if you heat it too much, it becomes deformed; and thus there is enough hindrance.	Cauterization by gold is indeed better and more successful than with iron, as they have stated; except that when you are heating the gold cautery in the fire you are uncertain, by reason of the redness of the gold, when it reaches the desired temperature. In addition to this it cools very quickly; and if you overheat it it melts in the fire, melts and runs, and the practitioner finds himself in difficulties.	0.72595197
And therefore we use iron cauteries that we have more adapted to our work.	Therefore in our own opinion cauterization is swifter and more successful with iron.	0.4817851
Now I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet, so that the way is easier to find.	Now I have arranged this book on cauterization by chapters, set in order from the head to the foot, to make it easy for the seeker to find what he wants.	0.75911695

chapter-1-subchapter-1.txt
This cautery is effective for moisture and coldness in the brain, and there are two types made for a disease called "soda", and for many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for the multitude of dreams, toothache, and sore throat, and especially for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.	This cauterization helps against excessive humidity and coldness on the brain, which cause headache, abundance of defluxions from the head to the regions of the eyes and ears, excess of sleep, toothache, sore throat, and in general any sort of disorder arising from frigidity, such as palsy, fits, apoplexy, and diseases similar to these.	0.7088313
The method for this cautery is that the patient is purged by a laxative medicine cleansing the head for three or four nights, according to what the strength, age, and habits of the patient can endure; then shave the patient’s head.	The manner of performing this operation is first to bid the patient open the bowels with an evacuant which will also clear his head, for three or four nights, according to the strength, age, and habits of the patient.	0.8484434
Then make him sit cross-legged with his hands on his chest; afterward place the base of your palm on the base of his nose between his two eyes; and where your middle fingers rest, make an incision there and then heat the cautery called "olivare", which has this shape:	Then tell him to have his head shaved; then seat him cross-legged before you, with his hands on his breast. Then place the lower part of your palm upon the root of his nose between his eyes; and where your middle finger reaches mark that place with ink. Then heat an olivary cautery.	0.8389058
And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it is cleansed; and for this reason it helps greatly.	The Ancients said that the more a wound is kept open, discharging pus, the better and more efficacious.	0.78577995
And some of them said that the cautery should be left on until part of the bone is burned, and then scrape off what is burned from the bone, and it will be healed.	Some said the skin was to be cauterized through to the bone and the cautery held until some of the thickness of the bone was burnt. Then the burnt bone was to be scraped out, then dressed.	0.7901849
And others say that the cautery should be left on and pressed so hard that it removes a piece of bone as large as a spindle that women use, so that the humors are completely expelled; and the wound should be left open for a long time; afterward, it should be cleaned and closed.	Others said that the cautery should be carried through to burn a deep impression in the bone so that there should come out of the bone a piece shaped like a grain of a carob tree or a small spindle-whorl; they asserted that the vapours of the head would be exhaled through this place. The wound should be kept open a long while, then dressed until healed.	0.73216075
And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me overall, except in some men where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and especially when the patient’s head is weak by nature, and the first method of cautery is safer and better for me, and I use this method to work together for healing.	But these two methods of cauterization I do not consider right except on certain men; and I regard them as risky. In my opinion, to let the patient alone is preferable and safer, if it is to be. For the head is weakened when its natural continuity is broken, as we see in other parts, and particularly when the patient's head is weak by nature. In my opinion the first type of cauterization is safer and better; therefore use that and be safe.	0.8460355

chapter-1-subchapter-2.txt

chapter-1-subchapter-3.txt
of the cautery of the head When sudden pain comes in one part of the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is cleansed by purifying medicines, and the other treatments mentioned in the division of diseases are applied, and none of this helps: then make cauteries in two ways, namely with sharp medicine and with iron.	When there occurs pain with headache in one side of the head and the pain extends to the eye; and the patient has cleared his head with purging drugs and there has been applied the other treatment that I have mentioned in the sections on diseases, but to no avail; in this disorder cauterization is of two sorts, either with caustic or with the actual cautery.	0.81807774
The cautery with sharp medicine is made by taking a clove of garlic, removing the peel, and cutting it a little at both ends, then cutting the temple where the pain is so that you can insert the clove of garlic under the skin; when it is inserted, bind and press it well and leave it for twelve hours; then untie it and remove the clove of garlic, and leave the wound like this for two or three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter until the rot comes out.	This is the manner of cauterization with caustic: take one clove of garlic; peel it and cut both ends off; then cut open the site of the pain in the temple with a broad scalpel till there is room to contain the clove under the skin; then introduce it under the skin till it lies completely hidden. Then bind up the wound tightly over it with pads and leave for fifteen hours; then unbind it, remove the garlic, and leave the wound open for two or three days; then apply cotton wool soaked in butter till it suppurates.	0.8907063
Afterward, treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish, use some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.	Then dress with ointment till it heals. If you would rather, you may carry it out with one of the caustic drugs that I have included in the eighteenth treatise, on caustics.	0.823231
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the cautery which has this shape:	The actual cauterization with iron should be done in this way: heat a cautery of this shape.	0.7552776
It is called "clos" because the head is shaped like a nail with a slight curve, and in the middle, it has a small protrusion; place it on the painful spot, hold your hand and turn the iron slightly, until half the thickness of the core is burned; then lift your hand so that the artery above does not burn, and a lot of blood flows.	It is called the claviform; the head is nailshaped in that there is a slight curvature with a small protuberance in the middle. Apply it then to the site of the pain, hold your hand steady and revolve it little by little. Let the thickness of skin burnt be about half; then remove your hand so as not to burn a subjacent artery, for thus a haemorrhage arises.	0.75334096
Afterward, apply cotton soaked in salt water to the spot for three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healed; and if you want, cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", with the point, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not old.	Then soak some cotton wool in saline, apply to the place, and leave three days; then apply cotton wool with butter; then treat with ointment till it heals. Or if you prefer you can cauterize this migraine with the knife-edge that juts out from the cautery; but be careful not to cut an artery, specially in this kind of migraine that is non-chronic.	0.84616786

chapter-1-subchapter-4.txt
of migraine	On the cauterization of chronic migraine.	0.4633721
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you wish, apply the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on artery extraction, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better and more helpful than the other.	But if you see that this cautery is not enough for this disorder and you see that the patient is of bodily fitness for it, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the wound till healed. If you prefer, employ that cauterization which we have described in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with the cautery of two blades; for that is a cauterization better and more effective than this.	0.9113525

chapter-1-subchapter-5.txt
of the pain in the ears due to cold	On cauterization of pain in the ears.	0.55455947
When cold-induced pain comes in the ear, and purgative medicines and other treatments mentioned in the division have been applied, and the pain does not move, then heat this cautery called "poins", which has this shape:	When the ear gets a pain from the cold and is treated with laxatives and other medicine as mentioned in its section and the pain nevertheless persists, heat the cautery termed 'punctate'.	0.7982296
Then prick all around the affected ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and distance yourself a little above the root of the ear once you have marked the spot with ink; and make ten pricks around each ear; afterward treat the spot until it is healed.	Then after it has been heated prick with it in a circle right round the ear, or around both if there is pain in both, after the place has been marked with ink; the cauterizations being a little away from the ear. Let the cauterization be of ten punctures or thereabouts round each. Then dress the places till healed.	0.9009187

chapter-1-subchapter-6.txt
of the distortion of the mouth	Cauterization of the twisted mouth.	0.46870944
A condition that must be treated by cautery is only those that arise from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make a cautery for those that come from dryness and nerve spasm.	The twisting of the mouth which is curable with the cautery is of that nature which arises from phlegm, as we have already noticed in the sections on sicknesses. But cauterization is to be carefully avoided in that type which is due to dryness or spasm of the tendon.	0.7389753
It is similar to the "cultellare" that we mentioned before, but it is a bit more subtle and the blade should be a bit thicker; afterward treat the spot as I mentioned before, until it is healed.	It is a variety of the bladed cautery such as has already been described, but is rather more slender as you see. Its blade should have a certain thickness. Then dress the place with what we have mentioned till healed.	0.73083603

chapter-1-subchapter-7.txt
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then make four cauteries: two on the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one in the place called "vasselz" as we mentioned before, and the last cautery above the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we mentioned before.	When an apoplexy has lasted a long while and has been treated by those methods we have given and your treatment has been ineffective but the patient has no fever, then burn him with four cauterizations: one on each frontal prominence; one in the middle of his head as we have described; and one at the back of the head as has been said. The shape of the cauteries to be as before.	0.79476

chapter-1-subchapter-8.txt
of lethargy	On cauterization for lethargy due to phlegm.	0.40648583
For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient strong purgatives and pills that cleanse the brain; afterward, shave the patient's entire head, and place on the occiput the mustard plaster that is described in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: do it as I have said.	First, great electuaries should be given to the patient to drink; and pills to clear the head. Then let his whole head be shaved and apply a mustard plaster to the hinder part as described in the treatise on plasters.	0.7863374
If he is healed this way, it is good; and if not, make three cauteries from the middle of the head down to the neck, spaced a finger's width apart; and treat them as the others, and if you want to add more, and the patient is enduring, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two corners, and treat until healed; and use the cautery called "olivare", as I have said before.	That should be applied several times as it is a kind of cauterization; do it in the very way described there. If he is cured, well and good; but if not, burn him with three cauterizations on the back of the head, arranging them in a row downward from the upper part of the head to the base of the neck; and make an interval between each pair of one finger's breadth. Then treat as aforesaid. If you wish to add to these cauterizations and the patient be fit to bear it, give him a burn in the middle; and if still more, then burn him on the two frontal prominences.	0.8965794

chapter-1-subchapter-9.txt
of the coldness of the head It is necessary that the head be cleansed with purgatives and what we have mentioned before; afterward shave the patient's head, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each corner, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is enduring, and the disease is strong, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave them until most of the core is burned, then lift your hand; afterward treat until healed, and use the cautery called "olivare" that we have mentioned before.	Purgation of the head should come first, with electuaries and the other things we have mentioned. Then shave the patient's head; and then burn him with one cauterization in the middle of the head and one on either frontal prominence and one on the occiput, and three on the vertebrae of the neck. And if the malady of flaccidity of the body require still more and the patient be fit to bear it, and his disease be severe and have a strong hold on him, burn him with four more cauterizations on his dorsal vertebrae and carry the cautery to burn almost through the thickness of the skin; then remove your hand and treat him in the aforesaid manner till he is healed. Let the cautery be olivary.	0.9052456

chapter-1-subchapter-10.txt
of epilepsy	On cauterizing for epilepsy.	0.49934477
Epileptics should not use cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to cleanse the brain with purgatives and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is grown and enduring enough to take medicine.	The epileptic who may be cauterized is he whose epilepsy arises from phlegm. When the patient is an adult and can stand taking the drugs, he should first purify his brain by great electuaries and the rest of the treatment mentioned in that section.	0.734899
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make gargles and chewing that cleanse the brain often with good foods; afterward shave the head in the middle, and make a cautery as we have said before, and one cautery on the vessel, and on each corner; and if the patient is strong and enduring, make cauteries as I said for those with paralysis and weakening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped as I have said.	But if it be a boy unable to tolerate the drugs he should employ gargles and medicaments to chew, to clear his brain, for several days beforehand, with an improvement in his diet. Then let his head be shaved and burn him with the single cauterization on the middle of the head in the manner described before, and with one cauterization on the occiput, and one on each frontal prominence; and, if the patient be fit and able to bear it, add those additional cauterizations on the cervical and dorsal vertebrae that we have already described for paralysis and for flaccidity. The cautery should be olivary, the shape before described.	0.84820366
If the patient is a child, make a subtle cautery in this manner:	If the patient be a boy, use a fine cautery.	0.74083984

chapter-1-subchapter-11.txt
When because of melancholy the superfluities or moisture are corrupted and thick phlegm, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said for those with paralysis.	When the cause of the melancholy be corrupt humours and a thick phlegm, burn him with those cauterizations mentioned in the case of the paralytic.	0.6859642
And if because of melancholy the superfluities decline to melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him something to drink that will cleanse the brain, as we have said before in the division.	If the cause of the melancholy be a redundance of humour turning to black bile, and the patient's body be humid, make him drink that which will purge his head as described in a previous section.	0.78331655
Afterward shave the patient's head; then make a ring of linen well made, like a circle, and place it in the middle of the head; and let the patient sit cross-legged and be well held on all sides; then present the liniment, and it is very effective with old sheep butter; and heat it gently over the fire, so that the finger can endure it when dipped; then pour the circle inside the middle of the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with other good management, until he is healed.	Then shave the patient's head and apply a compact ring-bandage of linen and put it round the middle of his head. Have him sit cross-legged, held firmly on all sides. Then take a pound of stale sheep's butter and warm it on the fire to a moderate heat so that a finger put in can bear it; then pour it out on the middle of the head inside the circle of the bandage and leave it till it has cooled. Do this once a week with other efficacious treatment till he is cured.	0.9109441
Or if you want, cauterize by making multiple pricks with the cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain evenly; and then apply cotton soaked in butter and chicken fat.	If you wish, burn him with multiple small puncture cauterizations; nor press long on the cautery but let this cauterization be only just punctured. For this kind of cauterization will moderately moisten the brain. Then let cotton soaked in butter or hen's grease be applied.	0.7209116

chapter-1-subchapter-12.txt
of the wateriness of the eyes When water first comes to the eyes by the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that will cleanse the head, and keep him away from all moistures, and make him sweat or bathe several times while fasting.	On cautery in cataract of the eye. When by those signs I have mentioned in the relevant section there is brought to your notice the beginning of a cataract of the eye, start with draughts for the patient such as shall cleanse his head; and guard him from all humidities. Make him also sweat for some days, fasting, in the bath.	0.7573009
Afterward command him to shave his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the water is in both eyes together, or in one if the descent is in one; and cut with the cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the core, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood flowing, then stop it with whatever power you have.	Then tell him to have his head shaved; and burn him with one cauterization in the middle of the head; then cauterize him with two burns on the temples if the cataract is beginning in both eyes; or on the one side only if it is in one eye. And with the cautery cut all the subcutaneous veins and arteries; and let the cauterizations be long, across the breadth of the temples. Beware of haemorrhage; if you see any, stanch it straight away with any means you can.	0.88041645
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision how you will stop it; and sometimes a cautery is made in the hinder part below the two bones at the back.	We shall deal later on with the method of extraction and cutting out of arteries, and provision against haemorrhage. Two strong cauterizations are sometimes made on the back of the neck below the two bones.	0.7382294

chapter-1-subchapter-13.txt
When the tears from the eyes are old and habitual and are on the veins, or next to the arteries that are on the outward appearance of the head; and it is seen that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of the water descending to the eyes: one cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries in the hinder part below the two bones; and if more is needed, then cauterize lightly above the eyebrow with a small cautery.	When tears are constantly in the eye and arise on account of the arteries and veins visible on the outside of the head, and you are sure that they are from cold thick phlegmatic superfluities, burn him with the very cautery that I taught for the beginning of cataract, namely, a cauterization in the middle of the head and two on the temples, and two on the back of the neck below the two bones; and, if you are compelled to add more, one cauterization on the side of the outer corner of each eye at the end of the eyebrow, with a small cautery.	0.9005139

chapter-1-subchapter-14.txt
When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient something to drink for three nights; afterward shave the head, and make a cautery in the middle with the olive-shaped cautery; and make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little below the hair; and be careful not to cut the artery.	When you have treated foetor by those methods given in its section and your treatment is unsuccessful, give the patient laxative draughts for three days; then shave his head; and burn with a median cauterization with the olivary cautery; then cauterize him twice above the eyebrows a little below the hair with a claviform cautery. Beware of cutting the artery. The figure of the claviform cautery.	0.7914747

chapter-1-subchapter-15.txt
When the eyelid is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivare". of which this is the shape:	When an eyelid droops either from disease or humidity, then burn the lid with a single cauterization with this crescent-shaped cautery.	0.6090859
And if you want, make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave the hand there except just long enough for the third part of the eyelid to be burned, according to the manner that I have said.	And if you wish burn him also a little above the eyebrows with two cauterizations (; that is, one) on each side; but keep clear of the temples; and let each cauterization be of the length of the eyebrow. Nor let your hand apply the cautery longer than to burn a third of the way through the skin.	0.76238894

chapter-1-subchapter-16.txt
of the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes turn inward and prick the eye, and cauteries are applied in two ways: either with fire or with burning medicine.	On cauterization of the eyelid when the eyelashes are turned inwards, irritating the eye. The cauterization is of two kinds, by fire and by caustic.	0.6865066
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.	Cauterization by fire will be thus: tell the patient previously, if he is one of those who pluck the lashes, to let them grow till they are long and straight; and if during growth they irritate him, bind the eyes with a fillet so as not to move till they have grown.	0.74520934
When they grow and are even, place the patient on your lap; then mark on the eyelid a figure like a myrtle leaf, with the beginning of the mark near the hairs; then apply cotton soaked in egg white and parsley mucilage on the eye, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape:	When they have grown and are straight, put the patient's head in your lap and mark upon the eyelid with ink the shape of a myrtle leaf, beginning near the lashes. Then apply cotton wool soaked in egg-white or mucilage of psyllium seeds. Then heat a cautery of this form.	0.8913611
Afterward, cauterize over the marked figure gently many times, so that the core is burned in that area; the sign of successful work is that you see the eyelid retract and the hairs lift from the eye's surface; then lift your hand, and leave it for three days, then apply cotton soaked in butter until the burn is gone; afterward treat with ointment until healed.	Then burn over the shape marked out, slowly, with many small strokes, till the whole surface of the skin marked out to the shape of the myrtle leaf be cauterized, specially the outer part of it. It will show the correctness of your work if you see the eyelid contracted and the lashes risen away from the white of the eye. Then remove your hand and let him be for three days. Then apply cotton wool soaked in butter till the scab falls off; then treat the place with ointment till healed.	0.8501407
And if after this the hairs come back and the eyelid is softened, then restart the cautery on the same spot as you did first; and if the hairs are outside, cauterize until the eyelid is lifted to its natural place, and is even, so the hairs do not prick the eye.	But if after an interval there be a return of the same condition of the eyelash and of drooping of the eyelid, repeat the cauterization in the same place just as you did before. And if it be in the lower lid cauterize this also till it falls back to its normal position and the hairs do not irritate the eye.	0.79549253
The cautery with burning medicine requires instructing the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then making a shape like a myrtle leaf out of parchment; then take French soap and quicklime, each one ounce, and grind them together well; do it quickly so it doesn't cool, then spread it on the parchment shaped like the myrtle leaf, and place it on the eyelid; and if the disease is in one eye, work on one, or both if in both; place cotton soaked in egg white below the eye; and let the patient's head be on your lap and place your index finger on the medicine, pressing gently and moving it whenever the patient feels a burning sensation from the medicine, as it feels like fire. When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine with your finger. And when the burning sensation has passed, wash the area with water, and check if you see the eyelid lifted as if by fire or incision; if so, it is good. If not, reapply the medicine on the spot where it has not worked, until your work is even and the eyes are aligned; then apply cotton soaked in butter until the burned core falls off, afterward treat the area with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.	Place your forefinger on the caustic and press it down a little and move it about according as the patient feels the bite of the caustic; for he will feel it sting like fire. While the stinging lasts, let the caustic remain on and move it about with your finger; and when the stinging dies down take away the caustic and wash the eye with water; then look, and if you see the eyelid raised up as by a blepharoplasty, either by fire or by incision, good. If not, repeat the caustic application in the place that the drug has not affected and which has not gone black, until your operation is complete and the eyelid draws together. Then apply cotton wool with butter till the crust of the burn falls away; then treat with Palm ointment or the like till it be healed.	0.9142437
And it is necessary to be very careful in your work so that no medicine falls into the eyes. And if the eyelid becomes soft again and the hairs prick the eye, restart the medicine on the softened spot of the eyelid exactly as you did before; afterward treat until it is healed; and this is the shape of the myrtle leaf:	But in your operative procedure take the utmost care lest the least bit of caustic get into the eye. And if, after some days, the eyelid be relaxed and some eyelash irritate the eye, then repeat the application, particularly in that part of the lid that has dropped, in the same manner as before; and treat till cured. This is the shape of the myrtle leaf.	0.8205371
And know that human eyes vary in size and shape, and adjust your treatment accordingly; and the correct method should not be revealed to anyone not dedicated to this art.	You should know that the human eye varies in size; so let your contracture be in proportion to this. The right procedure is well known to him who has experience in this art.	0.7494693

chapter-1-subchapter-17.txt
of the treatment of fistula by cautery	On cauterization of a fistula in the angle of the eye.	0.46581507
When you treat a fistula as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not work, then you must cauterize it in this manner.	When you have treated a fistula in those ways mentioned in the sections on diseases, without success, it should be cauterized after this manner.	0.8496698
Instruct the patient to place his head on your lap; and have an assistant hold his head between his hands so it does not move; then place cotton soaked in egg white or parsley juice on the eye; afterward heat the cautery which is shaped like the quill of a vulture, with the cautery at the end; if you wish, it can be pointed from one end to the other, or it can be shaped like a tent; but in any case, the quill-shaped one is very useful for your work.	Bid the patient put his head in your lap; and let an assistant hold his head in front of you without moving or stirring. Then place on his eyes cotton wool damped with egg-white or mucilage of psyllium seeds. Then heat a cautery shaped thus. It should be hollow and in shape like a fine tube, like an eagle's quill, at the one end that is used as a cautery.	0.8807873
Afterward press the fistula if it is open, and extract the pus and dry it; if it is closed, open it and remove the pus; then apply the hot cautery strongly, holding your hand steady over the fistula on the upper part of the eye, so your hand does not slip; place the cautery in the fat of the eye and corrupt it.	Then press on the fistula if it be open and get the matter out of it and wipe it away; or if it is not open, then open it. Then apply to it the cautery, which should be very hot, and press it in with your hand till it reaches the bone. While you are burning keep the hand away from the eye slightly toward the nasal side, lest your hand slip or the patient draw away so that you put the cautery into the ball of the eye and destroy it.	0.84482455
If you reach the bone with the cautery, it would be good. If not, repeat the cautery again, and again if needed, and leave it for three days; afterward apply cotton soaked in butter, and treat with drying ointment until healed; and if forty days pass without healing, apply sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and shave it according to what is mentioned in its chapter.	And if you reach the bone at the first cauterization, good; if not, repeat the cauterization if necessary. Leave it a few days, then put on cotton wool with butter and treat with hygroscopic ointment till it heals. And should forty days have passed and it does not heal, apply a sharp corrosive ointment so as to expose the bone, and strip it as will be explained in the appropriate chapter.	0.8863369
There is a method of cauterizing a fistula that some of the ancients mentioned. Open the fistula, and split the place; afterward place a small chamomile flower in the split, of which this is the shape: and make it to the size of one ounce of lead; and hold your hand firmly on the chamomile, and do not let the patient move, so that the melted lead does not flow into his eye; and it is necessary to place cotton soaked in egg white or water on the eye: the lead burns the fistula and heals it marvelously.	Another method of cauterizing a fistula is that which some of the Ancients mentioned: apply yourself to the site of the fistula and incise it; then insert into the incision a fine funnel, this being the figure of it, and pour into it a drachm of molten lead; and keep your hand on the funnel, holding it firm all the time, and do not let the patient move at all, lest the molten lead run into his eyes. Then you should put cotton wool soaked in egg-white or water upon the patient's eye. For the lead cauterizes the site of the fistula and acts as a marvellous cure.	0.87670064
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we mentioned, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer punctures to the nerve, and bring the fistula to the core of the nerve as needed in its proper place.	If the fistula heals by the cauterization and medication we have described, well and good; otherwise perforation of the nose will undoubtedly have to be undertaken to lead the fistula into the meatus of the nose, by the technique that will come in its own place.	0.74967766

chapter-1-subchapter-18.txt
of the cracks in the lips Many times cracks appear in the lips that are called "poil", especially in children's lips.	There often occur fissures in the lip to which are given the name 'hairs'; they are particularly common in the lips of boys.	0.77019566
When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery in this shape:	When you have ineffectually treated these clefts with those things that we have mentioned in their section, then heat a small edged cautery of this shape. The hollow should be as sharp as a knife.	0.7734394
And quickly place it in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; afterward treat the area with wax until it is healed.	Then quickly place it, hot, right on the fissure till the burning has reached the depth of the lip. Then treat with wax plaster till healed.	0.77320445

chapter-1-subchapter-19.txt
of the abscess in the throat	On the cauterization of fistulae occurring in the mouth.	0.4423194

chapter-1-subchapter-20.txt
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth become loose, and you treat it with medicines and it does not help, then place the patient's head on your lap; afterward heat the cautery whose shape will be mentioned later in such a way that you place a ring on the tooth; and place the hot cautery inside quickly, and hold it until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; afterward lift your hand and repeat the cautery as you wish; afterward, have the patient fill his mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and spit it out.	When the gums are relaxed on account of humidity and the teeth are loose, and you treat this with drugs, and your treatment is ineffectual, then place the patient's head in your lap; then heat the cautery whose picture will come later. Put a cannula upon his tooth and quickly introduce the glowing cautery into it and press a little until the patient can feel the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth; then remove your hand. Then repeat the cauterization as many times as you may desire. Then the patient should fill his mouth with saline, hold it for a while, then spit it out.	0.9219461
And in this way, the loose tooth will be firm, the softened gums will be strengthened, and the corrupted moisture will be dried.	Then the loose tooth will be made firm, the relaxed gum will be tightened, and the corrupt humidity will be dried up.	0.82890236

chapter-1-subchapter-21.txt
of the pain of the teeth	On cauterization for toothache.	0.41346204
When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is cold or wind, and the medicine treatments do not help, then a cautery is needed in two ways: with butter or with fire.	When the toothache arises on account of cold, or if there be a worm in the tooth, and medical treatment does not avail, then cauterization should be undertaken. There are two ways of doing this, one with butter, the other with the cautery.	0.77770996
The butter cautery is done by taking cow's butter and melting it in an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a stick, soak it in the melted butter, and apply it quickly to the aching tooth and hold it until it cools; do this often until the effect reaches the root of the tooth, and if you want, soak wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth, and place a hot iron on it until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.	Cauterization with butter is done thus: take cows' butter and let it boil in an iron ladle or pan; then take cotton wool, wind it round the top of a probe, and dip it in the boiling butter and quickly apply it to the aching tooth and hold it there till cold. Repeat this a number of times till the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth. If you prefer, dip wool or cotton in cold butter and put it on the aching tooth, then on top of that apply the hot iron until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.	0.9303105

chapter-1-subchapter-22.txt

chapter-1-subchapter-23.txt
When moisture prevails over the channels of the lung, especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be emptied by purgative medicines; afterward make a cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go down to the throat, and burn only a little of the core. Afterward make another cautery at the junction of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cautery be called "clavile" whose shape we mentioned earlier; and treat the area as we mentioned earlier until healed.	When humidities prevail over the windpipe, and especially when there is a frigid temperament, the patient should first have his bowels opened with a laxative. Then cauterize him once in the hollow of the jugular fossa at the root of the throat in the hollow part. Take care that the cautery does not pierce through to the gullet, and burn no more than half of the thickness of the skin. Then cauterize him once more, strongly, at the junction of the neck with its last vertebra, the cautery being claviform as described above.	0.8214705

chapter-1-subchapter-24.txt
of the cough When cough and lung disease are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, make two cauteries on the chest in empty places; and one cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the shape mentioned earlier.	When the cough and pulmonary disease arise from cold humidities and the patient suffers from no fever or wasting but the disease is chronic, sear him with two cauterizations over the two clavicles, in the soft depressions ; and with another cauterization in the mid-line of the chest between the breasts. Let the cautery be claviform as described above.	0.8427586
And if you want, make a cautery by pricking with the cautery called "poins" whose shape is mentioned earlier in the disease of the ears; and make up to thirty pricks, or around that number. Afterward treat the area as mentioned earlier, and let the cauteries be in three rows according to this shape:	And if you prefer, make punctate cauterizations with the cautery called 'punctate'; its shape has already been described under pricking for earache. The punctures should number upwards of thirty. Then treat as aforesaid until healed.	0.79266274
And for this reason, the cauteries are lighter, because you make three at once.	Sometimes also a trident cautery is prepared, in this manner, with which you can burn more speedily; for with this you can apply three cauterizations at once.	0.59530747

chapter-1-subchapter-25.txt
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterward, the patient should be laid on his back and side; then lift the core within the titillate with the fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inward, heat the cautery with two nerves of which this is the shape:	On cauterization of the axilla. When the head of the humerus is dislocated on account of the synovial fluid or when it does not remain in the correct position after the dislocation has been set, so that this becomes a regular occurrence—it is set and then dislocates with the least movement, as we have ourselves seen; you must first set the luxation, then make the patient lie down on his back or on his sound side; then with the fingers of the left hand lift up the skin of the axilla if the joint has dislocated downwards. Then heat a cautery provided with two spits in this manner.	0.8528583
and cauterize the core until it penetrates to the ribs, and the shape of the cautery will come with four cauteries; and therefore a cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, so the shape of the cauterization will be six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery with three nerves:	Then with that burn through the fold of skin till you have perforated to the other side, getting four cauterizations. The cautery may be of three prongs and then the form of the cauterization will be six burns. The prongs should be of the fineness of a probe. This is the figure of the cautery with three prongs.	0.7413386
Sometimes an additional nerve is added, making it eight cauteries.	Sometimes there is added yet one more so there will be eight burns.	0.77489996
Afterward, apply mashed leeks with salt on the cautery; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well strengthened.	Put on the burns leeks well pounded with salt; then keep the patient absolutely quiet so as not to move the joint for a time till it gains strength.	0.8717392
If it is dislocated upward, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thickness of the clavicle cautery, or many small cauteries. This will close the joint, remove the moisture, and the patient will be healed.	If the dislocation has gone upwards, which very rarely happens, then cauterize him above the shoulder with one good claviform cautery or with multiple punctured cauterizations. Thus the joint will gain strength and the humidity will disappear and the patient will be cured.	0.8160028

chapter-1-subchapter-29.txt
of the cautery for pleurisy	On cauterization for pleurisy.	0.64999026
And some ancients said that some use an iron cautery resembling a razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; the pain jumps out, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work, there is a fear that the patient may die immediately, or a fistula may form that cannot be healed.	Now one of the Ancients mentioned that there were some people who used an iron cautery shaped like a probe, and introduced it red hot into the intercostal space until it reached the abscess itself and evacuated the pus, as we have mentioned under tumour of the liver. But in this perforation with the cautery there is a danger either that the patient may die on the spot or that an incurable fistula may arise at the place.	0.8514105

chapter-1-subchapter-30.txt
When you treat the disease of the spleen as we have mentioned in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help, then there are three ways of cautery that are all good.	When you have treated disease of the spleen by the means that we have mentioned in the section and your treatment is ineffectual, there will be three ways of cauterization, each of which will be correct.	0.874682
One method is to make three or four cauteries in a line along the length of the spleen, according to the shape of the liver cautery we mentioned earlier; do not press your hand with the cautery, and let the patient lie on his back;	One is to make three or four cauterizations in a row over the long axis of the spleen like the cauterization of the liver, a figure of which has been given above. Let there be between each pair of burns a finger's breadth or a little more.	0.7575823
Another method of cautery is to heat the cautery with two nerves, as we showed in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift the core that is at the spleen, where the patient's ribs come on the left side, and the elevation where you lift the core should be along the length of the body, and the cauteries should be along the width of the body.	The second method is to heat the cautery provided with two prongs, described in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder. Lift up the skin over the spleen at the level of the patient's left elbow; and let the fold of skin lie across the patient's body so that the cauterizations will fall longitudinally.	0.80787647
Then insert the two burning nerves until the core is pierced on the other side, and then remove the cautery, and there will be four. And if you wish, cauterize with the cautery with three nerves. Afterward, treat when it has expelled pus for a long time, and this is much better than the other treatments mentioned earlier.	Then push in the two prongs, well heated, till you have pierced the skin from side to side. Then take out the cautery; and there are four cauterizations. Or if you prefer you can burn with the other cautery, of three prongs. Then dress the site of cauterization after you have allowed pus to run therefrom for many days.	0.795876

chapter-1-subchapter-31.txt
Cautery is not effective for dropsy except in the manner called "ascites". When you treat it according to the methods we mentioned in the divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two on the back over the spine, and one on the chest; and let the cauteries be close to the thickness of the core.	The cautery is particularly effective in ascites. When you have, without effect, treated a dropsical person with the various measures mentioned in the section on diseases, you should sear with four cauterizations around the umbilicus, and one over the stomach, another over the liver, and another over the spleen, and two behind his back between the vertebrae, one at the level of the breast and one at the level of the stomach; and let the burn be almost skin-deep.	0.78182685
Afterward, leave the cautery open to expel pus for a long time, and do not abandon the treatment of the patient after the cautery; healing will be hastened, and the two intentions will come together with the help of God.	Then keep the burn open so that it suppurates for a long while. Do not let the patient, after cauterization, be without the necessary treatment, so that you combine both methods for him, and a cure will speedily come to him.	0.7547828
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the clavile that we showed earlier; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as mentioned earlier.	The cautery with which his belly is cauterized should be claviform like the figure previously given; while the one with which his back is cauterized should be olivary.	0.87711215

chapter-1-subchapter-32.txt
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in a dropsical person, and are full of citrine water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. Do not go too deep, so the citrine water can flow out, and let the cautery be in this shape:	On cauterization of the legs and feet. When, in the sufferer from dropsy, these swell and become full of yellowish fluid, you should cauterize the upper surface of the feet in the depression between the little and fourth toes; hold your hand upright with the cautery; do not let it slant. Then remove your hand and do no more cauterization whatever; for the yellowish fluid will exude.	0.84658235
Then make two cauteries on each leg with the point of the knife-shaped cautery; let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open for a long time without treating, so the water can flow out; afterward treat with the other treatments we mentioned.	Then sear the legs with two cauterizations on each leg; cauterize with the bladed end of the cautery, and let it be along the length of the leg: one under the knee, the other lower than that, about the middle of the leg; and two more cauterizations over each femur. Leave the burns open without treatment for a long while during which the fluid will exude from them. Then dress with all that we have described.	0.8947535

chapter-1-subchapter-33.txt
When there is a bowel disorder due to cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive faculties in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and it cannot be treated by usual methods; and you see the patient enduring and of strong constitution, then make a large cautery on the stomach as mentioned earlier with the circular cautery; and four small cauteries around the navel with a subtle clavile cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.	When the diarrhoea is due to frigidity and humidities so that the capacity of the stomach and intestines to hold and to digest is impaired, and this has been treated by various methods and is not cured; if you see that the patient is able to endure the cautery and is of unimpaired strength, make a big cauterization on his stomach according to the preceding instructions for cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery; and four narrow cauterizations round his navel with the thin claviform cautery; and one or two big cauterizations in the lumbar region over the coccyx.	0.91224986
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient is enduring, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, because the treatment is effective when there is good help.	And if you see that the humidities are superabundant, and the patient fit to tolerate it, then make one cauterization over the groin and one over the hypochondrium. You may also add two small ones over the stomach near the big one. This is an effective treatment that does not fail to help.	0.7784283

chapter-1-subchapter-34.txt
of the treatment of hemorrhoids	On cauterization for anal haemorrhoids.	0.4807195
When hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are old and of thick, cold, and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we mentioned in the divisions, and it does not help, then make cauteries: three on the spine, the one furthest below the shoulder blades little by little in a triangle, and one cautery below the navel, two fingers' width;	When there are one or more chronic haemorrhoids in the anus arising from thick and cold humours or corrupt humidities, and they have been treated by those measures mentioned in the section, without effect, then sear the patient with three cauterizations over the lowest dorsal vertebra a little below the flat part of the back, triangularly; and one about two fingers' breadth below the navel.	0.7940463
and if you think his stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and the face is seen to swell, then make a large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with the clavile cautery; and leave the cautery open for a long time. Afterward treat the area until it is healed.	And if you consider that his stomach has become chilled and his food not being digested, and you see his face swollen, then do one big cauterization over the stomach as previously described; and one over his liver; and another over the spleen; with the claviform cautery. Keep the burn open a long while; then dress till healed.	0.94253165

chapter-1-subchapter-35.txt
When you cut the "thelul", heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it completely hot on the cut "thelul"; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the origin of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of "thelul", cauterize each as we have said; afterward treat with beneficial ointments until healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the "thelul", it will be more helpful.	When you excise warts, heat a spike-shaped cautery and bring it, hot, to the site of the excised wart, and press down till the cautery reaches the mouth of the vessel whence the blood comes. Do this once or twice over. If the warts be more than one, sear each one separately as we have described ; then dress with suitable ointments till healed. And if you burn the patient with one big cauterization over the lumbar region that will add to the effect.	0.7999792

chapter-1-subchapter-36.txt
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will recount in its place, then comes such a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.	When the patient will not submit to the cutting operation we have described in its own place, and is afraid of it, he may perhaps be cured with the cautery.	0.6700438

chapter-1-subchapter-37.txt
of kidney disease When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and from thick winds, and he has no desire for women, then make a cautery on the kidneys on both sides with the clavile cautery as mentioned earlier; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, which will be more helpful.	On cauterization of the kidneys. When pain strikes the kidneys from chill or heavy vapour, and the patient's sexual vigour is impaired thereby, you should burn him right over the kidneys, once on each kidney, with the claviform cautery mentioned before. I have often burnt him with a third cauterization on the flat of the back, making three cauterizations in a line, which is most effective.	0.7370087

chapter-1-subchapter-38.txt
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, make a cautery on the front part over the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right and one on the left, each cautery as long as the width of a thumb; make one cautery on the back, or two if needed; and let the cauteries be clavile according to the shape mentioned earlier.	On cauterization of the urinary bladder. When there occurs in the urinary bladder a weakness and relaxation due to chill and humidities, so that the patient cannot retain his water, sear him once below his navel, on the bladder, where the pubic hair begins; burn him once also on the right side and once on the left side of the navel; and let the distance of the burn from either side be the length of the joint of the thumb. Cauterize him also once on the lower part of the back, or twice if you need. The cautery should be claviform, as described.	0.8334618

chapter-1-subchapter-39.txt
of the uterus When the womb is cold and moist, not preventing conception, and the menses are corrupted and their periods are delayed; and when they come, great pain is felt: then make three cauteries around the navel, as mentioned in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; and let the cauteries be clavile, as mentioned.	On cauterization of the womb. When matter arises in the womb from chill or humidities and she is thereby prevented from conceiving and her menses are upset; their flow fails or, as they pass, pain accompanies them; then you must cauterize her three times around the navel, as we have mentioned in cauterization of the bladder; and once or twice in the lumbar region in the lower part of the back over the hips.	0.8011518

chapter-1-subchapter-40.txt
of the hip	at the hip].	0.5231476
When viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, causing it to dislocate, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the location of the dislocation is found empty, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a circular cautery, and bleed in front of the location around the joint so that the joint is within the circle; and let the cautery be like the one used for the stomach.	Then you should cauterize the patient over the hip joint itself with a circular burn, after you have marked with ink a circle round the femoral joint, so that the joint falls in the middle of the circle. The cautery should be the one whose description has already been given in cauterization of the stomach.	0.6220058
And if this cautery is not available, make three large olive-shaped cauteries, and let the cautery be as deep as the entire core; and treat it until it is healed.	But if you have not this cautery by you, give him three cauterizations with the larger size olivary cautery. The burn should be to the depth of the whole thickness of the skin. Then dress till healed.	0.7607561

chapter-1-subchapter-41.txt
of the hip pain When pain comes to the hip joint, caused by cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of the thick humors with fetid pills or other good pills.	When pain occurs in the hip joint and is due to cold and humidities, and the patient has been treated by those means mentioned in the section, and the treatment is ineffectual, and the pain becomes chronic, the patient should be purged of the heavy humours with foetid pills or pills of tamarind or the like; then cauterize him.	0.80784434
Afterward make the cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two ways: with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is done in many ways, one of which is: cauterize on the hip joint with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make them deep and large, with a space between each cautery the width of a finger, and let the cautery be olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on the head of the hip, so there are four according to this shape:	The means of cauterization in this case is twofold: either with caustic chemicals or with fire. The actual cautery will serve for several methods. One of them is to make three cauterizations over the femoral joint itself in a triangular manner ; and let them be of a fair depth; and the space between them a finger's breadth. The cautery should be an olivary one.	0.75614345
And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery mentioned earlier for the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle encompasses the entire hip, and the entire thickness of the core is burned.	The burning may be done with the circular cautery which has been mentioned under cauterization of a dislocated hip; a single cauterization so that the circle embrace the whole joint. Burn through the whole thickness of the skin.	0.72870487
And this is the manner done for sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. If it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers wide, a little to the left; and let the cautery be knife-shaped, and burn the thickness of the core; and if the patient feels the pain extends to the toes or near there, cauterize where the pain is felt with three or four pricks with the cautery called "poins".	This is the form of cauterization for sciatica when the pain is localized in the hip joint and does not extend to the femur and the leg. But if it extends to the femur and the leg, cauterize him over the thigh with two burns at the place where the patient indicates the pain to be; and one burn four fingers above the great tendon of the heel, a little to the outer side.	0.83317137
And if necessary, make more; if the pain is below the knee toward the thigh, make a cautery with the knife-shaped or circular cautery, and be very careful with all your cauteries not to leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, causing the patient greater harm and contraction.	If he indicates that the pain is under the knee towards the shank, give him one burn there with the edged cautery. Be careful in all your cauterizing not to carry the cautery so far as to burn a nerve or a large artery; for thence arises grave harm, or crippling, to the patient.	0.7876686
And I myself have seen many who made cautery on the ankle of the foot and left it so long that the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot too, and the foot was pierced and corrupted. Afterward a bowel disorder from which he died.	I myself have seen more than one person cauterizing over the tendon of Achilles, the cauterization being excessive, and the leg was affected with a defluxion of humours which eventually reached the foot and the whole was riddled; after that came diarrhoea, and, after that, death.	0.7959193
And if the pain is in two places together, make a cautery on each, in this manner. The wise said for the hip cautery, whose manner is this: make such an iron tool and let it be at the head as thick as a date stone, or a little less, and let it be interlaced, with a space between each interlace the size of a knuckle; and let the interlaces be open on two sides, and be like knots, and let there be a well-made iron handle; and this is the shape:	If there is pain in two places, cauterize both in this way. Certain learned doctors have mentioned a cauterization applicable to the hip in this manner: make a bowl of iron with a diameter of half a span; the thickness of the edge of its mouth should be that of a date-stone or a little less. Another bowl is introduced into this, and a third into that; and there is a distance between the bowls of a thumb-joint. The bowls are open on both sides; and the depth of them should be a thumb-joint or two.	0.7993604
And heat it until it is all red and sparks, then place it on the diseased hip joint, and turn it on the healthy side; and cauterize once with a round cautery and leave it for three days; then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; afterward treat with ointment until healed.	Then heat this cautery in the fire until it is hot and sends out sparks; and so let it be applied to the hip, the patient lying on his sound side; and thus three circular cauterizations will be produced at a time. Afterwards let it be for three days; then smear with butter and leave the wound open for a while; then treat with ointment till it heals.	0.8873588
Albucasim said that we use little of this cautery due to the fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it; however, it is a good cautery, for those who can endure it, and where it is appropriate.	The author of this book says that we very rarely employ this method of cauterization on account of the ugliness and dread appearance of it, and because we find few patients who will endure it. Nevertheless, it is one of the best cauteries for him who can endure it and is correctly treated by it.	0.68246317

chapter-1-subchapter-42.txt
of back pain	On cauterization for pain in the back.	0.5125172
When pain comes to the back, either from falling or impact or excessive evacuation, or from the spread of cold matter, cautery is useful for none of these cases, except for one caused by the infusion of cold matter.	Many different causes give pain in the back. Sometimes it happens from a fall or a blow, or from excessive evacuation or the like. It may also be due to an influx of humid matter. Cauterization is only to be employed in this last case, which arises from an influx of cold matter.	0.7294835
It is necessary that after the patient is purged with fetid pills or similar, three lines be made on his back where the pain is, marked with ink, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and capacity of the patient; and let the cautery be done with the cautery called "poins"; and if you wish, make three or four cauteries with the medium clavile cautery in this shape:	When the patient has been purged with foetid pills or the like, he should be cauterized in his back where the pain is, over the breadth of the flat of the back, after the place has been marked with ink, with three rows of cauterizations, five in each, or more, in proportion to what you see of the patient's endurance and strength. Use the punctate cautery. If you like, you may give him three or four cauterizations with the middle-sized claviform cautery.	0.86948055

chapter-1-subchapter-43.txt
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the sign of its onset is that they have labored breathing when they get up, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes on the other spines.	This disease often occurs in small children. The sign of the beginning of the disease in a child is that he suffers shortness of breath when standing or moving, and you will find that at the end of his dorsal vertebrae there is one visibly projecting above the other vertebrae.	0.79659617
When you see this and want to treat it, cauterize it with the circular cautery in this shape:	So when you see this and you wish to stop it, cauterize him with a cautery that should be circular so that the cauterization takes in equally all sides of the vertebra.	0.5920708
So that the cautery takes each part of the spine equally. And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with pricking cautery in two or three lines, and let the pricks be close to each other. Afterward, treat the area until it is healed as we said, and be careful not to administer cautery on gibbosity that is in a nerve spasm.	If you wish, you can cauterize two or three lines around the vertebra with the punctate cautery; let the punctures be close to one another. Then dress the place with those remedies we have mentioned, till healed. But beware of using the cautery in the deformity arising from a nervous spasm.	0.81895065

chapter-1-subchapter-44.txt
of joint pain	On cauterization of gout and pain in the joints.	0.5029675
When joint pain is from moisture that is spread to each part of the body, and when pain comes to the feet, which doctors properly call "podagra", and when it is from a cold cause and medical treatments cannot cure it, it is cured by cautery in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped in this shape:	When there are pains in the joints from cold humidities flowing into whatever part of the body it may be, and specially when there are pains in the feet, doctors are in the habit of calling that 'gout'. When gout due to chill has been treated with the various treatments mentioned in its section, and the pains remain, the cautery will remove them. That is, you cauterize the patient with multiple burns around the joint of the foot, after he has been purged.	0.7534822
And if it is necessary to prick the face of the foot, make a cautery with the cautery called "point". And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, which happens many times, make cautery on each knee with three or four cauteries on each part, with the olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, make more, but do not leave your hand there longer than necessary to burn the thickness of the core.	If you need to make punctate cauterizations round the front of the foot, use the punctate cautery; and if the pains go up to the knee or other joints, which often happens, burn each knee with three or four cauterizations on every side with the same olivary cautery. And if you require to cauterize him more than this, do it, but do not go deeply but only about the thickness of the skin.	0.8192011

chapter-1-subchapter-45.txt
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, provide him with a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days; he should have good rest, work little and avoid too much food and drink, and shouting too loudly; and when he follows this advice he will be completely healed. And I will later describe the cure by cutting in its chapter. of rupture of the abdomen	Then when he wants to get up after the forty days, employ a tight bandage and keep this on another forty days. He should be moderate in his exertion, his eating, drinking, and shouting. Thus under these rules he will be completely cured. I shall speak of the treatment of rupture by scission in the appropriate chapter.	0.86881137
When ruptures come in other parts of the abdomen and are known, and you want them not to grow more, make one cautery with a round cautery according to its quantity, and burn a third of the core; afterward treat as we have said; and some of the ancients said it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery in this shape:	When a rupture occurs elsewhere in the belly and is at its inception and you wish it not to grow, cauterize the rupture with a round cautery in proportion to its size; burn about two-thirds through the thickness of the skin and treat as we have said; he will be cured and the rupture will not grow. One of the Ancients said that ruptures were to be cauterized with a three-armed cautery like this.	0.86417425
but first mark the place with ink and make a line across the rupture, and another above, and place your hand in the middle with the clavile cautery. But the first cautery is easier and better.	First mark the rupture with ink; put the transverse line on the upper margin of the rupture and the other towards the lower, and apply a single claviform cautery in the middle. But the first cauterization is easier and better.	0.8418871

chapter-1-subchapter-46.txt
of chronic pain in any limb When pain comes to any member, either from falling or injury, and this pain lasts a long time, and medical cures do not work, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and let the cautery be according to the length of the member and its smallness, its weakness, its strength, and its location of twists and pain. If healed by the first cautery, it is good; if not, repeat another cautery on the same spot, because such a habit is that it must be moved to the nearby member, for which it is necessary to make cauteries until the patient is healed.	When pain occurs in some limb due to a fall or a blow and the pain becomes chronic and medical treatment has no effect upon it, you should cauterize it with the punctate cautery. In each case the cauterization should be in proportion to the size of the limb, its strength or weakness, and the chronicity of the pain and contusion in it. If it is cured at the first cauterization, good; otherwise repeat the cauterization. For it is customary for these pains to move from one part to a neighbouring part, and you must follow them with the cautery till the patient is cured.	0.8705833

chapter-1-subchapter-47.txt
And know that the more cauteries you make, the more you help, and the more it benefits; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already entirely corrupted. And the cauteries must be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the manner of the tools. Afterward, treat the area with vetch flour with honey and other treatments until it is healed.	You should know that the more you cauterize the more beneficial and effective it will be. You should know also that the patient will not find the cautery painful as a sound man would, since his body is benumbed. The cauteries should be of the types of instrument mentioned earlier, larger or smaller in proportion to the size of the limb or joint. Then treat the cauterization with powder of bitter vetch with honey, together with the other treatments, till healed.	0.8681847

chapter-1-subchapter-48.txt

chapter-1-subchapter-49.txt
When the disease called "albaras" is old, and the medical treatments do not work, then cauterize it with a cautery a little deep, according to the thickness of the core, until the whiteness is removed, and the color is changed; then treat with vetch flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and the blood of a dove and the blood of a lizard, each a part; and mix it all together, and bind it with a cloth, and air it at the place until it is healed.	When leprosy is of long standing and no device of medicine has any effect upon it, make a cauterization over it to a slight depth according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness has gone and the colour of the skin altered. Then treat with lentil flour, oil of roses, arnoglossa leaves, and pigeons' or swallows' blood, of each equal parts mixed all together and spread on lint; let this stick to the place till healed.	0.77756023

chapter-1-subchapter-50.txt

chapter-1-subchapter-51.txt
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to ripen either because of the excess it produces or because of the patient's age when he is decrepit (which means too old) and has little blood, or because of the time; and you want to hasten it to ripen: then cauterize around it with many small pricking cauteries; afterward, leave it like this. Because it will hasten to ripen.	When a person gets a boil which is slow in coming to a head, either because of the superfluity causing it, or because of the patient's age if he be an elderly man lacking in blood, or because of the season, and you wish to hasten the ripening of the boil, then make a punctate burn around it with multiple small cauterizations, and then let be; it will speedily come to a head.	0.8053179
And if you want to pierce it with the cautery, heat the cautery, the form of which is:	If you wish to perforate it with cauterization, heat the cautery of this type.	0.6163203

chapter-1-subchapter-52.txt

chapter-1-subchapter-53.txt

chapter-1-subchapter-54.txt
When someone trembles from the coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary to make four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach with the olive-shaped cautery; this will stop the trembling, and hasten the recovery from the cold disease.	When someone has a tremor, either from chill in a nerve or quartan fever, or from some other cause, you should cauterize him four or five times over the vertebrae of the back, one between each vertebra, and one on his breast and one on his stomach, with an olivary cautery. Thus the tremor will be stilled and the dispersal of the cold distemper will be hastened.	0.8812823

chapter-1-subchapter-55.txt

chapter-1-subchapter-56.txt
When the artery is cut Many times it happens that there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from outside, or from the incision of the abscess, or from the cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is very difficult to stop.	On cauterization in haemorrhage arising from a cut artery. Very often there occurs bleeding from an artery which has been cut either by an external wound or in opening an abscess or in cauterizing a part of the body and so on, and it is difficult to stem.	0.87395465
And nevertheless when this happens to someone, hurry to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press hard enough that the blood calms under your finger, and no drop comes out; then put several small and large olive-shaped cauteries in the fire until they are all red; then take one, either large or small depending on the wound and the place where the artery is broken, and put the cautery on that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is staunched.	When this happens to anyone, quickly apply your hand to the mouth of the artery, putting your forefinger to it and closing it properly till the bleeding ceases under your fingers and nothing comes out. Then put in the fire several olivary cauteries, small and large, and blow on them to make them very hot. Then take one, small or large according to the size of the wound and the site of the opening of the artery, and bring the cautery down right on the artery itself, after promptly removing your finger, and hold the cautery upon it till the blood ceases.	0.9207211
And if it spurts out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery goes out, then hastily take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.	But if it bursts out after you have removed your finger from the mouth of the artery, and the cautery has cooled, promptly take another of the cauteries which you have ready in the fire.	0.82815146
And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is staunched; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well staunched especially when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four ways we have mentioned: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not pulled, or by strong tying with thread, or by medicines applied that have the power to staunch blood; and let it be tied and pressed appropriately.	Continue doing this, with one after another, till the haemorrhage is stanched. Mind you do not burn any nerve which may be there, so that another calamity afflicts the patient. You should know that when there is arterial haemorrhage it is impossible to stop it, especially when the vessel is big, except in one of four ways, to wit: by the cautery as we have said; or by division of the vessel when it is not completely divided, for when it is cut through the ends of it contract and the bleeding is stopped; or by a strong thread ligature; or by the application of styptics with tight bandaging.	0.90700644
Whoever administers stanching by tightly tying with cloths or applying burning things, or other similar things, will find it helps but little.	But those who try to stop bleeding with ligatures or cloths, or by the application of caustics and the like, never stanch it by these means, or at least very rarely.	0.60221064
And if this happens to someone and he has neither doctor nor medicine present, he must put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press hard enough that it is staunched over the wound and over the vein; and not move his finger, but moisten it often with cold water that is very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and staunched; and afterward do whatever is necessary with cauteries and medicines.	And if this happen to anyone and there are available neither doctor nor remedies, let him at once apply his forefinger to the mouth of the vessel as we have bidden and close it firmly till the blood is stanched; and pour over the wound and over the artery, without removing the finger, water as cold as possible till the blood thickens and congeals and ceases to flow. And meanwhile one should be considering what kind of cautery or medicine is indicated.	0.9094707

chapter-2.txt
We have told you in the first chapter all about diseases that require fire cautery or burning medicine, and the indications, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries; and I have covered this chapter from head to toe, and I will proceed in this chapter in the same way so that one can find more easily what they seek.	ON INCISION, PERFORATION, AND VENESECTION, AND WOUNDS AND THE LIKE IN the first book I spoke of all those diseases for which cauterization is of value, either the actual cautery or that done with caustic medicines; and of their reasons and causes; also the instruments and the shapes of the cauteries. This I set out in chapters, from head to heel. In this book I shall proceed along the same route so that it will be easy for the inquirer to find what he is looking for.	0.84815687
And before I begin, it is necessary, dear son, for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first on cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.	But before I begin this you ought first to know, my sons, that in this book there is more risk than in the first, which treats of cauterization. Wherefore in this matter there should be greater circumspection.	0.8452536
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.	For in the course of the work of which this book treats there often occurs an effusion of the blood upon which life depends, in the opening of a blood-vessel or the incision of a tumour or the perforation of an abscess or the treatment of a wound or the extraction of an arrow, or in the incising for a calculus or similar cases; all of which are accompanied by uncertainty and fear; and in most death will supervene.	0.84318256
And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For many types of people come for treatments. Some come who are so afflicted with their illness that they die quickly because of the madness they find in their illness, and from the severity of their malice; and one must be wary of these. And there are those who give you their opinion and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the illness is treacherous. It is not right for you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but place greater consideration on your honor than on your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely on that of which you are certain, and from which you can gain profit and praise; and use prognosis and indication in the treatments of your patients to which health may be converted; and this will help you acquire a good reputation, glory, and a memory of praise.	So I warn you against undertaking any case in which there is any element of doubt to you; for in the exercise of the art you will be mobbed by all kinds of persons with all manner of afflictions; some being so weary of their sickness that death itself is a relief on account of the extent of their sufferings and the length of their miseries, their illness being so settled as to presage death. Some will lavish their wealth on you and enrich you, in the hope that they may be curable, when their disease is mortal. You should not assist any of this kind who approach you; let your caution be stronger than your greed and desire for gain; and do not embark upon anything of this kind unless you have positive knowledge, which you judge adequate, about the way of bringing the patient a good outcome.	0.84941995
Very dear son, Our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and may He inspire you with the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.	May God inspire you, my sons, with His guidance, and grant that you hit the mark and succeed; for it is in His hand; there is no God but He.	0.5394101
Now I have arranged this chapter for you by dividing it into chapters, according to what is in the chapter on cauteries, which I have described from head to toe, so that you may more easily find what you need.	I have arranged this book in sections as I did with the previous book on cauterizations, from head to heel; so you will the easier find in it what you seek.	0.82813597

chapter-2-subchapter-1.txt
Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, when the delivery process compresses the child's head too strongly; and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.	This disease occurs most commonly in infants upon delivery when the midwife grasps the child's head roughly. It also sometimes happens from some hidden and unknown cause.	0.806587
And I have never seen this illness except in children, and in all those I have seen, death hastened; and therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the work of such treatments.	I have never seen this disease except in very small children; and death very quickly overtook all those that I have seen; therefore I have preferred not to undertake operation in these cases.	0.8634027
If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this form:	This is the form of the scalpel. If the humidity is more copious and the swelling greater, make two intersecting incisions to this pattern.	0.7306835
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs are that you see the sutures of the head opened on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and this is not answered: you must make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:	But if the humidity is beneath the bone—and the sign of that is that you will see the sutures of the skull gaping on all sides, the water manifestly yielding when you press in with your fingers—you should make three incisions in the middle of the head, in this pattern.	0.7675873
And after the incision, draw out all the moisture. Then press the incisions with cloths and powders, and apply wine and oil, and leave it until the fifth day; then uncover it, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head be pressed evenly, and give the patient dry food with little moisture until the limbs are strengthened and healed.	After incising, draw out all the humidity; then bind up the incisions with pads and bandages; and over the bandages foment with wine and oil till the fifth day. Then loose the bandage and dress the wound with lint and ointments. And do not forget to bandage the head lightly; and feed the patient with a dry diet with little fluid, until the part is strengthened and healed.	0.93374217
And another method of incision is to look where the size of the abscess and the gathering of the water appears; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.	Another pattern of incision is to see where the tumefaction and collection of fluid is apparent. For sometimes it is greater in the posterior or anterior part of the head, or to the right or to the left.	0.7929429
Then cut where the abscess appears, and the filling of the water, and make the incision as you have the ability; and be careful not to cut the artery; and let the blood flow, so that the patient does not die from the outflow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.	Therefore make your incision where the tumefaction and dropsy are apparent; incise that place in whatever way you can. Be careful not to cut an artery lest you cause haemorrhage and the patient die of that haemorrhage at the same time that the humidity is evacuated.	0.83196855

chapter-2-subchapter-2.txt
When someone has an illness called "catarrh" in the eyes or chest, and the illness is chronic, and medical treatments do not help, then the last resort is cautery along with cutting the two arteries.	When a person gets painful defluxions into the eyes or chest which become chronic, and medical treatment is ineffectual in this case, then section of these arteries will be the most efficacious treatment.	0.6367864
Therefore, when you want to cut them, have the patient tilt their head back; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then the patient tightens their neck with a cloth; then observe where the veins pulse, and the locations of both are behind the ears, and they are slightly hidden; then mark the locations, and cut both with a sharp two-edged spatula, so that the cut reaches the bone, and this should be done across the width of the head.	When you decide on section, you should shave the patient's head with a razor; then rub the place with a rough cloth to show up the artery; then bind the patient's neck with an end of his garment; then you will observe where the artery is pulsating (the sites of both are the depressions behind the ears) for it is uncommon for them to remain hidden, except in a few persons. Then do you mark with ink over both; then cut with a hooked scalpel, cutting down to the bone; the incision should be lateral to the head.	0.83144426
And if you want, place the spatula under the artery and cut it from above, cutting as if two fingers width across.	Or if you prefer, introduce the scalpel beneath the artery and make a thrusting cut up at it. The incision should be of about two fingers' breadth.	0.782589
And when the vein is cut, the blood will continuously spurt out upwards.	When cut, the artery gives out a pulsating jet of blood spurting intermittently.	0.6335368

chapter-2-subchapter-3.txt
When a chronic migraine occurs, and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and an old persistent headache and similar things, and it is treated by medical treatments and none of it helps, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have explained.	When a man has a chronic migraine or acute catarrh, on account of acrid humidities and heat in the temporal muscles, or a violent chronic headache, or the like, and he has been treated with various medical treatments without success, we have sometimes in these diseases tried extraction of the arteries from the temples or cauterization of them, already described.	0.7492622
And the manner of their extraction is that the patient pulls back the hair of his temples, and feels for the artery that appears in the temple, for it appears well by its beating, and is slightly hidden except in some men who are very cold; and if it is hidden, then the patient tightens his neck with some cloths, then rubs the area with some rough cloth, and sprinkles the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula, which is of this form:	The manner of extraction is for the patient to shave the temporal hair; then you press upon the artery appearing on the temple; for it will be manifest to you by its pulsation, and is rarely invisible save in a few people or on account of severe cold. But if it is not plain to you then let the patient bind his neck with the end of his garment; then do you rub the place with a piece of cloth or foment with hot water, till the artery is obvious to you; then take a scalpel shaped thus; then with it gently scrape away the skin till you come to the artery, then stick a hook in it and draw it upward till you extract it from the skin and free it all round from the membranes that are beneath it.	0.843855
then lightly cut the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it up with pincers, and separate it well from the tissues that are beneath it on each side; and if the artery is thin, then turn it with the point of a hook, then cut it from that part according to the amount of the two heads. For if it is not cut, the blood does not spurt out completely.	But if it is not plain to you then let the patient bind his neck with the end of his garment; then do you rub the place with a piece of cloth or foment with hot water, till the artery is obvious to you; then take a scalpel shaped thus; then with it gently scrape away the skin till you come to the artery, then stick a hook in it and draw it upward till you extract it from the skin and free it all round from the membranes that are beneath it. But if the artery be thin, twist it with the tip of the hook and cut out enough of it for the two ends to be well separated from one another and contract so that no haemorrhage occurs; for if it is not divided and cut it will not let blood flow at all.	0.76690984
And draw out six cups of blood, up to three; and if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread, so that no rot comes before the healing of the wound, and the flow of blood stops; then cut the excess that is between the two ties at that very hour, and then, if you want, cauterize it with a knife cautery to the bone until the heads are cut; and this is the best procedure, if the patient does not have a fever and he is of a hot complexion.	Then let blood, from six to three ounces. If the artery be large it should be ligated in two places with a strong double thread; the threads should be either silken or lute-string, lest corruption attack them before the wound is healed, and haemorrhage occur. Then cut away what remains between the two ligatures; do that immediately or later. If you wish, you may cauterize it down to the bone with an edged cautery so that the ends of the artery be divided; for this will replace that operation.	0.8493421
For the cautery helps to end the moisture: therefore it is of greater help for the moisture. Or, for the extraction of the arteries, one must fill the area with old cotton and place well-made tents on top; and when you untie them, treat them with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until it is healed; and if blood runs from the artery while you are working, quickly stop it with cautery, or fill the area with vitriol and press it with your hand so that the blood stops; and if you do not have this on hand, place your finger on the spot until the blood clots, and sprinkle the area with cold water until the blood stops, and press as necessary; and the best and easiest method for extracting the artery is to cauterize the vein with a cutting cautery on both sides, but the cuts should be thick to retain their heat longer. For when the instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less. And there should be a finger's width of thickness between the two knives, and then when you have marked the two spots, place the burning iron on them until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let there be a distance between the two heads because it is not entirely closed by this cautery; and this is the form of the cautery:	Less serious and easier than excising the artery is to cauterize the vessel with this cautery provided with two blades, having first marked both places with ink. Bring it down, very hot, till it reaches the bone and the artery is cut in two places, so as to put some distance between the two ends, for it will certainly not unite after this cauterization. This is the form of the cautery. It should have two sharp blades like two small paring-knives, but they should be much less sharp than a knife, for if they are as sharp as a knife they will quickly lose their heat and the flesh will be slow in cutting.	0.784202

chapter-2-subchapter-4.txt
When tears from the eyes descend from the veins on the top of the head outward, and medical treatments do not help, and you see the patient's face redden, and he feels a throbbing in the forehead as if from chills; and his eyes are thin and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids fall out, and the eyelids are heated and scraped by the burning of the tears, then there is need for this treatment.	When lachrymation is chronic and arises from the external vessels on the cranium, nor does treatment by any kind of medical remedy have any effect, and you see the patient's features flushed, and he feels a creeping in his forehead like that of an ant, and his eyes are wasted and moist, and the roots of the lashes itch, and the eyelids are burned by the bitterness of the tears, the Ancients were compelled to treat it by this operation which they called 'treatment by the sword'.	0.79051983
And the ancients called it "contused treatment," and it involves having the patient with this disease pull back any hair on their forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead evenly along the length of the forehead; one of the incisions should be like two fingers in the middle of the forehead, running down to the nose, and the other two at the sides above the eyelids, and be careful of the incision of the arteries that are at the two sides above the eyelids; and keep your hand away from the junction of the two jawbones, and each wound should be three fingers wide across joined together;	You bid the patient shave the hair of his forehead; then you make three parallel incisions across his forehead a little apart; and let the length of each incision be two fingers' breadths; the first incision continuing the line of the nose in the middle of the forehead; and the second at a little distance from the temporal muscle; and the third incision on the other side of the forehead.	0.79322904
from the incision that is towards the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the flesh that is between the two cuts along with the tissue that is on the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second, and then remove this spatula.	Beware of cutting the two arteries which are at the sides, and keep your hand away from the mandibular joint; and let there be a distance between each incision as of three fingers joined.	0.57463884
then place in the first cut the instrument that is called "knife-like," and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side it is smooth, not sharp, and this is the form: And place the cutting side towards the flesh up to the tissue, and the smooth side towards the bone, and place it until it reaches the middle cut. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to what appears from the tissue, and then do the same from the middle cut to the other outside; and then extract the blood evenly, and press the area for the clotted blood; then place in each cut a tent of old cotton, and place cloths soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that no hot abscess forms; and on the third day, untie the bandage, and administer a large amount of warm water, then treat it with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds, until it is healed.	Have ready by you some pieces of sponge or a number of linen towels to wipe away the blood. Then introduce the double-edged scalpel shaped thus through the incision near the temple to the middle incision, and with it pare off all the skin between the two incisions with the periosteum; then do the same from the middle incision to the third one; then draw out this scalpel and introduce into the first incision another instrument which is known as 'the knife-shaped': sharp on one side, smooth and blunt on the other, thus. The sharp edge of it should be turned upward to the subcutaneous tissue and the smooth edge toward the bone; then push it on to reach the middle incision and with it cut all the vessels passing from the head down toward the eyes, without letting the incision come through the outer skin. Then do the same from the middle incision to the third.	0.8271425

chapter-2-subchapter-5.txt
When someone frequently has acute catarrh, and you see the eyes thin and small, and the vision weakening, and the eyelids burnt; and the hairs fall out, and there is deep acute pain in the head, and the patient sneezes; then know by these symptoms that these materials and this catarrh come only from many veins, and the best treatment for this is as follows.	When anyone has a quantity of painful defluxions, acrid and continuous, and you see the eyes wasted and sunken and their sight is weakened and the eyelids are ulcerated and lose their eyelashes; while deep in the head there may be a vehement and grievous pain with incessant sneezing, then you may know from these occurrences that those humours and catarrhs arise from many deep blood-vessels.	0.8186275
In this manner: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to grow flesh everywhere.	For example, two parts of wheat flour are taken and of colophonia four parts, and of them a salve is made which may be used to encourage the growth of flesh in wounds of this sort.	0.7389289

chapter-2-subchapter-6.txt
About the blockage of the ears	On the treatment of things that fall into the ear.	0.495831
Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grains, or an insect, or a stone from a mine or similar thing like iron; or seeds, like barley, beans, peas; or flowing substances like water and vinegar and similar things.	All that falls into the ear comes under four categories: mineral stone, or what resembles stone, such as iron or glass; vegetable grain such as pea or date-stone or the like; or liquid such as water or vinegar; or animal.	0.8698416
When a stone or other type of thing falls into the ear that does not adhere to the ear and does not grow in the ear, place the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, then distill a little violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and make the person sneeze with pepper, and plug the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and hold the ear upwards. Often it comes out by this treatment; and if it does not come out, then administer extraction with delicate pincers, which have this form:	When a stone or something of that sort that does not grow gets into the ear, turn the ear toward the sun. If you see the stone, pour upon it a little oil of violets or sesame; then try to get it out by moving the head or by inducing sneezing with ptarmica and keeping the nose closed at the onset of sneezing, having first made round the ear a circle of pieces of cloth or wool and drawn the ear upwards. This treatment will usually bring it out. But if it does not come out, try to get it out with a fine pair of tweezers shaped thus.	0.8923899
If it jumps out with pincers, that is good; if not, then administer extraction with a delicate hook of small size; and if it does not come out by this, then make a bronze tube and place the end of the tube in the ear hole tightly, and seal what is around the tube with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the tube; then pull it out strongly, for often it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, then take glue used for catching birds, and place it on an instrument that is suitable for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out. And if it does not come out by all these means that we have mentioned, then hurry to cut the ear before a hot abscess comes, and spasms; and the manner of the cut is that you first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein, and draw blood according to his strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the soft part at the dependent place; and let the cut be like a crescent, until you reach the stone, then remove it as best you can, and suck it quickly with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed. And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a thin, delicate spatula in this form:	And if this does not bring it out, make a bronze tube and introduce the end of the tube well into the meatus of the ear and fill in round with wax softened with oil so that there may be no outlet save through the tube; then suck it out with all your breath; it will often come out with this. But if it does not come out with these means we have described, take turpentine resin or bird-lime, a very little; twist some compact cotton wool on the end of a probe and put this on the tip; then introduce it gently into the ear after you have dried out all the moisture from the ear. But if your treatment so far is unavailing, then be quick and incise before an abscess or spasm supervene. Now this is the way to incise: first, the patient's cephalic vein should be cut and blood drawn, in proportion to his strength; then seat the patient in front of you and turn his ear upwards; make a small incision at the lobule of the ear in the depression there (the incision should be crescent-shaped) until you reach the stone; then extract it with whatever instrument you may.	0.9285645
and administer incision of the grain. But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract it with delicate pincers and by suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is eased.	You should not do this except when you are sure that this grain has become moist by reason of the vapours of the ear, so that you may cut up the grain into several small pieces. Then you may extract them with a blunt hook or fine-headed tweezers, or by suction, as we have mentioned; for their extraction will be easy.	0.75223625
In the extraction of an insect, if it is small-bodied, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large-bodied and can be felt, then administer extraction with pincers; and this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.	As for the extraction of a creature getting into the ear, look to see if it is small of body, such as a flea or the like, in which case treat by those means mentioned in the section. But if it has a large body, conspicuous to the touch, try to get it out with tweezers and hooks; for of all things that stick in the ear this is the easiest to extract.	0.8555156
In the extraction of worms bred in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you must look at the ear in the sunlight: if any worms appear, then extract them with delicate pincers, and if they do not appear, then take a tube of which this is the form:	As for the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you have unavailingly treated it by those methods mentioned in the section in the treatise on instillations, you will need to examine the ear in the sunlight; and if you can see any worms, extract with tweezers or fine hooks.	0.7823685

chapter-2-subchapter-7.txt
About the blockage of the ears	On the treatment of obstructions in the ear.	0.6814078
Some children are born who have no openings in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by blockage from a wound, or flesh growing inside the ear, and this blockage sometimes occurs deep inside the ear, so it cannot be seen; and sometimes it happens a little outside the hole, and it can be easily seen.	Infants sometimes are born with an imperforated auditory meatus. Some people also get an obstruction in the passage of the ear, either from an injury or from flesh growing in it. Sometimes this obstruction is at the bottom of the ear out of sight, but sometimes it occurs a little outside the passage and is invisible.	0.86774623
So that which occurs deep inside, if it cannot be seen, is of difficult healing in many cases, and in that which can be seen, you must place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the blockage apparent, then work it with this spatula of which this is the form:	The sort which occurs in the depths of the ear and is invisible is, in general, difficult to cure. As for that which is within sight, set the patient's ear in the sun and examine it; and if you see that the object is something external you should make an opening with a fine scalpel like this.	0.83732164
And let it be sharp and cutting in front and back, so that it does not injure the ear; if the blockage is of grown flesh or body of the ear, then hold it with delicate pincers, and cut it lightly, until that flesh is all removed.	Let its extremity be slightly broad, with a sharp point; while the rest of the scalpel should be smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear. But if the obstruction be from flesh growing in the auditory meatus, catch it with a fine hook and cut it, with the utmost gentleness, till all the flesh is gone.	0.7856732
And if the blockage is deep in the ear, then take a light, delicate razor and heat it a little in the fire, then place it in the body of the ear. If you feel the blockage where the patient feels discomfort in hearing, pierce lightly, and make sure you do not injure the nerves of the ear; then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.	If the obstruction be in the depth of the ear, take a fine smooth probe and warm it a little in the fire; then push it into the meatus. If you feel the obstruction (what time the patient will experience hardness of hearing), seek to perforate it gently, being careful not to injure the nerve of the ear. Then put in a plug the width of the meatus, which you will have anointed with Egyptian ointment; do this for some days till you are sure that the wound is healing.	0.86525154
Do this for some days until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it; and if you see the ear swollen, then you must remove the tent and place another tent moistened with wax made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then treat it until it is healed.	Then put in a plug the width of the meatus, which you will have anointed with Egyptian ointment; do this for some days till you are sure that the wound is healing. Or take a plug and dip it into water and sprinkle it with powdered vitriol and use that. If you perceive the ear swelling with an abscess you should remove the plug and put in its place another previously prepared by soaking in wax made with oil of roses, till the abscess has subsided; then dress till it is healed.	0.8614565
And if bleeding occurs, then plunge a sponge and cloths into cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop bleeding which are in the treatment of distillations.	If a haemorrhage occur, dip a sponge or piece of material in cold water and put it on the ear, and apply the rest of the treatment to stop haemorrhage mentioned in the treatise on instillations.	0.82194126

chapter-2-subchapter-8.txt
About the flesh of the eyelids	On the treatment of warts on the eyelids.	0.48890445
These swellings that come on the eyelids of the eyes when they are moist and then dry, you must stretch them with tongs and pincers, and cut them with a spatula at their roots; then place powdered vitriol on the area.	These warts which occur on the eyelids are sometimes humid, sometimes dry. You should hold them with forceps or a hook, and cut them away from the roots with a scalpel; then put powdered vitriol on the place.	0.805059
And if blood flows from them, cauterize with a delicate lenticular cautery, and cauterizing after the incision is very effective; and many times they recur if any part of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burnt and do not return.	If there is bleeding from them, cauterize them with a fine lenticular cautery. Cauterization of them after excision is best, for they often return when a part of their roots is left behind; but when they are cauterized the roots are burnt and they will not come back.	0.8403808

chapter-2-subchapter-9.txt
And if the hailstone descends inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn the eyelid and stretch the hailstone with pincers, and cut and press it from one side to another; and if the eyelid is separated by the incision, it does not harm anything; and when the hailstone is cut, wash the eye with salted water, and treat the area with substances that generate flesh until the patient is healed.	If the stone is rather toward the inner aspect of the eyelid, then invert the lid and catch up the stone with a hook—you will not need to incise the lid—and cut it all round. If the lid is pierced in the cutting, it will do no harm at all. Then, after cutting away the stone, wash the eye with salt water; then treat with cicatrizing medicines till healed.	0.7891501

chapter-2-subchapter-10.txt
Exinach is a fat that forms in the tissues of the upper eyelids, and this happens more in children than in adults, and it greatly troubles their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the sunlight because the tears rush to their eyes; and because of this they lie on their faces often, and sleep on their faces, and their eyelids under their eyebrows are moist and the swelling and appearance are covered with exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the exinach in between.	Hydatid is fat which arises in the folds of the upper lid. It is a disease chiefly occurring in children, irritating their eyes, giving them morning catarrh; they are unable to look full into the light of the sun, since they get an immediate secretion of tears. And for that reason you will find them lying always on their faces, and they also sleep on their faces; and the eyelids below the eyebrows are moist and covered with swellings, while the hydatid stands out prominently; and when you press upon the place with your finger you can feel the fat beneath it.	0.85842705
Then extract it with a piece of cloth placed between your fingers on the outside, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is expelled; and be careful not to press in the cut, so that you do not come with the spatula to the eye, and injure it.	Draw it out with a cloth rolled between your fingers, turning your hand to right and to left till it is separated. Be careful not to go so deep with your scalpel that it sticks in the eye and injures it.	0.8383277
And if the exinach does not appear at the beginning of the cut, then increase the cut slightly until it appears; then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the area, and bind with bandages.	If you do not see the hydatid at the first incision, you must gently cut a little deeper till it comes forth, then draw it out as described. Then dip some cloth in vinegar and water, apply to the place and bind it up with pads.	0.75796443
And there are such men who grind salt and place it on to corrupt that moisture that remains. Then treat it until it is healed. And if a hot abscess comes to the area, then treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.	There are some who grind up salt and put it in the hollow of the incision to liquefy thereby the remains of the humidity. Then dress till healed. If an effusion occur in the place, treat with sedative plasters till healed.	0.8280432

chapter-2-subchapter-11.txt
When hairs other than the natural ones grow on the eyelids, and they are thick, they harm the eyes, and cause various diseases such as habitual tearing and softening of the eyelids and albugine, to the point that it causes the destruction of the eyes; and the treatment is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire, or by sharp medicine according to what is before in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by hooks, according to what I will say.	When superfluous lashes grow on the eyelid outside their natural place, below the natural lashes, and continue, they injure the eye and give rise to many kinds of disease, such as chronic lachrymation, dropping of the eyelids (ptosis), and whiteness and opacity, eventually resulting in the destruction of the eye. The plastic operation on the eye is carried out in four ways: by the actual cautery; by caustic in the way mentioned above in the book on cauterization; by incision and suture; or with canes, as I shall describe.	0.79079044
and there is another method: and it is that you mark the eyelid with a figure that is like a myrtle leaf, as we have explained, with three separated hooks according to the form that is here:	Yet another way of operating is to mark on the eyelid the figure of a myrtle leaf as we have described; then lift the eyelid with three hooks, either separate or joined thus.	0.7722243
then cut what exceeds with small scissors evenly according to the form that is here:	Then cut away the superfluous lid with a small pair of scissors with an even incision. The scissors are of this pattern.	0.6235558
And if you cannot hold the pincers, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with a thread, and place it in the middle of the figure; and place another thread near the large tear duct, and the second thread near the small one, and gather the threads evenly between your fingers; then raise your hand evenly, and lift all the skin that you have marked, as we have explained, then join the two lips of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with wax and similar soothing ointments;	But if you cannot conveniently hold with the hooks, take a threaded needle and introduce it into the middle of the marking; and put another thread through near the greater canthus, and a third thread near the lesser canthus. With your fingers hold the threads evenly and then raise your hand evenly and you will raise up the whole of the marked skin as we have said. Then bring the edges together with a suture and dress till healed. But if in your incision, or the opening you have made, a swelling arises, then allay the swelling with wax and similar sedatives.	0.8986776
and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyelid are inverted: then you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in both is more artificial.	Sometimes the lower lid also has the lashes inverted. For this you should use any of the methods we have mentioned: the incision and suture, and the operation by the actual cautery and by caustic. (	0.60311395
The treatment with hooks is according to this form: and it is that you turn the eyelid and cut inside according to what I have said, and then make two hooks by art, and two delicate threads as long as the eyelid and the width of the spatula is; and cut the two ends on two sides where you hold the threads; then join them both subtly above what exceeds the eyelid of the eye, and press the two hooks from both sides strongly; and leave it like this for some days, and the skin that is pressed will die and blacken and rot, until it falls off by itself.	Trimming the lid by means of canes is done as follows: you invert the eyelid and cut the inner slit as I have described; then you prepare two slender canes or rods of a length equal to that of the eyelid and a breadth less than that of a scalpel; and at either end of each you make a notch to hold the threads. Then gently put them together over the superfluous part of the eyelid and tie them firmly together at both ends and leave for a few days; for the ligated flesh will necrose and turn black and putrefy and eventually fall away spontaneously.	0.88200414
If it delays, then cut it with small scissors, then treat it until it is healed; and when the wound is healed, and the eyelid is lifted, and the hairs will not prick anymore; and this is the form of the two hooks that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:	But if it is slow in sloughing, cut off with shears; then dress till healed. And when it is healed the eyelid will be raised and the lashes will no longer irritate the eye. Now this is the figure of the canes; you should prepare them exactly in this shape and of this length and breadth.	0.7952064

chapter-2-subchapter-12.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-13.txt
When this disease called "aleacrati" or rot comes to the eye, there are two types: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it occurs by the healing of a wound, or by cutting or cautery, and by similar things.	Now sometimes this inversion is natural, sometimes acquired. It is acquired either from the cicatrization of an injury, or an incision, or cauterization, or the like.	0.5457178
And the manner of the procedure is that you cut that adhesion, and separate the lips of it, and place linen tents inside, and bind it until it is healed; and you must not use in the treatment of it any drying and constricting substances. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but treat it with softening substances, such as fenugreek; and sprinkle it with water or mallow and linseed cooked, and dyacylon ointment melted in some oils, and wrap a tent in it, and treat it with this.	The idea of the operation is to excise the scar, separate the edges of the wound, pack linen between them, and bandage up till healed. In the treatment of it you should not use anything styptic or drying, for if you do the inversion will return worse than ever before. Employ relaxing substances such as fenugreek; and fomentation with water in which mallows and linseed have been boiled; and diachylon plaster which has been previously softened with one of the oils and spread on the packs; and treat it with this.	0.8719926
And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care that it does not heal in the same form as before; and this procedure that we have mentioned is only for addressing this disease, so that it does not return in the same form as before.	The main thing in the treatment is to use every device to prevent the healing up of the place as it was before. This operation which we have described is but some correction of the inversion, not that the appearance of the place will necessarily revert to what it was.	0.6692856

chapter-2-subchapter-14.txt
This disease which is beneath, truly called "axacrati," is both natural and accidental. The accident comes from a wound and a cut and a cautery and similar things; and the way to proceed in this is that you take a needle, with a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct to the right, so that the thread comes in two ends of the flesh; then stretch the flesh upwards with the needle, and cut it with a wide spatula.	It is acquired by injury or incision or cautery or something like that. This is the method of operating for it: you take a needle through which has been passed a double thread and you run it into the flesh, making it penetrate from the left angle of the eye to the right angle so that the thread is fixed in flesh both ends. Then with the needle stretch the flesh upwards and make an incision with a broad scalpel; and if the eyelid returns to its proper shape, well and good.	0.76018864

chapter-2-subchapter-15.txt
About the adhesion of the eyelid	On adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.	0.53762156

chapter-2-subchapter-16.txt
Know that the eye nail (a growth on the eye) is of two types: one is nervous and resembles a hard surface, and another that is not nervous but resembles congealed white moisture, which when touched with iron or tried to be taken with pincers, cannot be grasped; and both types start near the large tear duct and grow little by little until they cover the entire sight, all the light, and the movement of the eye.	Ungula occurs in two forms: either the nervous, which resembles a fine hard membrane; or the non-nervous, like a white congealed humidity; which, when the iron touches it or you try to pick it up with a hook, is cut through and the hook has no hold on it. Both kinds grow from the greater angle of the eye, whence they spread little by little until they cover the pupil and block both the vision and the movements of the eye.	0.7798461
And be careful that the spatula does not touch the fleshy tissue and tear it, and that the pupil is not pierced; and after the incision, throw a little ground salt into the eye, and eyewash made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it is healed.	But beware lest the scalpel touch the corneal covering and cause a fissure in it and the pupil protrude. Then after the incision put into the eye a little powdered salt or an eye-lotion of verdigris, and leave it till the following day; then treat as may be necessary till it heals.	0.8003973
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot place the needle, and the hook cannot enter, many times this type of nail is treated with medicines; and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you want to cut it, then open the patient's eye, and take the light, slightly sharp spatula, in this form:	If the ungula is non-nervous in origin and you cannot transfix it with a needle nor get a hook to hold fast in it, this sort is often successfully treated by medical means. So treat as described in the section.	0.6791427
And lift the nail delicately, and if you see that it diminishes to a point and the root approaches, then distill from your mouth into the eye eyewash made of litharge and red eyewash and ground salt, and cover the eye until the next day; then restart the procedure with this same work, until it is all removed.	So treat as described in the section. But if you prefer to cut it, open the patient's eye, and take a fine smooth scalpel, rather blunt, like this and with this gently scrape away the ungula from above; and if you see that it is crumbling away and breaking down under the scraping, then immediately instil into the eye some eye-lotion of verdigris, or the red eye-lotion, or a little powdered salt, and bind the eye up till next day.	0.74091876
If anything is not contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then leave it, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then restart the procedure as before, until it is healed.	Then repeat the operation on it till you have removed it all, unless an abscess forms in the eye, in which case cease the operation and treat the abscess till cured. Then repeat the treatment with the same scraping till healed.	0.71566415
And if the appearance of the flesh of the tear duct greatly harms the eye, then suspend it with the hook, and cut a part of it but not all, so that the flow of tears does not come; then distill into the eye red eyewash made of litharge.	As for a protuberance of flesh in the angle, if it causes great hurt pick it up with a hook and cut part of it away, with not too big an incision lest there be a flux of tears. Then into the canthus instil red eye-lotion or lotion of verdigris till healed.	0.731421

chapter-2-subchapter-17.txt
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then fill the eye with ground salt or distill red eyewash and similar corrosive medicines, and place cotton soaked in egg white on the eye, so that it is protected from a hot abscess; and if anything remains, and hot blood rises, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing substances for hot abscesses; then return to your procedure until it is healed, and do the same when flesh is added to the eye in this manner.	And when you have finished your incision and removed all the chemosis, fill the eye with powdered salt or instil the red powder or similar corrosive; and apply to the outside of the eye cotton wool with white of egg to ward off an abscess. If there is any chemosis left and blood is getting the better of you and you fear an abscess, then desist and treat the eye with those means for settling a tumour. Thereafter return to your operation till cured. So must you do with superfluous flesh that arises in the eye.	0.905352
But always, you must adjust the treatment of each weak eye according to the natural way; and the accidental way, with the work of iron; and do not place your hand in any of these procedures until you see that the members can endure that procedure.	But you must avoid treating surgically any eye that is weak, whether congenitally or by acquired disease. Never set your hand to an operation of this kind till you have seen if the organ can endure such an operation.	0.6505532

chapter-2-subchapter-18.txt
Sebel are red veins that are covered over the eye, and take away the vision and weaken the eye always. It is necessary first to see if the eye in which sebel is present is strong, and there is no other disease except sebel; then remove it in this manner: command the patient to place his head in your lap, then suspend those veins with the hook according to his wisdom, and let the hook be delicate and double according to this form:	Pannus is a network of blood-vessels spreading over the eye so as to interfere with the function of sight and, in the course of time, weakening the eye. You must first examine, and if the eye with the pannus be strong, with no fault other than the pannus, then the pannus should be gathered up. This is done by bidding the patient put his head in your lap; then, as skilfully as you may, pick up those blood-vessels with one or two hooks. The hooks should be of a gentle curve, like this.	0.735507
And let there be two hooks by degrees in one body according to this form:	Or there can be two hooks joined together on one handle, thus.	0.5452885
then take those veins with small forceps, and wipe the blood hour after hour, until you see those veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to injure the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this procedure at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not cut anything but those veins; and when you have done this, distill green and red eyewash into the eye to destroy what remains of the sebel.	Then take up the blood-vessels gently with the fine scissors, and wipe away the blood constantly, till you see all those blood-vessels removed from the eye, and the blood wells forth. But be careful of the eye lest you damage it with the points of the scissors. Let your work be done in broad sunlight at midday; and be very steady in your action so as to cut nothing beside the bloodvessels. When you have finished, instil the red or green lotion into the eye to destroy by its caustic action the remnants of the pannus.	0.8646127
And if you cannot gather all of it in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and it is assured from a hot abscess, then restart according to this manner which is described before until it is healed; and this is the form of the forceps:	If you are unable to gather it all up at that one time, apply a plaster to the eye such as will allay the pain, and leave him* for a few days till* the pain be eased and there is no danger of an abscess. Then repeat the operation in the same manner till it is healed. This is a figure of the scissors. [	0.80122626

chapter-2-subchapter-19.txt
About the fistula of the eye	On turning a fistula into the nose.	0.46070877
The doctors call it "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and sharp burning medicine as I have described before, and it is not healed, then the procedure is that you cut above the abscess, where it should heal, and draw out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.	Doctors give the name 'fistula' to what laymen call 'a quill'. When you have treated it with the cautery or with caustic according to the instructions given previously, and it is not healed, there is no clear method of treatment except to cut down on the tumour at its ripening and let out all the humidity or pus therein, till you reach the bone.	0.7255144
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then scrape it with the instrument of which this is the form; and it is called "rough head," and is made of Indian iron with one round head, and is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:	When bone is reached and you see necrosis or blackness, scrape it with an instrument like this. It is called 'rough-head' and is made of Indian iron. Its head is round like a button but is engraved with markings finely engraved, like those of a file or a rasp.	0.7730742
And place it on the area of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption is scraped; and do this several times, then restore the area with drying medicines.	Place it on the site of the diseased bone and spin it between your fingers, pressing down a little with your hand, till you are sure all the diseased bone has been scraped away. Do this several times. Then let the place be dressed with stanching and styptic remedies.	0.8215252
Then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and move your hand a little away from the eye, then turn the drill until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because the air comes out if he holds his hand on his nose; and then restore the area with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and the area hardens, the material will go to the nose; this is an easier thing for the patient.	Then put it to the bone itself near the canthus; but keep your hand a little away from the eye; then with your hand rotate the drill till the bone is perforated; and the patient will have the sensation of this, since, if he holds his hands over his nose he will find the breath coming out through the hole. And then dress the place with styptic and stanching remedies as I have taught you. And when the flesh begins to grow and the place gets hard, the matter which before was coming outward will be turned into the nose; and this will be easier for the patient.	0.9039754

chapter-2-subchapter-20.txt
About the prolapse of the eye	On the reduction of exophthalmos.	0.46669352

chapter-2-subchapter-21.txt
And if the eye appears greatly, then pierce it with a delicate spatula that reaches the depth of the eye, and let the white moisture flow and the eye will descend, and immediately enter back in; then extract it until it is healed.	Then you perforate it with a fine scalpel going to the depth of the eye; and an albuminous humour will flow out and the eye will shrink and return at once. Then bandage till healed.	0.7402412

chapter-2-subchapter-22.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-23.txt
Then rest a little, and if the water rises again a second time, place it with the instrument, and when it is fixed and it does not rise, then lightly withdraw the almagda by turning your hand little by little; and then place a little of ground rock salt in the water, and wash the eye inside. Then place on the outside of the eye wadding or wool moistened with rose oil and egg white, and bind it with the healthy eye.  We, and those of our time, place ground cumin with egg white on it.	Then let him rest a little while; and if the humour goes back up again depress it a second time without taking the needle out. When it stays down firmly and does not come back again, gently draw the needle out, twisting it ever so slowly with your hand. Then dissolve a little pure rock-salt in water and wash the eyeball with the solution; then apply all over the outer aspect of the eye carded linen or wool moistened with oil of roses and egg-white, and bandage it up together with the sound eye. Now we and our contemporaries apply pounded cumin with the egg-white.	0.9324987
And if the almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit," of which this is the form:	But if the couching needle does not serve, failing to enter the eye on account of its hardness (for there are some whose eyes are hard indeed), you should take the scalpel called al-baridl figured thus.	0.7070915
If a hot abscess comes, you must untie the eye before the seventh day, and treat it with what soothes the abscess; and when it is soothed, then untie the vision and place a small pillow on his face to cover it for a few days, and keep him in that dark room. And then let him go out of the house little by little, and return to his normal activities; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.	But if an abscess occur you should unbandage the eye before the seventh day and restore it to health by those methods that allay swelling. When it has subsided, allow him free sight, putting over his face a dark veil beneath which his vision may be exercised for a few days while he is still in the dark room. Then let him come out of the room gradually and take up the exercise of his business. But you should know that in the case of a depression of a cataract the student cannot manage without having seen that operation performed several times; then he may perform it himself.	0.82619727
And one came to us who was from Iraq, who told us that in his country they make a pierced almagda, with which they suck the water, but I never saw any in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.	I have heard that a certain Iraqi has said that in Iraq he makes a hollow needle by which the humour is sucked out. In our land I have never seen anyone do it in this fashion, nor have I read of it described in any of the books of the Ancients; perhaps it is newly invented.	0.7729336
And let their heads be of the same delicacy, and the back in three sharp angles.	They are mostly made of brass; and their extremities should be of this very fineness, triangular at the tip and sharp.	0.5088193

chapter-2-subchapter-24.txt
About the flesh on the nose	On the treatment of nasal polyp.	0.44223338
Sometimes diverse types of flesh grow on the nose, some resembling scorpions with many legs; and some with flesh that is encrusted in a dark color, and some with soft flesh of good color. In those cases of flesh that are soft and not encrusted, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and throw the hook at that flesh, and pull it out; then cut what you can sustain with a delicate sharp spatula on one side, until you know that all the flesh is removed.	Sometimes there arise in the nose various superfluous fleshy growths. One of these is a thing resembling a centipede; another, a cancerous growth, stony, hard, and pale in colour; another again is a soft growth, not pale. Any of these growths that is soft is not malignant or cancerous. You should make the patient sit before you, facing the sun, and dilate his nose and introduce a hook into these polyps and draw them out; then amputate what you can take hold of, with a fine scalpel sharp on one side, till you know that all the growth is gone.	0.82826793
And if anything remains that cannot be cut, then open it with a delicate instrument lightly, so that nothing remains; and if blood overflows, or a hot abscess appears, treat it as necessary; and if it is a malignant abscess, quickly cauterize it until the blood is staunched and all the flesh is removed, then throw vinegar and water or wine into the nose.	And if there be anything of them left behind that you cannot cut away, then gently scrape away with any fine instrument till nothing of them remains; and if the bleeding be too much for you, or an abscess occur, then combat it by suitable means. If it be a malignant swelling, then speedily cauterize till the bleeding stops and all the polypi are gone. Then introduce into the nose, after the incision, vinegar and water, or wine; and if the nose be free and fluid flow into the throat from it, then know that he is cured.	0.91252923
And let it be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and the same conduits; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be used for purging the head; and have a handle on the head for holding it when heating the oil or any liquid.	It should be made of silver or bronze like a small lamp, its oil-container open, and with its channel likewise. If you like you may make its spout closed like a reed; and the oil-container of the instrument can be made covered over. It has a handle at the end, as you see, to hold it when heating the oil or whatever juice or other liquid you wish.	0.8737789

chapter-2-subchapter-25.txt
About the flesh on the nose	On warts growing on the end of the nose.	0.4895571

chapter-2-subchapter-26.txt
The method of the suture is that you join the separation: either with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or with thread, as I have made known to you.	Now the manner of suturing is to close the discontinuity, either with a needle, as we describe for suture of the belly, or with a thread as we tell you there.	0.7610798

chapter-2-subchapter-27.txt
About abscesses of the lips	On the extraction of nodules occurring on the lip.	0.56174344
In many men, hard abscesses, resembling grains of vetch, form inside the lips, both smaller and larger; then you must turn the lips, and cut above each knot, and take it with pincers and cut it in each part; then fill the area after the incision with ground vitriol until the blood is staunched; and then wash it with vinegar, and treat the area with drying substances until it is healed.	A good many people sometimes get little hard swellings inside their lips, some resembling the vetch grain; some larger, some smaller. You should invert the lip, incise all along each nodule, catch it up with a hook, and cut it away all round. Then after incising rub pounded vitriol into the places until the bleeding stops. Then let him rinse with vinegar and salt, and dress the place with styptic drugs till the wounds heal.	0.8896531

chapter-2-subchapter-28.txt
Many times, attached flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; you must then hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood flow; then place ground vitriol on the area, or other constricting and drying powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, as often happens, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it: it will not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.	There often grows on the gum superfluous flesh which the Ancients call 'epulis'. You should take it up with a hook or grasp it with forceps and cut it at its root and let the pus or blood flow out. Then put on the place either pounded vitriol or one of the absorbent styptic powders. And if the growth returns after treatment—for they often return—excise a second time and cauterize; it will not come back after cauterization.	0.8678473

chapter-2-subchapter-29.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-30.txt
It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay pulling it as long as you can, because it should not be done; because it is a very serious matter until there is no excuse for scraping. So when the patient is forced to pull the tooth, you must be sure of the aching tooth. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they believe it is in the healthy tooth, and have the good tooth pulled; and yet the pain does not go away until the bad one is extracted, as we have already seen with these lords; and when you are sure of the aching tooth, you must scrape around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gums on all sides; then move it with your fingers or with delicate forceps little by little, until it is well loosened, then firmly fix the forceps; and let the patient’s head be in your lap between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.	You should treat toothache with every device and be reluctant to extract; nothing can replace the tooth when it is extracted, for it is a noble substance—until there is no means of avoiding extraction. When the patient is determined to have it out, act with deliberation till you are sure which is the painful tooth; for often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks the pain is in a tooth that is sound, so he has that one extracted; but the pain does not abate until the diseased tooth is removed. We have frequently seen this happen in the practice of the barber-surgeons. When you are quite sure which is actually the painful tooth you should cut away all round the tooth with a scalpel having a certain measure of strength, until the gum is separated all round.	0.8276962
Then extract the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it on each side lightly, and move it as you did at first. And if the tooth is pierced and decayed, you must fill it with cloth where the holes are; and then extract it delicately with forceps, so that it does not break during extraction; and you must work very carefully around the gums to loosen the tooth.	Then draw the tooth straight out so as not to splinter it. And if it will not come out, then take one of these following instruments and gradually introduce it beneath the tooth all round; then try to move it as you did before. If the tooth has a hole in it or is decayed, you should plug the hole with a rag, forcing it in with the tip of a fine probe so that it will not break when you grip it with the forceps. You must completely scarify all round the gum.	0.9161761
The forms of the instruments used to loosen the teeth first should have long points and thick handles, so they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:	The shape of the fine forceps with which you first move the tooth should be with long jaws and a short handle, thick, lest they bend when you take hold of the tooth. And this is the shape of the large forceps.	0.79674876
And they should be thick so they do not bend when pulling, and made of well-crafted iron, and should have teeth to hold the tooth firmly.	They should be of Indian iron or of steel, strongly made, the jaws tempered and having teeth fitting into each other so that a sure and firm grip may be obtained. Sometimes the jaws are made like a file, also to give a strong grip.	0.69768465

chapter-2-subchapter-31.txt
About the root of the teeth When the root remains after extraction, you must place cotton moistened with butter on the area for one or two days, until the area is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri," whose head resembles a swan’s beak; and inside they are made like a file and this is the form:	When, in extracting a tooth, a broken-off root remains behind, you should apply to the place cotton wool soaked in butter for one or two days to soften it; then insert the tongs or forceps with stork-bill jaws; this is the figure of the forceps. The point should be made like a file or rasp on the inside.	0.7187447
And if the roots do not come out with these forceps, you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," that is to say, lever, of which this is the form:	If it does not respond to your attempt to extract it with these forceps, you must dig down over the root and remove all the flesh, and then insert the instrument that resembles a small crowbar; this is its figure.	0.65992147
And it should be strong and thick so it does not break, and if the root comes out with this, that is good; if not, use all the instruments, of which the forms come after this:	It has a short rather thick extremity, and should not be tempered lest it fracture. If the root comes out, good; if not, get assistance from the other instruments figured here.	0.7179798
and other tools that are used in the reasoning of teeth, and this instrument which resembles large forceps, of which this is the form:	Another, triangular and slender. Sometimes also we get help from this forked instrument and beside this, from other instruments and appliances mentioned above under scraping of teeth. Sometimes also recourse may be had to this instrument resembling a large hook, figured thus.	0.62944645
And let these instruments be strong so they do not break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments, which are not listed; and the wise and skillful master finds his instrument by himself, according to what his works and the disease show him, because there are some diseases for which the ancients did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of cases; and if the jaw or other bones are broken, or it decays, then search for the instruments that are needed, which I have told you about, and use the forceps, of which this is the form: And let them be thick and good at holding to grip the bone, so it does not escape, but can be held and removed; and then restore the area with appropriate medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, scrape it with this instrument:	You should know that dental instruments are very numerous, as are the other instruments, almost beyond reckoning. And the experienced worker with a knowledge of his craft may devise fresh instruments according as his work on actual cases suggests them to him. For there are certain diseases for which the Ancients did not mention any instruments, on account of the variety of them. Now if the mandible or one of the bones of the mouth be broken or decayed, explore the site with some instrument that is suitable for it, namely one of the instruments or forceps mentioned for extraction of roots.	0.802045

chapter-2-subchapter-32.txt
When the teeth appear not according to their natural position, and the form is unsightly, especially in young women, then you must know if the tooth is born after the other tooth, and is not in the right place, and it cannot be filed or smoothed: then scrape it; and if it is aligned with the tooth, take this instrument of which this is the form, and it resembles a small beak, and is made of sharp iron at the tip:	When teeth grow in other than their natural place the appearance is very bad, specially when it occurs in women or slaves. So you should examine; if the tooth has grown out behind another tooth and it is impossible either to saw or file it down, then extract it. But if it be attached to another tooth, cut it down with an instrument of this kind. It resembles a small chisel and should be of Indian steel with a well-sharpened end.	0.80813015
And cut it little by little over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it is visible that it can be filed, then file it with such a file as this form shows:	You should file the tooth with it very slowly and gently over a period of many days so as not to shift the tooth and cause it to fall out; then finally smooth it and scrape it with one of the scrapers.	0.56093967
and it is like the file used for making needles; and file the tooth little by little over several days lightly, so that it does not move until it falls; then smooth it at the end with some kind of scraper, and if the tooth is too sharp and it hurts the tongue, then you must file the roughness until it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue or corrupt speech.	If it be a tooth of which part has broken off and it hurts the tongue in speaking, file it down till you have disposed of the roughness of the break and the tooth is smooth and neither injures the tongue nor hinders speech.	0.63769436

chapter-2-subchapter-33.txt
And when the teeth fall, they are put back in their place, again and again, as we have said; and no one should handle it who is not wise and patient, and sometimes the form of a tooth is made from cow bone, and it is placed where it is missing, and tightened as we have said, and it stays and serves for a long time.	Sometimes a piece of ox-bone may be carved and made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in the site where a tooth was lost, and fastened as we have said, and it will last and he will get long service from it.	0.7292049

chapter-2-subchapter-34.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-35.txt
and if you see it turning a dark color or becoming hard, without the patient feeling it, do not touch it, for it is a cancer; and if it turns white and is moist, use the hook and cut with a fine spatula, and release it on both sides; and if bleeding occurs during your procedure, apply powdered vitriol until it stops, then continue your work until you remove everything; then wash the area with plantain water and salt, and treat with other remedies until it is healed.	If you see that it is dark or black, and hard, and the patient has no sensation in it, do not interfere with it, for it is a cancer. But if it is inclined to be pale and has fluid in it, put a hook in it and incise it with a fine scalpel and free it all round; and if haemorrhage hinders you while operating apply pounded vitriol to it till the bleeding stops. Then proceed with your work till all is extracted; then let him rinse his mouth out with vinegar and salt. Then give all the suitable treatment till healed.	0.86401355

chapter-2-subchapter-36.txt
Of the abscesses of the throat	On the treatment of swelling of the tonsils and other swellings in the throat.	0.42433217
When you press the tongue with this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the hook and insert it into the tonsil, and pull it out as much as you can; and pull some of the surrounding tissues with it, then cut it with the instrument, which has this form, resembling forceps; and the ends are curved, one towards the other, and very sharp, made of fine iron or steel:	And when the tongue is depressed with its help, the tumour will be made manifest to you and your direct vision will fall upon it. Then take a hook and fix it in one tonsil and pull it forward as far as it will go; but be careful to not pull away with it any of the mucosa. Then cut it with an instrument of this form; it is like scissors except that its extremities are curved, the beak of each meeting the other, and very sharp. It should be made of Indian iron or Damascene steel.	0.8024069
And if you do not have this instrument, cut it with forceps, which have this form:	If you have not this kind of instrument, cut it with a scalpel of this form, on the one side sharp, on the other quite blunt.	0.57691574

chapter-2-subchapter-37.txt
Of the uvula	On removal of the tumour of the uvula that is called 'uva'.	0.5235387
This treatment is safer than cutting or cautery; if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calamint, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, oats, and similar herbs, and combine all or some of them in a pot, and add plantain, and boil them; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot have an instrument with this tip: And it should be made of silver or fine bronze, and one end should be placed in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the uvula through the tube, until the uvula is mortified; then repeat this often, until the uvula dries, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the hot abscess, as many things can happen; and only do this when the hot abscess is in decline. And if this instrument is not available, take a tube and place an eggshell at the end, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the eggshell prevents the vapor from harming the mouth, and it is a good and safe treatment.	This kind of treatment is safer than incision and less to be feared. Sometimes uva is cured by a method milder than either incision or cautery, namely by means of vapour in the following manner: take pennyroyal and artemisia absinthium and organy and rue and wormwood and chamomile and southernwood and similar herbs and put them all, or some of them, in a pot, cover them with vinegar, and boil them. The pot should be luted with clay; and there is to be a hole in the middle of the lid to which is fitted a hollow instrument like this, made of silver or bronze, and the end in which is the protuberance should be put in the patient's mouth so that the vapour passes up the tube to the uvula, which becomes of a very dark colour. Do this repeatedly till it sloughs away.	0.86664665

chapter-2-subchapter-38.txt
And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the end raised; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, so the cough does not occur, nor push the bone in; and better that the patient inserts the instrument, as he knows where the object is; then push it down, or pull it out evenly with the instrument, until it is out.	The patient himself should introduce it into his own throat gently; he should raise the head backwards and take care not to touch the larynx lest coughing be aroused. And let him remove therewith the bone or sharp body. Or else let the doctor introduce it with his hand (although it is better if the patient himself introduce it, since he knows the site of the obstruction) and push it down and then draw up his hand with the instrument; all this according to the way it presents itself to him, till it is removed.	0.81427765

chapter-2-subchapter-39.txt
Of the leech in the throat	On the removal of a leech sticking in the throat.	0.52534866
And the form of the instrument to extract the leech, when it can be seen, is like curved forceps to easily enter the throat; and it resembles a bird's beak, and has a rough surface like a file, so that what it grabs, it cannot let go; and here is the form:	This is the figure of an instrument for extracting the leech from the throat when visible. It resembles forceps, as you see, except that it has this bend for entry into the throat; and the two extremities are shaped like a bird's bill, with the roughness of a file. When they have hold of a thing they do not let go.	0.7946459

chapter-2-subchapter-40.txt
There are many types of abscesses, as mentioned later in this book, and they differ in perforation and cutting; and there are two types, one in its own form, and one due to the place where it is on the body. For the abscess of the head is different from that of the anus, and the abscess of a fleshy area is different from one that occurs in joints, and each has its own judgment in the procedure.	One is the kind of tumour it is in itself and the humidities it contains. The other is the part of the body where it occurs. For the tumour occurring in the head is different from the tumour occurring on the posterior, and a tumour occurring in a fleshy part differs from one on the joints; each having its separate category of operation. There are some tumours that should not be opened till after the pus in them is matured and ripe.	0.7550349
And this must be universally known in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how to proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.	This is the information you need about the treatment of tumours in general. As for the particulars, I now review the way to treat each tumour, by chapters, in detail.	0.61956406

chapter-2-subchapter-41.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-42.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-43.txt
The ancients spoke and wrote about the incision of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who performed it, and it is in their writings.	The Ancients mentioned this laryngeal incision, but I have not seen anyone in our parts who has done it. Now here is the gist of what they say.	0.7956288
For those who have squinancy, it is necessary that the opening of the throat called "epiglottis" is cleared; and that no aid is given in this way, because all the veins and the lungs of the patient are affected by hot abscesses in the mouth, throat, or the two tonsils. When the disease is in the airway of the lungs, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.	Incision should be avoided in those suffering from quinsy, for they will not benefit from it, since all the passages and the lung will be diseased. But in those with an abscess in the mouth, throat, or tonsils, and when there is no disease in the windpipe itself, you must employ laryngotomy to avoid the mischief of suffocation.	0.7135866
So, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should cut it below the third or fourth ring with a small transverse incision, between the two rings or according to the size of the membrane's incision, not in the cartilage;	Now when we wish to undertake this we should incise the larynx under the third or fourth ring of the windpipe with a small incision transversely between two rings, so that the incision may be through the membrane, not the cartilage.	0.7307532
and this area is suitable for the incision of the epiglottis because there is no flesh there, and the vessels are sufficiently distant.	This spot is suitable for incision, for it is deficient in flesh, and there are no blood-vessels near.	0.6806958
And if the surgeon is fearful, he should stretch the skin of the throat with a hook, then cut the membrane until he reaches the channel; avoid the blood vessels if any are seen, then cut the membrane as we have said;	If the practitioner be nervous, he must stretch the skin of the throat with a hook, then cut down through the skin till he reach the windpipe, and avoid blood-vessels if he see any. Then let him incise the membrane which we have spoken of.	0.83378947
and it is indicated by the phlegm of the channel that comes out through the broken place, and by the loss of voice;	You can be certain of having opened the trachea by the emission of phlegm when it is pierced, and by the loss of voice.	0.5403104
and leave the wound open for a while.	Then leave the wound open for some while.	0.82290745
And when the time of strangulation risk has passed, bring the two lips of the wound together, and sew it without including the cartilage; then apply medicines that promote flesh growth, until it is healed.	When the danger of suffocation is passed, bring the two lips of the wound together by the skin, which alone must be sutured, without the cartilage. Then use medicaments stimulating granulation till healed.	0.8135207
Albucasim said not to do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and breath is failing. Then, the epiglottis is cut because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;	The author of this book says, the interpretation of this account that we have given is this: when they see that one of the tumours that they mention has obstructed the patient's throat and he is approaching death and is anxious himself to be incised, they resort to laryngotomy so that the patient may breathe somewhat through the wound and his life be saved.	0.5424682
and for this reason, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is past, and it passes in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew the wound and heal it until it was cured;	They bid leaving the wound open till the worst of the disease abates; its height will last about three days; then they bid sew up the wound and dress till healed.	0.7328821
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young lady took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the lungs;	My own experience was this: a slave-girl seized a knife and buried it in her throat and cut part of the trachea; and I was called to attend her.	0.70459473
and I was called to heal her, and I found her almost dead.	I found her bellowing like a sacrifice that has had its throat cut.	0.4384025
I uncovered the wound, and found the blood that had come out, and knew well that she had not cut any veins or conduits except the throat, and the wind was coming out through the wound.	So I laid the wound bare and found that only a little haemorrhage had come from it; and I assured myself that neither the jugular vein nor an artery had been cut, but air passed out through the wound.	0.7930759
I hurried, and sewed the wound, and healed it until she was healed;	So I hurriedly sutured the wound and dressed it until healed.	0.7161863
and it happened to the young lady that she was hoarse of voice, and later returned to her normal state;	And no ill befell the maid except for a hoarseness in the voice, but nothing more; and after some days she was restored to the best of health.	0.5308635
therefore I say that in the incision of the epiglottis, there should be no fear.	Hence we may say that laryngotomy is not dangerous.	0.5193101

chapter-2-subchapter-44.txt
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and is a large abscess the color of fat, and is common in women;	This tumour which is called 'Elephant of the throat' is a large tumour of the colour of the body; it commonly occurs in women.	0.769969
and it is of two kinds: natural, and accidental; the natural one has no remedy.	It is of two kinds, congenital and acquired. As to the congenital, there is no treatment for it.	0.7145712

chapter-2-subchapter-45.txt
There are many kinds of knots, of which I will describe all the types;	There are various kinds of cyst. We have already mentioned all their varieties in the proper place.	0.5776348
and now I must explain the difference between a knot and an abscess.	But we need here to set forth the difference between a cyst and an abscess, for it is complicated.	0.63978386
I say that an abscess involves heat and fever until the swelling has passed, and the suppuration is complete; then the fever and heat subside.	The abscess will be accompanied by heat and fever and fearsome pain, until the boiling-up of the superfluous matter settles down and the suppurating process is completed: then will the fever and intensity subside.	0.78069127
With a knot, there is neither heat, fever, nor pain, and it contains a sac, which is its own sac and is the color of the body, and it starts like fat and becomes large;	But with a cyst there is neither heat nor fever nor pains, and a membranous capsule encloses it, its own particular covering.	0.61145914
and there are two types, either fatty or moist, and they come in many colors as I described earlier.	The cyst is flesh-coloured, and it begins like a pea and becomes like a melon, more or less; and is of two kinds: either fatty or containing humidity; and the colours of the humidities are several, as we mentioned in the appropriate section.	0.6210708
When you come to treat a knot, you must first test and examine it with the instrument called an "entromissoire," as its form will be shown in the chapter that follows.	When you come to treat the cyst, you should first sound it and examine it with the instrument called the explorer, which is figured in the next chapter.	0.7172601
And the way to investigate the abscesses of knots is to take the moistest part you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know the instrument has pierced the core, according to the size of the abscess;	The way to examine all tumours and cysts is to take this instrument and press it in at the spot where the tumour is softest, and revolve it gently with your fingers till you know you have pierced the skin; then press it in proportionately to the size of the tumour.	0.7022947
then remove the "entromissoire," and observe what comes out.	Then remove the explorer and see what comes out after it.	0.73703784
If flowing moisture comes out, note its color, and make an incision as I have said for other abscesses;	If a humidity should flow, whatever the colour, make a simple incision, as I said for the other tumours.	0.71712875
and if no moisture comes out after using the "entromissoire," know that it is fatty, and make a cross-shaped incision, and take it with forceps, and gently peel it from each side and make sure to remove the sac in which it lies whole with the knot;	But if no humidity come out along the track of the explorer you know at once that it is fatty. Therefore make a cruciform incision upon it in this shape, as I have told you, and attach hooks and dissect away the skin gently from all sides. Be careful with the capsule; if you can, get it out whole, together with the cyst.	0.62993145
and if you cannot remove it whole, remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.	But if the capsule is torn in the course of the operation, and you cannot get it out whole, which frequently happens, remove it bit by bit until there is none of it left.	0.59208006
For if anything remains, the knot will return many times;	For if a part of it is left behind, either great or small, the cyst will generally return.	0.568987
and if a little remains, and the blood troubles you, fill the wound with some corrosive powders, and tighten the wound, and apply things that soothe hot abscesses, and treat it with other cures until it is healed;	If it defeats you and some little piece of it remain, pack the wound, when you have done all you can, with some caustic powder and bandage it and put on it something to ease the inflamed tumour, and treat in the usual way until healed.	0.73648
and if the knot is large, sew the two lips of the wound, and treat it with things that generate flesh.	If the tumour be large, sew the edges of the incision together and treat with stimulants.	0.634587
and if the beating vein hinders you or something else, hasten and fill the place with powdered vitriol, and leave it tied for two or three days, until the wound rots, and the blood's boiling subsides; then return to cut what remains of the knot.	If you should come across a blood-vessel, pulsating or not, and there be haemorrhage, hasten to pack it with pounded vitriol; and leave bandaged for two or three days until the wound becomes purulent and the boiling-up of the blood is allayed; then resume cutting open the rest of the cyst.	0.87054336

chapter-2-subchapter-46.txt
Here are the forms of the "entromissoire" instruments, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small; and there are three square ones called "albaret," and one called "breb," and they come in three types: large, medium, and small, for probing fistula abscesses;	There are three varieties of this instrument, large, medium, and small. This is the figure of the large explorer. Figure of the medium explorer. Figure of the small explorer.	0.67238677
and they are like the needles with which you sew stitches, and they are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are better, and the black lead ones are better for probing the curves of fistulas;	They are made round, polished, and smooth, like packing-needles, of Chinese copper or of white copper, or of brass, silver, or iron. The best are those made of white copper. Sometimes probes are made of black lead, for investigating fistulas whose deeper course is devious; so that by reason of their softness they can adapt themselves to the curves.	0.71675646
and they come in three types: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the width of the holes.	Of these, too, there are three varieties: the long, the medium, and the short, proportioned to the requirement of the depth of every fistula.	0.7338455
The forms of hooks have many variations, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are hooks with two curves in three different ways as well;	There are many kinds of hook. For example, there are the simple hooks, that is, having only one prong; there are three kinds of this: large, medium, and small.	0.7617296
and there are hooks with three curves, and they also come in three types; and there are hooks with two curves, and hooks with one curve only, and they come in three types; and all these are necessary in their place.	And there are the bent hooks with two prongs, of which there are three kinds. And there are the hooks provided with three prongs, of which there are three kinds. All of these kinds are necessary in their place.	0.88594174
The heads of these with which you cut are sharp, and some of them only cut on one side, with which you peel the knots, so that you do not cut the vein or the nerve;	The cutting edges should be sharp, and the other ends blunt. The reason for making them like this is so that they can be utilized in dissecting away cysts where there is a fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and also that the patient may console himself thereby and find some small relief from the pain involved in the dissection of a tumour.	0.58124024
and these "entromissoires" have blades set in handles, so that the patient does not notice them when opening abscesses;	Figures of the scalpels which are hidden between the fingers when tumours are to be opened, so that they are not noticed by the patient.	0.56493837
and they come in three types: large, small, and medium, as you see;	They are of three varieties: large, medium, and small.	0.77302146
and they are only used in fleshy places, like legs, arms, breasts, groins, and similar places;	But they are not to be used for suppressing haemorrhage in all parts of the body, but only in the fleshy parts such as the calf and thigh muscles, the arm muscles, the breasts, belly, and groin, and other similar fleshy soft parts.	0.6623177
and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling the bark of a pistachio, in this form, to stop bleeding:	Sometimes of this class small instruments, like nutshells, are made, like this.	0.5161849
and it is sometimes placed where there is bleeding from the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes rounded in this large form:	Haemorrhage from a venesection is stopped by these; or in the case of a cut artery or vein. Sometimes round ones are made, like this.	0.6732886

chapter-2-subchapter-47.txt
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they resemble women's breasts;	The breasts of some males may swell on attaining puberty so as to resemble the female breast, and they remain permanently swollen and ugly.	0.7082562
and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, must cut them according to this form from line b. to g.: then peel the fat, and fill the wound with medicine that generates flesh, then sew the two lips of the wound together, and treat it until it is healed;	If this is abhorrent, a semicircular incision should be made on the breast, like this figure, from b to g. Then dissect away all the fatty tissue and pack the wound with a cicatrizing compound and sew the lips together and dress until healed.	0.6238019
and if the breast droops down, and is softened due to its size as happens to women, then cut it in two parts on top, with two similar incisions; of which one is connected to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form, from line b. to line g.; then peel the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healed;	But if the breast is pendulous and flabby on account of its size, as happens with women, you should make two semicircular incisions on the upper side, the ends joining one another, in such wise that the longer incision encircles the other like this, from b to g. Then dissect away the skin between the two incisions and remove the fat and sew up as we have described; and apply styptic powder and the necessary dressings until healed.	0.8396681
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully done, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of the blood flow, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it consumes the remaining fat, then treat it until it is healed.	But if you cannot make the incision as full and perfect as it ought to have been, because the patient is restless, or because haemorrhage arises, you should pack the wound with cotton wool soaked in corrosive ointment and leave till it eats away the remainder of the fat; then dress until healed.	0.86557114

chapter-2-subchapter-48.txt
Of abscesses of the armpits	On the opening of axillary tumours.	0.43145943
These abscesses that come under the armpits are types of hard scrofula with sacs, and some contain moisture.	These tumours under the armpit are of the type of scrofulous tumours, hard, enclosed in a capsule. Some contain humidity.	0.80113643
Those that contain moisture must be cut in this form, from line b. to line g.: And when all the pus in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat it with suitable ointment until it is healed.	Those that contain humidity should be opened with a semicircular incision like this, from b to g. When you have removed all the pus that had been in the tumour, pack the wound with teased-out cotton wool and leave till another day. Then remove the cotton wool and dress with a suitable ointment until healed.	0.771147
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, cut it as we have said for scrofula incisions, and if the wound discharges pus, apply cautery as we have said before.	If the tumour be of the nodular scrofulous kind, cut directly down on it just as we prescribed for that kind. If the wound continue to discharge pus, apply the cautery to it as prescribed before.	0.7508883

chapter-2-subchapter-49.txt
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is healed over it, abscesses often form, and it is the same with a swollen vein and abscess;	When an artery is injured and the overlying skin scars, a tumour very often arises from this; the same thing happens to a vein: a swelling and a tumour.	0.8199908
and it is known this way when it is from the artery, the abscess is long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel a tightness; and when it is from the vein, it is round and visible on the surface;	And these are the signs by which you may diagnose whether the swelling and tumour arise from an artery or a vein: if it be from an artery the tumour will be a deep and elongated mass; and when you press upon it with your finger there will be a feeling of pulsation. But if it arises from a vein the swelling will be circular and superficial.	0.7470708
and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and in the groin and on the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. So it is necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and the one that is at the top should be avoided as well, and in the one that is from the swelling of the artery, cut lengthwise above the skin;	It is dangerous to make an incision on tumours of this kind, specially in the axilla, the groin, the neck, and in many other parts of the body; it is indeed highly dangerous, so in these you must avoid treatment by the knife; also in those in the limbs and in the head it must be avoided.	0.7626083
So it is necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and the one that is at the top should be avoided as well, and in the one that is from the swelling of the artery, cut lengthwise above the skin; then open the incision with hooks, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues, until it is uncovered;	But any such that arises from the inflation of the mouth of an artery, you may cut down in the skin over that with a longitudinal incision; then open up your incision with hooks and dissect away the artery, freeing it from the tissues till it is laid bare.	0.65931416
then place a needle under it, and pierce it to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, as I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples;	Then run a needle beneath the artery to reach the other side, and tie the artery in two places with a double thread, as I showed you for the extraction of the temporal arteries.	0.7814429
then puncture the place between the two ties with an "entromissoire" until the blood comes out, and the abscess is relieved;	Then with the scalpel prick the part between the two ligatures to let out all the blood and get the tumour down.	0.64123243
then administer the treatment that generates flesh, until the ties fall off; then treat it with suitable ointment until it is healed;	Then apply dressings to excite suppuration until the ligatures fall away; then dress with suitable ointments until healed.	0.78343076
and if the abscess is from the vein, you must hold with your hand as much of the abscess with the skin as you can, then place the needle under the place you are holding, and pierce it, and place a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, with a tie on one of the two sides with the two ends of the thread;	If the swelling be due to a vein that has been penetrated, you should gather up with your hand as much of the tumour as you can, together with the skin; then pass a needle beneath the place which you have grasped in your hand and run it through, threaded with a double thread, until it emerges at the other side; then with it tie a strong ligature round the swelling as I mentioned to you on ligaturing the swollen uvula, from either side, with the ends of the thread.	0.8701552
and if you are concerned that the thread may not hold, place another needle with a thread under the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four places;	If you fear that the threads may come loose, pass a second needle and thread beneath the whole tumour to intersect with the passage of the first needle; and tie your threads in four places.	0.80065215
then cut the abscess so that the excess comes out, then cut the excess of the core and leave what is tied;	Then incise the tumour in the centre to extract the contents. Then cut away the superfluous skin and leave what has been ligatured.	0.7175031
then place a cloth moistened with wine and oil on it, then administer tenting and ointment treatments until it is healed.	Then put on that a pad previously soaked in wine and oil; then apply the treatment with lint and ointments until healed.	0.91472054

chapter-2-subchapter-50.txt
Just as abscesses occur in the artery and vein, abscesses can occur in the nerves when they are struck, or from too much work, and similar things.	As a tumour arises on an artery or a vein, so may it also come in a tendon when it has been bruised; or it may arise from excessive fatigue, or such causes.	0.8063463
And this happens more often in the joints and fingers and in all places where there are joints, and it is a serious abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in many cases without pain;	This occurs mostly at the wrists, at the heel, and at all sites of articular movement.	0.53436834
and when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep in the body, but just under the surface;	It is a hard tumour of the same colour as the rest of the body, and is generally painless, and when strong pressure is put upon it the patient has a numb feeling in it. It is a tumour that does not form in the deeper tissues but is subcutaneous.	0.5971436
and it moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor below nor above, and the one in the joints should not be cut with a knife: there could be a contraction;	It is freely movable laterally, but will not go forward or backward. Those that are situated on joints should certainly not be tackled with the knife, for that often causes palsy.	0.5841003
and the one that is on the head or on the forehead, split the skin with a spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with pliers, and cut it at its root;	Incise the skin of those occurring on the head or forehead, and if the tumour be small take hold of it with the forceps and cut it away by the root.	0.7708678
and if it is large, suspend it with a hook, peel it, then remove it and sew the wound, and treat it until it is healed.	But if it be large, catch it up with a hook and dissect it away and remove it; and sew up the incision and dress until healed.	0.8204428

chapter-2-subchapter-51.txt
Of the large hanging swellings Sometimes thelul occurs in the belly and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to fungi, with a thin root and a large head; and there are small and very large ones;	On the amputation of warts occurring on the belly. Some people often get warts on the belly and on the rest of the body, called fungous warts, because of their resemblance to fungi. They have a slender pedicle and a broad head, the edges of which are sometimes inverted ; and some are small, whereas others of them grow very big.	0.7359723
and I saw a man who had two on his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, with thin roots, and were already split, and moisture was constantly flowing from them.	I myself once saw a man who had two warts on his belly that looked more like fungi than anything else; they were white and had thin pedicles. Their edges were inverted and had split open, and a humour flowed continually from them.	0.8420985
I cut them and found one weighing 18 ounces, and the other 6 ounces, and the procedure for the incision is that you see if the patient is moist, and the color of the growth is white and moist with thin roots;	I amputated them both and weighed them: one came to about eighteen ounces, and the other six ounces. This is the operation for amputating them: examine the patient carefully, and if he be of a humid temperament and the colour of the warts be white, and if they are soft, with a thin stalk, amputate them with a broad scalpel.	0.71985817
then cut it with a broad spatula, and have the cautery ready in the fire. Because often there is too much blood flow during the cutting, and if the blood overwhelms you, then quickly cauterize it;	But you should also have at hand cauteries in a fire; for often in amputating them there is much haemorrhage. So, if the bleeding be a hindrance to you, be quick and cauterize them.	0.72906
and if you see the patient is frightened and afraid of the knife incision, take a well-made lead thread, and tie the growth as we have said, and leave it for two days;	On the other hand if you see that the patient is frightened and dreads the cutting of them with the scalpel, take a wire of stout lead, and ligature this type of wart and leave for two days.	0.6951365
then tighten it, and keep tightening the lead thread until it cuts through the growth, and it falls off by itself without trouble; and if the roots are large, it is dangerous to cut, especially for the belly, but you can cut half of it,	Then increase the stricture by the lead wire and go on doing this as it sinks into the wart, until the wart is cut through and spontaneously falls away with no trouble. But if the warts have stout pedicles there is some risk and fear in the cutting of them, especially those that occur on the belly. Sometimes, however, you can cut away the half, or some part, and then cauterize to prevent recurrence.	0.7468159
then cauterize it so it doesn't return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the thelul that is of dark color and poor quality and looks bad.	Then dress until the wound is healed. But beware of trying to cut away growths that are dark in colour, with little sensation and hideous in appearance, for they are cancerous tumours.	0.62911236
Because it is a cancerous abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer later.	I shall soon be mentioning cancer.	0.4153793

chapter-2-subchapter-52.txt
If the appearance of the swelling comes from the cautery of a wound or from the split of the sac, and it is on the belly and some pus comes out, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries as mentioned before, or from windiness;	The navel becomes prominent from many causes; either from a rupture of the peritoneum over the abdomen, so that omentum or intestine comes through it as in other ruptures; or from blood extravasation from an artery or vein, as we have mentioned; or else from wind trapped in it.	0.76365733
and if it is from the rupture of the sac and the exit of the intestine, the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is an easy thing without pain, and it appears in various forms. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when pressed with fingers, it recedes, and then returns, and perhaps it is squeezed, and grows a lot when entering the bath and from hard work.	If it be due to ruptured peritoneum and protruding omentum, the colour of the tumour will be the same as the rest of the body; it will be soft and painless and will seem to change its position; But if it be due to an escape of bowel the change of position, compared with what we have described, will be greater, and it will disappear on digital pressure, and then will recur; and often there will be crepitus with it, and it will increase in size on entering the bath or on violent exertion.	0.7482394
And if it is from moisture, it is an easy thing, and it is clear when you press it with your hand, and it does not contract; and if it is from blood, the signs show a large and hard abscess, and it is fixed in one place;	If it be due to fluid, it will be soft and will not disappear on manual pressure, nor will it grow larger or smaller. If it be due to blood, then in addition to these signs the tumour will appear blackish. If it arise from a fleshy overgrowth, the tumour will be solid and hard, remaining always constant in bulk.	0.6787759
and if it is from windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the procedure is that you see if the appearance is from the blood of the artery, or the vein, or windiness. So you must leave the treatment. Because there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.	If it be due to wind, it will be soft to the touch. The operation for these is to examine, and if the exomphalos be due to arterial or venous blood, or wind, you should withhold treatment since it is dangerous in these cases, with an uncertain outlook, as I taught you in the chapter on tumours arising from an artery or vein.	0.79450715
And if the appearance is from the intestine or the bowel, you must order the patient to hold their breath, and lie straight, then mark around the swelling; then command him to lie often in your hands, then go around the place you have marked with the spatula, then extend half of the abscess above with the large hook;	But if it be due to bowel or omentum, bid the patient hold his breath and stand stiffly upright; then make an ink mark all round the umbilicus; then tell him to lie on his back before you; then with a broad scalpel cut all round the umbilicus along the line marked out; then draw up the middle of the tumour with a large hook; then ligature the site of the incision with a strong thread or silk cord, tying it securely with a slip-knot.	0.7691
then open the half of the abscess stretched over the tie, and put your index finger in it, and search for the intestine; if you find it caught by the tie, then untie it, and push the intestine back inside the belly;	Then open the middle of the tied tumour above the ligature and insert your forefinger and search for the bowel; and if you find it caught in the ligature slacken the slip-knot and push the bowel back into the abdomen.	0.89617413
and if you find the bowel, then take it with the hook, and cut off the excess;	But if you find omentum, stretch it with a hook and cut off what is superfluous.	0.62013364
and if the artery or the vein hinders you, then go carefully around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put in them two strong threads, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross that you had pierced;	And if you come across an artery or vein, tie it securely and go on with your work: take two needles and thread them with two strong threads and insert the two needles into the incision that you have made around the tumour, pushing them in so that they cross one another.	0.8576343
then tighten the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you want, remove the needles, and leave the place until it rots, and the dead flesh falls off by itself; or cut it when it becomes thin and rotten, then treat it with what is needed, and finish the abscess as we have said;	Then ligature the tumour in four places over the needles. If you wish, you may remove the needles and let be until the ligatured tissue necroses and falls away of its own accord; or cut it away when it is thin and necrosing. Then dress with the needful ointments until healed.	0.8394041
or cut it when it becomes thin and rotten, then treat it with what is needed, and finish the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place with what is needed, and seal the place.	Then dress with the needful ointments until healed. But if the prominent navel be due to an overgrowth of flesh there or from humidity, you should slice the tumour as we have said and get out all the blood or humidity to be found there.	0.6920215

chapter-2-subchapter-53.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-54.txt
of dropsy We have already mentioned in the division the characteristics of dropsy, and how the collection of water is made, and the signs of each type, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and the one that is treated with iron: it is only eclites; and one should not touch with iron in these two types: namely, tympanites and yposarche, because it is a deadly thing; so when you treat this type of dropsy called "eclites" with medicines, and the treatment does not work, then see if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as cough and looseness of the belly and similar things; then do not touch with iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient has strong vitality, and he has no other disease besides dropsy alone, and he is not too young nor too old, then you should proceed as follows: lift the patient upright in your hands, and the assistant presses the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the chest, then take the pointed spatula in this form: and it should be sharp on both sides and pointed, but not so penetrating that it can reach the intestines when it is inserted, and cannot injure them;	When you have been trying medical treatment for this kind, for ascites, and your treatment is ineffectual, then consider; and if the patient be in a low state or suffer from other disease beside the ascites, such as cough or diarrhoea or some such, then beware of attempting operative treatment since it will be of uncertain outcome. But if you see that the patient has plenty of strength and suffers under no other complaint beside the dropsy, and is of neither tender nor advanced age, then the operative procedure in this case is for you to place the patient, standing, before you, with an assistant behind him to apply manual pressure to his abdomen and push the fluid down into the pelvis. Then take a pointed scalpel of this shape, sharp along both sides, long, and very sharp at the end like a scalpel, but slightly stubby so that in operating you do not reach the intestines and damage them.	0.8162693
then see if the dropsy is formed towards the intestines: then you must cut above the belly three fingers width below the navel; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then the cut should be on the left side of the belly three fingers; and if it is for the spleen, it should be on the right side, and the patient should not lie on the incision so that the fluids do not flow to that weak place;	Then consider; and if the dropsy arises from the region of the intestines then you should make an incision three fingers' breadth directly below the umbilicus, above the pubes. If the dropsy arises from disease of the liver, let your incision be three fingers to the left of the umbilicus. If it arises from disease of the spleen, let the incision be three fingers to the right. Moreover, the incision must not be on the side which the patient wishes to lie on, so that the superfluities may not flow to the damaged part.	0.9036759
at the top is the blade, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it descends immediately on the instrument; then empty half or a third of it, because if you empty more than necessary at that time, perhaps the patient will die from the loss of his life force, or he will faint, or he will approach death;	Its extremity may be cut to the shape of a writing reed like this; the upper end of it is supplied with a ring. When the instrument reaches the fluid, the fluid will at once pass down into it. Evacuate at one time only a moderate amount of fluid; for if you evacuate more than you should at a time, the patient may die through a dissolution of his animal spirits, or he will undergo a fainting that is next door to death.	0.7311878
but empty according to the amount of his strength, and according to what the conditions of the patient’s strength signify, and his pulse; then remove the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now by the skin that stops the hole that is on the sac, which I mentioned, that you pierce in this manner; then reinsert the instrument the next day, if you see the patient tolerating it, and draw out a small amount of water;	But let out such quantity of fluid as is proportionate to his strength and as is indicated to you by the patient's condition: the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his colour. Then withdraw the instrument and keep (the rest of) the fluid in. For it will be immediately held back by the skin that closes the opening in the peritoneum, which, as I have told you, must be perforated in that manner. Then repeat the use of the instrument another day if you see that the patient can tolerate it, and withdraw again a small quantity of fluid.	0.868334
do this for a few days, and be careful not to rush so that only a little water remains. And if you have doubts about the patient, and you leave a lot of water in him, then treat him with burial in hot sand, and with a lot of sweating or baths and in the sun, and prevent him from drinking; and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize over the stomach and over the liver and over the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I said before.	And do this daily, watchful and on guard against error, until there is only a trace of fluid left. But if you are afraid for the patient and leave a large amount of fluids treat him by burying him in hot sand, and by heavy sweating in the bath and in the sun, and letting him go thirsty; while you treat him with drying medicines, till he is well. He should also be cauterized on the abdomen and on the liver and spleen after the paracentesis, as I have previously described.	0.8977425

chapter-2-subchapter-55.txt
Of the obstruction of the penis Sometimes children are born without a hole in the penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in the right place. So it is necessary to immediately pierce it with a very fine spatula in this form: then place a fine lead nail in the hole, and tie it and leave it for three or four days and when he wants to urinate, the nail is removed, and he urinates, and then it is replaced; and perhaps it is not needed because the urine that comes out will not let it close. Those whose hole is small are treated with the lead nail, as we have said, and it will enlarge. Those who do not have the hole in the right place are injured, because some are born with the hole at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis high; and they cannot impregnate because the semen cannot reach the womb, and this is a bad condition.	When he wishes to make water, it will be removed and he will do so; then put it back. If you do not put in the leaden sound it may be that the urine passing through the place will prevent the wound from healing. The case having too narrow a meatus should be treated with the leaden sound, as we have said, for many days until it is wide enough. In those cases having a misplaced meatus—for example, there are some born with the opening at the edge of the glans so that they cannot make water forwards until the opening of the penis is lifted up by hand, nor can they beget, since the semen cannot reach directly to the uterus, a disorder which is very ugly.	0.8311015
And the procedure is that the patient should lie often on his back, then stretch the tip of the penis and cut it like the shape of a pen, so that the hole is in the middle, as it should be; and be careful of bleeding which often occurs, and if it happens, stop it with what stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.	The manner of operating in this case is for the patient to lie back; then with your left hand draw out his glans firmly and cut the end of the glans at the place of the meatus with a broad knife or sharp scalpel, as if sharpening a pen, or as if you were whittling something, so that the middle of it protrudes like a glans penis and the opening falls in the middle as it should. And beware, in your operating, of haemorrhage, which often happens; meet it with styptics and dress the wound until it heals.	0.7963696

chapter-2-subchapter-56.txt
Of the pustules of the penis Many times these pustules appear on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; then you must take them with a fine hook, and cut and clean them all, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on them; then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed. And if the pustule is malignant, of a rotten color and smelling bad, then you must use cautery. When you have cut it, and if the pustule is at the top of the penis, and is partly inside the skin and partly outside, then you must remove the pustule that is inside first; and when it is healed, then treat the outside. Because when you treat them together, the tip of the penis is not safe from being pierced, and blackness and corruption come to the penis and the testicles; then you must remove all that is black and corrupt, then apply a plaster of honey and flour made from pomegranate peel and vetch, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.	The nonmalignant you should seize with a fine hook and pare away until they are altogether gone; then apply to the place cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment; then afterwards dress with Palm ointment until healed. But when the pustules are malignant, of a dirty colour, for these you should employ the cautery after cutting and scraping them. If the pustules be on the prepuce of an uncircumcized unbeliever and there are some inside the prepuce and some outside, those that are inside should be removed first; and when they are healed over, then treat those outside. For if you deal with both at the same time you are in danger of going through the prepuce.	0.8424478
and if it is a difficult thing to separate it, then you must peel it with a spatula a little bit from the tip of the penis and the skin; then gently separate between the two, and place a fine linen cloth soaked in cold water, so it does not reattach.	But if the complete separation of the two be difficult then you should dissect away a little of the glans and of the prepuce; for the prepuce is thin, and consequently it is often pierced quickly. Separate then between the glans and the prepuce with a piece of fine linen dipped in cold water to prevent further adhesions. Then let it be dressed with some styptic wine till it heals over.	0.7879604

chapter-2-subchapter-57.txt
Circumcision is not like the healing of other wounds; however, when we perform this procedure willingly, especially on children, it is necessary to make it the best and safest operation.	Circumcision is nothing but a solution of continuity like other wounds: but as it is a result of our deliberate action, and as it is done particularly to boys, we should plan in this case the very best operation, and the easiest way that leads to safety.	0.7883343
I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children because they did not use it in their law, and we only have what we have learned through experience.	Now the Ancients made no mention of circumcision in any of their books, since it was not practised in their religion; but it is something we have acquired by experience.	0.68361676
For I have seen most of the masters and surgeons performing circumcision with a scalpel, and scissors, and with a razor; the procedure was faulty because there are two layers, and perhaps they cut the top one and leave the one underneath.	I have myself seen the common run of practitioners and barbers carry it out with razor and with scissors; they use a spindle-whorl, a ligature of thread, and incision by means of the finger-nail. I have personally tried all these ways and have not found a better than circumcision with scissors and a thread ligature.	0.6800183
Now it must be cut again, and the pain is doubled, and with the scalpel, the tip of the member is not secure; and with the razor, the blade might slip and cause complications, and often they heal without needing treatment, as I have seen.	I have personally tried all these ways and have not found a better than circumcision with scissors and a thread ligature. For circumcision carried out with the razor is often eluded by the skin; for the skin of the prepuce is of two layers; and often the outer skin is incised and the inner is left intact, so that a second incision is needed, and renewed pain; while when the circumcision is done with a spindle-whorl you are in danger of cutting the tip of the penis, since the tip often goes into the aperture of the whorl.	0.61985177
Regarding the circumcision done with scissors and a thread tie, I have found it to be effective because the scissors cut both above and below equally well.	Experience has taught me the superiority of circumcision with the scissors and the thread ligature.	0.5190538
For when you press your hand, it cuts evenly in one go; but the thread must be tightly tied around the skin; and the way of the first procedure is to make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the penis, and then make him enjoy in all the ways you can; then make him stand between your hands straight, and hide the scissors in your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them or any of the instruments; then place your hand on the penis and blow on the tip, and pull it up so that the tip of the penis is inside; then clean it well from the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the marked spot with a double thread, then tie it again slightly lower with another tie; and hold it with two fingers at the second tie at the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two ties, then quickly lift the upper skin and pull the tip of the penis;	For scissors cut evenly, since the upper edge of the scissors is exactly the same as the lower edge; and so, as you compress your hand, thanks to the correspondence of the two blades you cut equally and simultaneously; and you make the girdle of the thread like a wall all round the skin of the tip of the penis: thus no error can occur. The manner of operating is first to make the boy, especially if he is one who understands a little, imagine that all you are going to do is tie a ligature on the tip of the penis and leave it for another day. Then amuse him and cheer him as much as you can, according to his intelligence; then stand him upright before you, not sitting; and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot and do not let the boy's eye chance upon that or any other instrument. Then with your hand take hold of the tip of the penis, blow into the foreskin, and draw it back till the glans penis is exposed; then cleanse from it all unclean matter that has collected.	0.90900034
then make him stand between your hands straight, and hide the scissors in your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them or any of the instruments; then place your hand on the penis and blow on the tip, and pull it up so that the tip of the penis is inside; then clean it well from the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the marked spot with a double thread, then tie it again slightly lower with another tie; and hold it with two fingers at the second tie at the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two ties, then quickly lift the upper skin and pull the tip of the penis; then let the blood flow little by little because it is cleaner that way; and put powder on it and on the powder a cloth soaked in the white of a cooked egg mixed with rose water, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.	Then amuse him and cheer him as much as you can, according to his intelligence; then stand him upright before you, not sitting; and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot and do not let the boy's eye chance upon that or any other instrument. Then with your hand take hold of the tip of the penis, blow into the foreskin, and draw it back till the glans penis is exposed; then cleanse from it all unclean matter that has collected. Then ligate the indicated place with a double ligature, and a second right round beneath; then take hold at the site of the lower ligature with thumb and forefinger, very firmly, and cut between the ligatures; then quickly push back the skin and draw out the glans penis; then let a little blood flow, for that is all the better and prevents the swelling of the tip of the penis; then wipe it with a piece of soft cloth, then sprinkle on it ashes of dried gourds (this is the best of all that I have tried) or else fine white flour, which is also good; then apply on top of the powders a piece of linen with egg-yolk cooked in rosewater, beaten up with fresh oil of roses of good quality. Leave this on the wound until the following day; then dress it in the usual way till healed.	0.91767615
The shape of the scissors for the circumcision is this: the two tips should be thin and sharp, and the tips should be as big as the handle equally:	This is the type of scissors most suitable for circumcizing. They should be fiat-nosed, sharp, with no bend in them, and with the pivot tempered ; and the length of the handles should be equal to that of the blades.	0.5843731
the mistake of the circumcision is when the inner skin escapes the incision; then it is necessary to stretch it with your nail before the place forms an abscess; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, hold it with forceps, and then cut it.	Now the mistake often occurring in circumcision is for the inner layer of skin, either the whole or the part, to be inverted at the cutting. So you should at the start draw it out with your finger-nail before the place swell; then make an even incision. And if you are unable to get a hold with your finger-nail then pick it up with a hook and make your incision.	0.7975337
And if three days pass, and the area below the penis is swollen, then leave it until the hot abscess is soothed, and peel it lightly; then cut it as you can, and be careful of the part of the penis, as it will not harm it at all.	If after three days there still remains some inflation and swelling of the part below the tip of the penis, let it be until the effusion subsides, and then gently peel it away and cut it as best you may. Be careful of the tip of the penis; though if any of the tip is cut away that will do no harm.	0.84481764
Then treat the area with healing powder that we have mentioned in the powder section, and if you cut the skin too much, and it goes above, it will not harm; treat it as we have said until it is healed.	And dress the wound with stimulating medicaments from among the powders that we described in the treatise on powders. Should more of the skin be cut away than necessary and the skin is wrinkled up, that will do no great harm either. Continue such treatment as we have mentioned, until healed.	0.7961043

chapter-2-subchapter-58.txt
of the retention of the urine	On the treatment of retention of urine.	0.6081551
The retention of urine is caused by the obstruction of a stone, or clotted blood, or pus, or flesh growth, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division;	Retention of the urine is caused by an obstruction, from a stone or a clot of blood or pus or a fleshy tumour, or similar cause.	0.7903603
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should bend over his knees; and place his feet on his back, and stretch his belly over his back, and the patient should hold his breath as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone, thus releasing the urine;	When you have carried out treatment in the ways we have prescribed in their place and the urine is not released; and when you see that it is held back by a stone sticking in the neck of the bladder, then you should have the patient down on his knees, squatting; then mount a man on his back to press his abdomen against his back; and let the patient himself hold his breath as tightly as possible; for then pressure will be put on the neck of the bladder to force the stone back and liberate the urine.	0.8541633
and if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with the instrument called "syringe," which has this form: it is made of fine silver, light, and shaped like a bird's feather; and the tube is a palm and a half in length, and fine at the tip.	But if these measures do not free it and the matter is very urgent with the patient, then you should attempt to bring it out with the instrument called a catheter, of which this is the figure. It is made of silver, slender and smooth and hollow like the quill of a bird's feather; as slender as a probe; about a span and a half in length; and with a tiny funnel at the end.	0.76034737
The method of releasing the urine is to take a double thread, and tie a bit of wool or cotton at the end, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe; and cut the excess wool and push it to the end of the syringe, then coat the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a chair, and moisten his bladder and penis with olive oil and warm water;	This is the manner in which you draw off the urine through it: take a double thread and with a strong knot tie a little wool or cotton on the end, introduce the end of the thread into the lower end of the catheter, and trim off with scissors any superfluous wool, so that it will go into the tube and close it like a tassel. Then smear the catheter with oil or butter or egg-white. Make the patient sit down; then anoint the bladder and the meatus of the penis with humid oils or with olive-oil and warm water.	0.8462592
then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the base of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the abdomen; then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it reach the empty space, and this is done in this order only because the passage where it goes is twisted; then gradually pull out the thread with the wool, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it, and let the urine flow;	Then gently introduce the catheter into the urethra until it reaches the root of the urethra. Then turn the end of the penis upward toward the umbilicus; then push the catheter inwards until the curve of the catheter ends, and push the catheter in until it reaches nearly to the seat. Then turn the penis down, with the catheter in it, and push until it reaches the bladder, and the patient now feels that it has entered a hollow. The reason why the operation is done in this manner is that the passage by which the urine is excreted is curved.	0.8679694
and repeat the syringe process until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.	Apply the catheter again and again until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.	0.7506619

chapter-2-subchapter-59.txt
When abrasions or blood occur in the bladder, or decay is present, and you want to distill water and medicines there, do so with the instrument called "clepsydra," and this is its form:	When there occurs an ulcer in the bladder, or there is a clot of blood or a deposit of pus in it, and you wish to instil into it lotions and medicaments, this is done with the help of an instrument called a syringe.	0.7393314
It is closed, and has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the place at the top where the medicine flows should be such that it stops the penis without addition, so that the moisture can be drawn out, and pushed in when needed;	It is made of silver or ivory, hollow, with a long fine tube, fine as a probe; entirely hollow except for the end, which is solid with three holes in it: two on one side and one on the other, as you see. The hollow part containing the plunger is exactly of a size to be closed by it, so that any liquid is drawn up with it when you pull it up; and when you press it down it is driven in a jet, as is done by the projector whereby naphtha is thrown in naval battles.	0.6779491
and when you want to pour your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the kesteur in the moisture, and pull the plunger that is inside; this will draw the moisture into the kesteur, and then push the plunger back in forcefully; the moisture will enter, and come to the bladder immediately, so the patient will feel it;	So when you wish to inject fluid into the bladder, dip the end of the syringe into the fluid and draw up the piston, for the fluid will be drawn up into the cavity of the syringe. Then introduce the end into the urethra as we described for catheterization; then expel the fluid by means of the piston; the fluid will immediately flow into the bladder and the patient will have a sense of its entry.	0.79048026
and this is the form of the fine clyster with which one irrigates the bladder: it is here:	This is the illustration of a fine clyster also for irrigation of the bladder.	0.57632476
and if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a bowl, and put into it what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.	But if you have not a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and cut out a circle; then make holes in the edge all round the circle; then pass a strong ligature through these holes all round and draw the circle in, as a bag is closed with a draw-string, first putting into it whatever fluid, oil, or water, you desire. Then tie it to the instrument and do with it as with the camel's bladder, squeezing until the fluid reaches the bladder of the patient.	0.8838745

chapter-2-subchapter-60.txt
of the stone	On the extraction of the stone.	0.44146636
We have already mentioned in the division the types of stones, and their extraction along with medicines; and I have explained the difference between stones formed in the kidneys, and all the signs, and in which stones one must operate with cutting; in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will explain it clearly and briefly.	We have already in the due place reviewed the different kinds of stone and the medical treatment of them. I mentioned too the difference between stones arising in the kidney and those arising in the bladder, and gave all the symptoms of them. I also mentioned the kind of stone to which manipulation and incision are appropriate.	0.8421013
I say that stones formed in the bladder occur more often in children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder similar to water in its subtlety; and sand appears, and the patient scratches his penis, and it often hangs, and then stiffens; and many of these stones pass through the urethra; and the treatment is easier for children until they are four years old, and it is very serious in the elderly, and moderate in the young, for those who are between youth and old age; and the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.	Now I say that a vesical calculus most frequently occurs in boys. Among the symptoms is that the urine passed out of the bladder is of a thin consistency like water, and sand appears in it; and the patient keeps on rubbing and playing with his penis; and often it hangs flaccid and then is erected; at the same time many of them get a prolapse of the rectum. The cure of boys under the age of fourteen years is easy; but the treatment of old people is difficult; and that of young men midway between the two. And the larger the stone the easier the cure; with a small stone the cure is otherwise.	0.8844347
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with a clyster, to remove all the feces that are in the intestines. Because it sometimes obstructs the search for the stone.	When we undertake treatment the patient must first have an enema to empty his bowel completely; for sometimes the faeces prevent the calculus being found when it is looked for.	0.7432797
Then take the patient by the feet, and shake him and move him below, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it jumps from the high place; then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards; then search for and touch the stone inside;	Then the patient should be taken by the feet and jarred to and fro and shaken downwards to bring the calculus down into the neck of the bladder; or else let him jump down from a height a number of times. Then have him sit down upright before you with his hands beneath his thighs, to make the whole bladder incline downwards. Then examine him and palpate him externally. If you feel the stone in the empty place, immediately hasten and cut down upon it.	0.8554701
if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately hasten to cut over the stone. And if it does not fall completely to the touch, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young adult; and insert it into his anus, and search for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then move it to the neck of the bladder; then press down with your finger, and push it to the place where you want to cut.	If you feel the stone in the empty place, immediately hasten and cut down upon it. But if there is not the slightest sign of it to the touch then you should anoint with oil the forefinger of your left hand if it be a boy, or the middle finger if it be a fully grown young man, and introduce it into the anus and search around for the calculus, until, when it comes under the finger, you can work it slowly towards the neck of the bladder. Then press upon it with your finger and push it outwards toward the place where you wish to make your incision.	0.9099222
And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to stretch the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his left hand remove the skin that is under the testicles in the area where the cut is made; then insert the cutting spatula, which has this form:	Then press upon it with your finger and push it outwards toward the place where you wish to make your incision. And bid an assistant squeeze the bladder with his hand; and bid another assistant raise the scrotum with his left hand and with the other hand stretch the skin under the testicles away from the place where the incision is going to be.	0.77522826
And cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the side of the left buttock; and be straight over the stone, and your fingers should always be in the anus, and the cut should be transverse so that it is wide on the outside, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;	Then do you take a lancet like this and make your incision in the space between the anus and the testicles, not in the mid-line but on the side of the left buttock; and cut down upon the calculus itself, keeping your finger in the anus and pressing it outwards. The incision should be oblique, wide externally and narrowing inwards down to dimensions allowing the exit of the stone, not larger.	0.8195735
perhaps pressing it with the finger that is in the anus, so it comes out without effort; and know that there are some stones with angles and edges: they are difficult to extract; and there are some that are smooth, like an acorn, and round, whose exit is easy.	Now you may press with the finger that is in the anus upon the stone as you make the incision, and it comes out without difficulty. You should know that sometimes there are stones which have angles and edges, on which account their extraction is difficult. Some are smooth like acorns and rounded, and these come out easily.	0.884457
For those with angles and edges, make the cut larger; and if it does not come out, then it is necessary to grasp it with forceps that are like a file at the tip, to hold the stone so it does not slip; or you insert underneath it a fine instrument curved at the tip; and if you cannot manipulate it this way, then enlarge the opening a bit, and if the blood flows, then stop it with vitriol;	But in those cases where the stone is rough and angular you should slightly increase the incision. Then if it still will not come out you must then resort to a device— namely to catch hold of it with strong forceps having an extremity like a rasp, to get a tight hold of it so it shall not slip out; or else introduce beneath it a narrow instrument with a crooked end. And if you then cannot get the stone out, widen the incision slightly; and if there is any bleeding stanch it with vitriol.	0.8681845
and if there is more than one stone, then first push the largest to the neck of the bladder, then cut over it, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterward if there are several. And if it is very large, then it must be sawed, and the wound made larger. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine always comes through where the place cannot heal; but always strive to pull it out, or to break it with forceps, until you extract it in pieces;	If there should be a number of stones first push the largest of them into the neck of the bladder, then cut down upon it; then push a smaller one down after it; and do the same if there be more than two. But if the stone be very large it is foolish to make a great incision down upon it; for the result is that the patient either dies or has a chronic urinary fistula because the place will not heal at all. Try rather to manipulate it so that it protrudes; or else attempt to break it up with the forceps so that you can extract it piecemeal.	0.8913889
and when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and compress it, and put over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then wrap the patient on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.	And when you have completed the operation pack the wound with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, and bind it up and apply a pad soaked in olive oil and wine or oil of roses and cold water, to reduce the swelling. The patient should lie flat on his back and the bindings should not be undone before the third day; and when they are undone foment the place with plenty of oil and water.	0.921731
And when you untie it, then moisten the place well with oil and water, then treat it with dyafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed.	Then dress it with Palm ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals.	0.61840975
And if hot abscesses form in the wound and corrosions, and clots of blood in the bladder, and the urine is retained because of this, which is known in such a way that blood flows with the urine: then insert your finger into the wound, and remove that blood, because if it remains, it corrodes the bladder, and rots it;	If an increasing and cankerous abscess occur in the wound, or anything similar such as clotting of blood within the bladder, with stoppage of the urine (which would be signified by the urine being accompanied by blood) pass your finger into the wound and remove the blood; for if it lies in it it will lead to sepsis and necrosis of the bladder.	0.73355764
then wash the wound with water and hyssop and salt, and help it in all the ways you know, until it is healed; and it is necessary that every time you treat him, you tie his thighs together, and apply the medicines to the place.	Then wash out the wound with vinegar and water and salt, and apply whatever treatment is suitable for the case until it heals. Also at all times during treatment his hips should be bound and kept together so that the medicaments applied to the place may not be disturbed.	0.8341941
And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra, and stuck inside, and the urine cannot flow out; then treat it with what I mentioned before, that you often cut it, and one is excused from the cutting by this treatment. I have already proven this method.	Now if the calculus be small and be impacted in the opening of the urinary passage, preventing the exit of the urine, treat it with the means I am about to describe before you go on to make your incision, for often I have found this treatment suffice without incision; I have experience of this.	0.79893947
Take an iron drill according to this shape and it should have three angles fixed in a stick:	You take a drill of the finest steel, of this shape. It should be triangular at the point and sharp, with a wooden handle.	0.6448351
then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then insert the drill into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the drill with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then the urine will soon flow, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the penis. It will soon break, and come out with the urine, and the patient is healed;	Then take a thread and with it bind the penis beneath the calculus to prevent the stone from returning to the bladder. Then introduce the iron of the drill gently into the meatus until the drill reaches the stone itself, and then very very gently revolve the drill upon the stone with your hand, and try to perforate it, till you pierce it through to the other side. Then the urine will at once be released. Then, with your hand outside the penis, squeeze the remains of the stone, and they will crumble and be washed out by the urine and the patient will be cured.	0.9262742
and if you cannot do this because of something that prevents it, then tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then cut the penis at the stone between the two ties, then remove it, and untie the thread, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.	But if this treatment is not possible for you on account of some impediment, then tie a thread beneath the stone and another above; then make an incision down upon the stone in the penis itself between the two ligatures, extract it, then undo the ligature and clean away the blood that has clotted in the wound.	0.9045528

chapter-2-subchapter-61.txt
of the stone in women	It is very uncommon for women to have stone.	0.5501648
It rarely happens that a stone forms in women, and if it happens sometimes, the treatment is difficult, and is hindered by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman willing to expose herself to doctors, especially if she is chaste.	But if it should happen to a woman the treatment is indeed difficult and is hindered by a number of things. One is that the woman may be a virgin. Another is that you will not find a woman who will expose herself to a (male) doctor if she be chaste or married.	0.7335657
And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art with her hands; and the fourth reason is that the woman's stone is deeper than the man's stone, which requires a deeper cut, and there is great fear.	A third is that you will not find a woman competent in this art, particularly not in surgery. Then a fourth is that the place for cutting upon the stone in a woman is a long way from where the stone lies, so the incision has to be deep, which is dangerous.	0.78549224
And if necessity compels this, then you must find a skilled female doctor, and it is difficult to find one, and if you cannot find one, then seek a chaste, subtle male doctor; and present him with a wise old woman knowledgeable in women's lives, or a woman who knows part of the art, and instruct her to do what you command regarding the search for the stone;	If necessity compels you to this kind of case, you should take with you a competent woman doctor. As these are very uncommon, if you are without one then seek a eunuch doctor as a colleague, or bring a midwife experienced in women's ailments or a woman to whom you may give some instruction in this art. Have her with you and bid her do all that you enjoin; first of all, in searching for the stone. If she perceive that the woman is a virgin she should pass her finger into the anus and palpate for the stone.	0.7991027
and examine very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the anus and search for the stone; and if she finds it, then press it under her finger, and instruct her to insert her finger into the woman's vagina, and search and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.	If she perceive that the woman is a virgin she should pass her finger into the anus and palpate for the stone. If she finds it and keeps her finger on it, then bid her cut down upon it. But if the patient be not a virgin bid the midwife pass her finger into the vulva and palpate for the stone, after she has placed her left hand upon the bladder and applied a good pressure.	0.79293364
If she finds it, then she must move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut over the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle of the vulva, where it is better positioned, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above or below the stone, and make the first cut small;	If she finds the stone she should gradually push it down from the outlet of the bladder as far as she can until it reaches the bottom of the pelvis. Then she should cut down upon it from about the middle of the pudenda near the root of the hip on whichever side she can conveniently feel it; she must keep her finger on the stone, pressing from below.	0.84637374
then insert the probe into the cut, if you feel the stone then enlarge the wound so that the stone can come out, and know that there are many types of stones: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and with roots. know their characteristics to understand the extraction.	The incision should start by being small; then let her introduce a sound into the small incision, and when she finds the stone then she will enlarge the incision until she knows that it is big enough for the exit of the stone. You should know that there are many kinds of calculus: some are large and some are small; smooth and rough; long, rounded, and pronged. Learn to recognize these types and you will have an indication of what to do.	0.81973314
And if the blood overcomes you, then apply powdered vitriol to the place, and hold it for an hour until the blood is stopped; then return to your work, until the stone is out, and have the instruments I mentioned for the extraction of stones in men to help you in your work;	If you are hindered by a haemorrhage, scatter powdered vitriol on the place and keep it there for a time until the haemorrhage has ceased, and then return to your operating until the stone is out. See also that you have ready the instruments mentioned for the extraction of stone from the male, to assist you in operating.	0.8635939
and if the blood overcomes you, and it is from the artery that is cut, then apply the powder to the place and compress with tents and bandages, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not extract it, because the patient might die; then treat the wound.	If you are hindered by a haemorrhage and you know, by the spurting of the blood, that it comes from an artery that has been cut, then put styptic powder on the place and bind up tightly with bandages and leave it and do not come back to it; let the stone be and do not extract it, for often that loses the patient; then dress the wound.	0.80466413
And when the heat of the blood is soothed, and the place is healed, then return to your work, until the stone is out.	And after some days, when the acute haemorrhage has subsided and suppuration has set in, return to your operating until you get the stone out.	0.64479375

chapter-2-subchapter-62.txt
Watery hernia is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white syfac, which is under the skin of the testicles, which contains the egg; and it is called "syfac," and sometimes it is actually in the tissue of the egg, so one thinks it is another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white syfac we mentioned; and this rarely happens.	A watery hernia is a collection of fluid in the white membrane lying beneath the skin surrounding the testicle, which is called the scrotum. Sometimes it has a capsule of its own which nature has formed alongside the testis so that one would think it another testicle; it may also form between the skin of the scrotum and the white membrane which we mentioned; however, this occurs very rarely.	0.8177042
And the generation of this hernia is from the weakness that comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread.	This hernia arises from a weakness occurring in the testicles and this matter drains into it; sometimes it happens from a blow upon the testicles.	0.6062597
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: either it is a color leaning towards jaundice, or it is red blood, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often;	The fluid is of different colours, sometimes yellowish, sometimes blood-red, sometimes like lees, black, and sometimes the fluid is watery-pale; this actually is the commonest.	0.70725036
and these are the signs to recognize this accumulation, because if it is in the white syfac that we mentioned, the abscess is round, a little long like the shape of an egg, and the testicle does not appear, because it has moisture all around.	Now these are the signs whereby we know where the fluid is collecting: if it be in the tunica albugínea, as we have said, the tumour will be round and slightly elongated like the shape of an egg. The testis is not apparent since the fluid hems it in all round.	0.72953117
And if there is moisture in the actual tissue, the abscess is round with part of the egg, and therefore one thinks it is another egg;	But if the fluid be contained in a capsule of its own the tumour will be round, to one side of the testicle; therefore one imagines that it is another testicle.	0.69327384
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syfac, it can be felt well; so when you want to know the color of the moisture, test it with the square probe, the form of which is mentioned before. According to what comes out after the probe, judge what is inside.	If the fluid be situated between the skin of the scrotum and the tunica albugínea it will be obvious to the touch. If you wish to know the colour of the fluid, take a sample from the tumour by means of the four-sided exploring needle which has been figured previously; and by what comes out in the track of the explorer you may know the colour of the contained fluid.	0.71670836
According to what comes out after the probe, judge what is inside. And when we treat it with surgery, it is necessary that the patient be bled according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then lay him on his back, on something a little high, and place many cloths under him;	When we begin operative treatment the patient should be told to be venesected, if possible, if you see that he is of a plethoric bodily habit. Then let him lie on his back upon something a little raised, and have a heap of material placed beneath him.	0.6968384
then sit on his left, and command the assistant to sit on the right, and stretch the penis to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles;	Then sit down on his left side, and bid an assistant sit on his right side and draw out his penis toward one side or other of the scrotum and toward the hypogastrium.	0.7379205
then take the blunt spatula, and cut the skin of the testicles along the length until near the base, and make the cut straight dividing the skin of the testicles until the white syfac, and peel it gently according to your ability;	Then take a broad scalpel and make a longitudinal incision in the scrotum, from the middle almost to the pubes. The incision should be straight, on a parallel with the median raphe of the scrotum, down to the tunica albuginea, and dissect away from it carefully lest you cut it.	0.65733624
then pierce the syfac full of water with a large opening, and extract all the water, and then use your forceps, and stretch the syfac upwards; and do not touch the skin of the testicles, but only the syfac; cut it all or in pieces, especially the side of it gently, because if you do not cut it well, the water will return;	Then open up the membrane containing the fluid with a wide perforation and draw off all the fluid. Then with hooks separate the two edges of the incision and draw the membrane upwards but do not touch the skin overlying the testes; then cut away the membrane in whatever way is possible, either as a whole or piecemeal, particularly the side piece; for unless you use the utmost diligence in cutting it away you cannot be certain that the fluid will not come back.	0.7790669
and if the egg comes out during your work, put it back in its place when you have completed the work on the syfac; then join the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture, then treat it as other wounds, until it is healed.	If the testicle should protrude from its covering of skin while you are operating, return it when you have finished cutting the membrane; then bring together the two edges of your incision with a suture. Then dress with the usual dressings for wounds until healed.	0.72793376
And if you find the egg corrupted with another disease, then you must tie the vessels that are suspensory, fearing the flow of blood; then cut the testicle with the suspensory, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.	If you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, you will have to tie off the vessels which are in the suspensor, for fear of haemorrhage. Then cut the testicle from the suspensor and remove it and dress as we said above.	0.8638629
And if the water is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two hernias; then cut the other part as you did the first one equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound wool soaked in rose oil;	If the accumulation of fluid be on both sides you may know it to be a double hydrocele; so make another incision on the other side as you did for the first. If it is convenient for you to make one operation of it, do so.	0.6449143
and put outside other wool soaked in wine and oil, and put it on the two testicles, and put over doubled cloths, and tie it all with a bandage in this form:	Then wipe away the blood and apply to the incisions wool that has been soaked in olive-oil or oil of roses and on that again more wool that has been soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over the testicles and over the hypogastrium; and over that again folded pieces of linen forming pads and bind them down with a bandage having six heads. Two pieces of cloth should be taken and sewn together and packed in between with carded wool to this pattern.	0.6882913
Then take two cloths, and fill them with teased wool according to this design and sew them together at the waistband of the pants, and one end takes the area from the perineum to the back, and the other to the base; and the other two ends on the two sides, and all the tightening should be assembled in the buckle of the pants;	Two pieces of cloth should be taken and sewn together and packed in between with carded wool to this pattern. The ends by means of which it is attached should be made of cotton or soft wool and should be drawn tight at the waist of the breeches. One of the ends you take over the seat toward the back: the second end you take toward the pubes, the two ends round the thighs below, and the remaining two ends over the groin, and the whole is bound up tight with the belt of the breeches.	0.79987824
and sometimes this hernia is treated with a cautery instead of an iron cut, and it is that you take a subtle knife-shaped cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles, and heat it as we have said, so that the white syfac containing the water is exposed;	This rupture may also be treated by cautery instead of surgery. This will mean taking a knife-edged cautery and cutting with it the skin of the testicles; it should be hot, as we told you before, and used until the white membrane covering the hydrocele be exposed.	0.69925344
then take the cautery in this form, and pierce the syfac with forceps, and peel it with this fine hot cautery:	Then take another cautery of this type, which resembles the Greek letter tau; and with it perforate that membrane. It should be hot so as to draw out all the humidity.	0.54151267
And cut it in all the ways you can, until you scrape it all; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this procedure is safer; and more protective against blood flow, and better than the cutting procedure;	It should be hot so as to draw out all the humidity. Then stretch the membrane with hooks, dissect away the capsule with the cautery and cut it away as best you are able until you have completely removed it. But be careful that the heat do not touch the testicle. You should know that this operation is safer, further removed from the danger of haemorrhage, and better, than operation by incision.	0.6779886
and if anything opposes you, whether it is a hot abscess or blood flow or something else, then treat what opposes you, according to what is said before.	If, while operating either with the knife or the cautery, you are hindered by an inflammatory swelling or haemorrhage or anything else, you should deal with all of them by suitable treatment in accordance with what has been said before.	0.672423
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this procedure because of its horror, then administer perforation, as I told you, and it is that when you are very sure by the signs we mentioned that the watery hernia is there,	If the patient be timid and will not suffer this operation on account of its unpleasantness, then treat by perforation as I shall now describe.	0.72611916
then make the patient sit on a raised chair; then pierce the abscess in the lower part with a wide spatula, and make the perforation along the body; and the opening should be large, so that all the water flows out;	When by the signs we have mentioned you are certain that the hernia is watery, you should seat the patient on a high chair and pierce the tumour in its lower part with a broad scalpel. The perforation should run in the long axis of the body, and it should be an ample opening to let all the fluid run out.	0.77709365
then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and let the rest of the water flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed;	Then put cotton on the place and bind it on and leave it so as to soak up the rest of the fluid; then dress the wound until it heals.	0.90452
and if the white tissue does not let the water come out in the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a pen or the instrument with which one extracts the water from dropsy patients, the form of which is mentioned before; and enlarge the wound a little, and know that the water will return, and will gather again after six months or so, and thus the patient will pass his days.	But if the fluid fail to flow out when the opening is made, which would be due to the tunica albuginea's obtruding into the opening and preventing the outlet of the fluid, you should then introduce into the wound a goose-quill or an instrument such as is used for ascites, already described; or else the opening should be widened a little. But you should know that after six months or so the fluid may come back and collect again; when it does so, perforate him in exactly the same manner; so will the patient prolong his life.	0.7995976

chapter-2-subchapter-63.txt
Know that in the cutting of this branch there is fear in many situations, which is why it seems to me that it is often better to leave it alone;	You should know that cutting for this kind of hernia has an uncertain outcome and in most cases results in death; and therefore I think it better to let it be and to safeguard the patient.	0.6069549
And I will tell you the work and the types of the abscess.	However, I shall mention the manner of operating for this and all kinds of tumour.	0.6437979
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and especially to the testicles; and this happens for many reasons.	Now I say that many tumours arise from the bodies composing the testicles; and this from several causes.	0.77729297
That is, from sour and sharp excess, which spreads to the testicles, or from a blow;	It may be from an acrid superfluity running down into the testicles, or from a blow.	0.6028284
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and it does not cause pain, and it is a serious abscess;	The colour of the tumour will be like that of the rest of the body and there is no water to it. The lump will be solid and often will be stony hard, of a dark colour, and without sensation.	0.5327153
And sometimes it is a serious, fearful, and dangerous abscess, and of dark color, and sometimes it comes from a node in the artery, or from swelling of a vein.	The lump will be solid and often will be stony hard, of a dark colour, and without sensation. Sometimes also it arises from a knotting and inflation of the arteries, as has been mentioned, or from an inflation of the veins.	0.65332687
When it is from a node in the artery, it is known by the hot abscess’s disposition when you press it with your fingers; And you should not touch it.	The sort arising from a swelling of the arteries may be recognized by a dispersal of the lump when you press upon it with your fingers; this should not be interfered with at all.	0.76237917
The one that is made from swelling of a vein is known by its disposition to the expression of finger touch,	The sort arising from a swelling of the vein will not disperse when you press upon it with your fingers.	0.5672066
And it is possible to make an incision on this kind, and on the other flesh; And it is that you cut the core of the testicles, then extend the testicle upwards, and pull it out from the white sac, and free the suspensory from all parts of the testicle.	It is sometimes possible to cut down on this kind and also on the other fleshy tumours thus: make an incision in the skin of the testicles; then draw the testicle upward and out of the tunica albuginea, and free the suspensor from the vessels and tie the vessels, and cut the suspensor after you have freed it from all round the testicle.	0.8054916
If the testicle is already attached to these born flesh, then it is necessary that you pull the testicle and cut it;	Should it happen that the testicle is adherent to the fleshy growth, you will have to cut away the testicle itself and remove it.	0.6408684
And if it is attached to the sac, or in what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you free all that tissue and cut it roundly.	But should the adhesion have formed somewhere inside the membranes or in the space between the vessels, then you must free the adhesion as a whole and cut it away with a circular incision.	0.6973536
And if the growth of the flesh is in the back place, then it is necessary that you cut it all, and extract the testicle, as we have said.	If the fleshy growth should be at the site of the junction which is behind, you will have to cut the whole thing away and remove the testicle as we have said.	0.84940475
And when your work is done, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other cures until it is healed.	And when your operation is finished, pack the wound with wool moistened with oil of roses and wine; then dress in the usual manner until healed.	0.83423066

chapter-2-subchapter-64.txt
This is an abscess enveloped in a covering resembling a bud, with the softening of the testicles, And the patient moves painfully when he walks;	A varix is a twisted tumour resembling a cluster of grapes, with relaxation of the testicles, which makes movement and exercise and walking difficult for the patient.	0.5602193
And the treatment of this disease is almost as fearful as the one mentioned before,	The treatment of this condition is of uncertain outcome, akin to those conditions just spoken of.	0.5405649
And yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.	Nevertheless we must describe the operation for this condition as it was performed by the Ancients.	0.61182404
You should make the patient sit on a raised seat, then push the suspensory of the testicles down with your fingers, With all the vessels that are near the penis, and the master holds them, and extends them firmly;	So I begin by saying that you must have the patient sitting upon a high seat; then push down the suspensor of the testicles and take hold of the skin of the testicles with your fingers together with the blood-vessels near the penis; then let your assistant take hold instead of you and draw out strongly.	0.8028163
Then cut with the broad sharp spatula across the vessels, until they are uncovered,	Then with a broad sharp scalpel make an oblique incision in the direction of the vessels so that the vessels are laid bare.	0.6976886
And then strip on each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;	Then dissect on all sides in the same way as I told you for extracting the temporal vessels.	0.66434956
Then stick a needle with a double thread, and tie it at the first place where the infection has come, and tie it again at the other end; Then cut them in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture;	Then run through them a needle doubly threaded and tie at the spot where the varix begins and tie it again where the varix ends, then cut through the varix in the middle with an incision at right angles to the length of the body and draw out the turbid corrupt humidity that has gathered in it.	0.78719896
Then treat the wound as with others where pus forms, so that some vessels fall that nourish one of the testicles;	Then dress the wound with the wound dressings usual where you wish to encourage suppuration, so that the vessels nourishing the one testicle may perish; there is no harm in that.	0.6244805
For from this comes no harm, and if infection comes to all the vessels, it is necessary to extract the testicles with all the vessels; So that the organ does not lose its nourishment due to the cutting of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.	But if all the vessels are varicose then you will have to remove one testicle with its vessels lest the testicle be deprived of nourishment through cutting into the vessels; for it will wither and be of no use.	0.73611367

chapter-2-subchapter-65.txt
Of the rupture of the syfac The occurrence of this rupture happens either by the cut that comes to the membrane (syfac) or the stretching over the belly in the groin area, causing the intestines to descend from that rupture to one of the testicles;	This hernia is due to a split occurring in the membrane stretched from the hypogastrium over the belly in the region of the groin. Through this opening the bowel descends upon one of the testes; this opening is due to the membrane's splitting or stretching.	0.73358226
And this rupture is either from the membrane or from its stretching, and these two ways come from many causes: either from a blow, or a jump, or shouting, or lifting heavy loads, and similar things;	And these two kinds occur from a number of causes: from a blow or jumping or shouting, or lifting a heavy weight, or a similar cause.	0.83909154
And the signs, when it is from the stretching of the membrane, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; And the abscess is equal to the depth, because the membrane presses the intestine.	The symptoms of it, when it arises from a stretching of the membrane, are that it is a slow and chronic development and does not happen on a sudden, and the swelling is even and deep down, because the membrane is pressing the bowel.	0.78059876
And the signs, when it is from the cutting of the membrane, are that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscess appears differently, just under the skin, because of the issue of the intestine and the body outside the membrane.	When it is due to a split in the membrane, the signs will be that it starts with a sudden severe pain, and the lump varies in consistency, appearing close under the skin; that is due to the emergence of the bowel and its passage outside the membrane.	0.77957517
And sometimes the omentum descends with the intestine, and it is held there, causing great pain for the patient, especially when it is pressed.	Sometimes also the excrement comes down with the bowel and gets held up there, and this involves the patient's death, for thence arises an intractable pain and borborygmi, specially when pressed upon.	0.76386416
And in these treatments, there is fear of using the knife, which is why it must be avoided.	The treatment of the varieties of this disease with the knife is dangerous; so be cautious of rushing at it.	0.5805298
And the way of the work is that you command the patient to push the intestine back inside the wound with his hand, if he can return it; Then have him lie on his neck between your hands and lift his thighs;	The manner of operating is to bid the patient reduce the bowel back into the belly if it be disposed to return, then lie back before you and raise his legs.	0.7306936
Then stretch the skin upwards and cut all the skin of the testicles lengthwise; Then put inside the lips of the cut with hooks as needed to open the wound, and so that the organ can come out;	Then do you stretch upward the skin adjacent to the groin, and cut the whole length of the skin of the testicles; then attach to the edges of the incision as many hooks as are necessary to open the incision. The incision should be sufficiently large to allow the testicle to be drawn out.	0.85928696
Then strip the membrane that is under the skin of the testicles until the white membrane is completely uncovered;	Then dissect away the tissues that lie beneath the skin of the scrotum so that the hard tunica albugínea be exposed all round.	0.66374254
Then put your index finger in what follows the testicle, in what is between the white membrane that is under the skin of the testicle, and between the second membrane,	Then introduce your forefinger in around the testis in the space between the white membrane beneath the skin of the testicle and the second membrane, and with your forefinger free the attachment at the back of the testicle.	0.8149669
And separate what is behind the testicle and between the second membrane; and then move with the right hand inside the core of the testicles, and stretch the white membrane upwards with your left hand, and lift the testicle along with the membrane towards the cut; And command the assistant to stretch the testicle upwards, and untie what is behind the attachment;	Then with your right hand explore within the scrotum and fold back the covering of the testicles, at the same time stretching the tunica albugínea upwards with the left hand, and bring the testis with the membrane up into the opening, and bid your assistant to stretch the testis upwards; and do you fully free it from the posterior attachment.	0.78006506
And search with your fingers if there is any part of the intestine wrapped in the white hard membrane, and if you find anything, push it back into the belly;	Feel with your finger that there be no part of the intestine that has got twisted within the tough white membrane; and should you find any push it back into the abdomen.	0.81466764
And after all the rest according to the roundness that the testicle carries; then cut in the part that is under the skin of the testicles, until the blood and the pus flow, as we have said before;	Then make a counter-incision in the lower part of the skin of the testicles, to let the blood and matter drain away as we bade you before.	0.6990669
Then administer wool soaked in oil, and put it in the wounds, and administer the tie that we have mentioned. And sometimes the white membrane is cauterized, as we have said, after the incision, for fear of blood flow.	Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound, and the bandage that we prescribed (sometimes also the white membrane that we spoke about is cauterized after the incision to forestall haemorrhage, for that usually happens) and let the ligatures be until they fall away spontaneously.	0.7972535
For this happens many times, and leave the tie until it falls by itself; and if it delays in falling, then it should be sprinkled with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it falls;	If they are slow in coming away, then foment with hot water and apply something to sweat them off.	0.4009284
Then treat the wound with other cures until it is perfectly healed.	Then dress the wound in the usual manner until it heals.	0.6869735

chapter-2-subchapter-66.txt
Of fleshy hernia	On flatulent hernia.	0.5406126
In this condition, I have never seen anyone who dared to treat it with a knife.	I have not seen anyone pluck up enough courage to attempt the operative treatment of this kind of rupture.	0.6133417
And the ancients said that it is done like the condition that is with infection, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the cut on the testicles lightly below;	The Ancients indeed said it ought to be done in the same way as hernia with varicocele; namely, to ligate the blood-vessels after cutting down upon them, gently, and lower down.	0.67108154
Then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess as it appears, until the vessels fall; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.	Then make an incision in the middle and apply to the tumour such things as will keep it open until the blood-vessels fall away. And dress the wound in the manner we have already mentioned until it heals.	0.8043884

chapter-2-subchapter-67.txt
Sometimes a rupture comes in the groin, as we have said, and the place opens; and no intestines descend to the testicles, and if any descend, it is little, and they return all the time;	Sometimes there occurs a rupture in the groin as we have said, and the part protrudes. No portion of the intestine descends into the scrotum; or if anything it will be only a tiny portion and will reduce at any time.	0.83027816
And yet if it stays too long in this condition, the wound or membrane grows, so much that the intestines descend;	But if it goes on for a long time the rupture in the membrane increases until the bowel and omentum descend into the scrotum.	0.65341413
And this happens from the stretching of the membrane that is in the groin, as we have said, because it is stretched, then the place is softened and swollen and opens;	It arises from a stretching of the membrane in the groin, as we said; the membrane stretches and then relaxes and the place swells.	0.8485703
And the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is treated by knife in this manner:	Its treatment by the cautery is as I have already described.	0.5411901
And it is that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the swollen rupture in width according to the size of three fingers;	Sometimes also it is treated with the knife in this manner: With the patient lying back before you, make an incision three fingers wide, transversely across the swelling of the rupture which projects.	0.6250893
And then extract the membrane that is under the skin that follows, then take the rod and put it on the apparent place of the membrane;	Then perforate the subcutaneous tissues so as to expose the white membrane that lies under the skin alongside the rupture. Take a probe and place it upon the projecting part of the fascia and push it back into the depths of the abdomen.	0.5871396
And press it to the depth of the belly, then sew the two apparent places of the membrane on the head of the rod, and sew one and the other;	Take a probe and place it upon the projecting part of the fascia and push it back into the depths of the abdomen. Then sew together the two swollen portions of membrane over the end of the probe and suture the one to the other.	0.6899663
Then extract the head of the rod, and do not cut the membrane or stretch the testicle or anything else, as I have made you know in the treatment of the intestinal rupture;	Then take out the probe. On no account make the incision into the fascia nor touch the testis nor anything else, as I taught you on the subject of treating the intestinal hernia.	0.7159412
Then treat it by the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, cleanse it and treat the wound until it is healed.	Then dress the wound, and when the stitches come apart remove them and bandage the wound again until it is healed over.	0.7353041
The membrane is constrained and does not appear in the rupture, and the cautery is better in this place and closer to healing.	For the membrane will draw together and the rupture will not come out again. But the cautery is better at this spot, for it is safer.	0.6351594

chapter-2-subchapter-68.txt
on the softening of the skin of the testicles	On the loosening of the skin of the scrotum.	0.7011086

chapter-2-subchapter-69.txt
Of castration	On castration.	0.6468931

chapter-2-subchapter-70.txt
of hermaphrodites	On the treatment of the hermaphrodite.	0.4441322
Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways in men: one is that between the two testicles there appears something like the female genitalia, sometimes with hair, and sometimes urine comes out of it. The other way is in women, where they have something like a penis and two testicles above the base. The treatment for both men and women is to cut all the extra flesh and treat it like other wounds. In the second way, in men where urine comes out through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.	There are two kinds of male hermaphrodite: one has the appearance as of female pudenda with hair in the region of the perineum; the other has the same in the skin of the scrotum between the testes. Sometimes also urine is excreted through that which is in the skin of the scrotum. There is also one kind among women, in which there is, above the female pudenda, on the pubes, what resembles the male organs.	0.84063876

chapter-2-subchapter-71.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-72.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-73.txt

chapter-2-subchapter-74.txt
of abscesses of the uterus	On the perforation of eruptions occurring in the uterus.	0.5002738

chapter-2-subchapter-75.txt
If the child comes on its head by natural exit, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, make her sit on a stool, or have women hold her; and moisten her genitals with oil or cooked fenugreek, then place between her fingers the small spatula of this shape: and cut the afterbirth, and tear it with your nail until the moisture inside runs out; press the woman’s belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, give the woman an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil; then make her hold her breath and sneeze with condisi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: the child will come out now. If the two hands come out, gently push them back little by little; if they cannot go back in, place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up; then lower the seat to the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall when lowering; if the hands cannot go back in, and the child dies, cut the hands with the knife previously mentioned, extract the child, and reassemble it properly.	When the foetus comes out by the vertex in the normal manner and yet the delivery is with great difficulty for the woman and you see that her strength is getting exhausted, then make her sit on a seat and have her held firmly, and foment her womb in a decoction of fenugreek and in bland oils. Then the midwife should take between two fingers a little scalpel and make an incision in the foetal membrane or open it with the finger nail, to allow the contained waters to flow out; and put pressure upon the woman's abdomen until the foetus comes down. But if it will not come down then the woman should have an enema of mucilage of fenugreek with oil of sesame. Then bid her bear down after the enema, and with ptarmica stimulate her to sneeze; and close her mouth and nose for a while and the foetus will quickly come out.	0.9001839
Of the birth of the child feet first When the child comes feet first, you must push it upward; and then turn it little by little, until it is aligned;	Foot presentation: when the foetus presents feet first you should raise them both; then you should very gently turn the foetus so as to straighten it.	0.7631861
then take one of the feet and extend it little by little.	Then take one of its feet and stretch it gently.	0.8629719
When it reaches the thighs, command her to hold her breath, and make her sneeze with condiments; then it will come out, if God wills.	When they come down as far as the hips, bid her bear down, make her sneeze with ptarmica, and it will come out.	0.6253189
And if it does not come out as we have said, then turn it little by little, until it is in the natural position. For then it will come out easily.	But if it will not come out with these means we have described, you should return the foetus gently until you have placed it in the natural position; then it will come out easily.	0.7706184
And if it does not come out as we have said, then take marshmallow mucilage, sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind it all in a mortar; and put this ointment inside and outside the woman’s genitals, then make her sit in warm water up to her ribs;	But if it defies all that we have described, take mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and oil of sesame and dissolved gum, and pound them all well together in the mortar and anoint the woman's pudenda and lower abdomen; then make her sit down in warm water reaching to the costal margin.	0.8421287
and when she is softened below, make a necklace of myrrh for her, put it below, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a seat, make her sneeze and pinch her mouth and nose, and press her belly gently, for the child will come out now. Of the birth of the child knees first When the child comes in this form, the midwife should place her hands little by little;	And when you see the lower parts are softened, make a suppository of myrrh and let her introduce it; and when she has had the suppository in for a while make her sneeze, stopping her nose and mouth; and press gently upon the abdomen; then will the foetus immediately emerge. Presentation of the foetus by knees and hands : when it comes out after this manner you should seek to introduce the hands slowly; then let the woman lie back on her shoulders with her feet hanging down, reclining on a couch with her hands clasped together; then very gently put pressure upon the abdomen; then take away the pillows from under her feet until her lower parts are vertical ; and if the foetus does not come out then, take both her feet and shake them violently ; then press upon her costal margin until the foetus ascends ; then let the midwife insert her hand and put the foetus in the right position, very gently, and bid the woman bear down, until the infant is born.	0.82360923
Of the birth of the child with one hand hanging out You must skillfully bring the hand back: if it cannot be brought back, make the woman stand up, and walk;	Presentation by the side with one hand hanging down: attempt to manœuvre the hand back again; but if you cannot reduce it then make the woman stand up and walk.	0.7409518
if she cannot walk, make her lie on a bed, and spread her legs firmly;	But if she cannot walk then have her lie on a couch, and agitate her feet violently.	0.8064778
then administer the mucilage I have mentioned;	Then employ the ointment which I described among the mucilages.	0.6327435
and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a seat, then carefully bring back the hand; and extract the child according to the natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to hold her breath until the child comes out.	If parturition begins, make her sit upon a seat and attempt the reduction of the hand and version of the foetus to the natural position, and make the woman sneeze and bear down until the child is born.	0.7114982
Of the birth of the child with its neck first, and its hands spread, and its face turned toward its mother's back The midwife must hold her hand, then turn it little by little, and extract it gently;	Presentation on the back, with hands outstretched and face towards the mother's back: the midwife should take the infant's hand and then turn him very slowly, and gently rectify his position.	0.756554
and when it is aligned, put marshmallow mucilage and oil on her genitals, as we have said, then command her to move little by little;	Then when he is in the correct position apply to the maternal passage the oil and mucilage prescribed.	0.5487315
and when you have done this, make her sit on a seat, and command her to hold her breath; and make her sneeze. Of this same manner with the afterbirth	Then bid the woman move gently and when she has done so make her sit down upon a seat and bid her lean over to her right side; then bid her bear down, and with ptarmica make her sneeze ; then the foetus will come forth.	0.70036864
Of this same manner with the afterbirth When it comes out in this manner with the afterbirth, cut the afterbirth with your nail, until the moisture is emptied;	The foetus presenting laterally, doubled up : when it presents at the os in this manner together with the membrane, open the membrane with your finger nail and let out the waters.	0.554241
and if the child hangs by its face and neck, cut it from the umbilical cord, so it is not retained, and the child dies;	And if it adhere over the infant's face and neck, cut it away from the umbilicus lest he be strangled and die.	0.81207144
then put the child back in, until you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to hold her breath a few times:	Then push the foetus back till it is in the proper position, and bid the woman bear down a few times until the foetus comes forth.	0.7541407
Of the birth of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, though it rarely happens. Two are a strange thing, and they rarely live;	The birth of twin or multiple foetuses: you should know that it is a common occurrence for twins to be born alive, and sometimes three or four infants, but this is a rarity; while five after this manner is altogether unnatural and they never live.	0.85304
I know this, that they are multiplied, and are separated by the membrane that divides them, which is attached to the umbilical cord;	Although they may be more than one, they are enveloped in a single membrane but separated one from the other by a dividing membrane joined to the umbilicus of each one.	0.4916724
and sometimes they come out as naturally as a single child, as we have said.	And when they are born they may come in the natural easy manner of a single foetus; or by any abnormal presentation such as we have described.	0.6204616
And if they come out with difficulty, treat it as we have said, and let the midwife be skillful, and do quickly and lightly what she must do; and do as best as possible for the safety of all. Of multiple births	And if one of them be born with difficulty, presenting in some unnatural manner as described, the treatment is also as described. Let the midwife be delicate and do whatever she does gently and calmly, adopting in each case whatever technique it demands that will conduce to a safe result. A note on the foetuses that may be formed in the womb and abort.	0.7212372
Of multiple births Sometimes one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen children are formed in the uterus, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage,	Sometimes in the womb there may form one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more than ten. And I can vouch that one woman had an abortion of seven foetuses and another woman of fifteen, all of them formed. This is by the decree of the Almighty, the Wise.	0.7670667
and the midwife must know all this, for perhaps such a thing may happen to her; so do as necessary.	And all this should be part of the midwife's knowledge, for one day she may meet such a case and she must deal with it in the proper way.	0.6606587

chapter-2-subchapter-76.txt
Of the dead child	On the extraction of the dead foetus.	0.5090304
When you treat a woman for a dead child in her womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to manual work; then you must know if the woman has sound strength, and has no condition or fear of death;	When you have dealt with a dead foetus by those methods mentioned in their chapter, and it does not come out, and you are compelled to operate, you should examine to see if the woman be in a healthy state and not having any disease on account of which you might entertain a fear for her life.	0.7320514
then the woman must be supported on her back, with her head inclined downward, and her legs raised;	The woman should lie on her back on a couch, her head tilted back and her legs raised.	0.7821786
and the assistant holds her on both sides, or she is tied to the bed so she is not pulled during the descent of the child;	An assistant on either side should hold her down firmly or she should be bound down to the couch, lest the body be drawn out of position in extracting the foetus.	0.71667427
then rub the opening of the uterus with moist oils mixed with marshmallow mucilage, fenugreek, and linseed, then the midwife anoints her hands with these oils and mucilages; then she gently places them in the uterus, then finds a place where she puts the hooks that are suitable for this,	Then the opening should be anointed with moistening oils and with mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and with linseed. Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages and gently introduce it into the vagina and with it locate a place in the foetus to fix hooks in.	0.87843895
and take care if the child is positioned to descend head first; then fix the hooks in its eyes or in its neck or in its mouth or in its palate or under the chin or in the armpit or near the ribs,	The suitable places for that: consider, and if the foetus present the vertex then she should fix the hooks in its eyes or in the neck or in the mouth or palate or beneath the chin, or the collarbone, or about the ribs, or beneath the false ribs.	0.7143032
and if the descent is feet first, fix them in the wrist and the sides;	But if it present the feet let the hooks be fixed in the pubic region or middle ribs.	0.5003016
and he must hold the hook in his right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and gently put his whole hand in, and fix the hook in any of these places that we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty space;	She should hold the hook in the right hand and put the curved part between the fingers of the left hand, and introduce the hand gently and fix a hook in one of the places before mentioned, driving it in until it comes to a hollow.	0.8013183
then fix another hook against it, or a third if necessary, so that the extraction is even;	Then opposite it let her fix another or a third if need be, so as to give even traction, not pulling to one side.	0.7433479
and then extend it evenly by moving from one side to the other, to make it come out, and the hooks should be toothed to hold better, as here is the form:	Then she should pull evenly, not just in a straight line but with the foetus moved from side to side so that its exit may be eased, as is done in extracting a tooth.	0.63529193
And if a part remains, the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil, and places them in that part, and pulls out the other part;	From time to time the tension must be relaxed, and if any part of it be held up the midwife must oil some of her fingers and introduce them to one side to manipulate the retained part.	0.6288536
and if any remains, put the hook in a higher place, and do this until it is all out.	And if a part only of the foetus come away she should shift the hooks to other parts a little higher up, and so on, until the whole of the foetus has come out.	0.60587186
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back because of the tightness, then you must wrap it in a cloth, until it is all out;	If the hand should come out before any other part and it is impossible to reduce it on account of the pressure, then a tape should be wound round it and she should pull on it until it is all out; then it should be cut off at either the carpal or the elbow joint.	0.66017157
then cut it at the joint of the limb or at the elbow, and you must do the same with the other hand, and the two feet.	In the same manner should the other hand be dealt with, and the feet.	0.56029445
And if the child's head is large and the exit is narrow, or there is fluid collected in the head, then you must put the spiked spatula between your fingers, and split the head and extract the fluid; or break it with the instrument called "almidach", the form of which is given with the instruments in the chapter after this one;	If the foetal head be large and it is tightly squeezed in exit, or if there be a collection of fluid in the head, you should introduce between your fingers a spike-shaped scalpel and split the head to let the water out; or you should smash it with the instrument called cephalotribe which will be illustrated, together with figures of the other instruments, in the chapter following.	0.78060865
and do the same if the child has a naturally large head; and then pull out the bones with tongs,	In the same manner you act if the foetus have a naturally large head: either you should cut the skull open or smash it with the cephalotribe as we said; then you should draw out the bones with forceps.	0.6673848
and if the head comes out and it is stuck at the collarbone, split it, so that the fluid in the chest comes out;	If the head comes out and the foetus is held up at the collar bones, an incision should be made to let out the humidity in the thorax, for the thorax will then shrink.	0.6817529
and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as much as you can;	But if the thorax does not shrink and is not disposed to emerge then you should cut off pieces in any manner possible.	0.53566647
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, you must pierce it until the fluid runs out.	If the lower belly be swollen or dropsical then you should make an opening to draw out all the fluid.	0.671578
And if the child is feet first, the extraction is easier, and the adjustment to the mouth of the uterus is easy.	If the foetus present the feet then the extraction will be easy and it will be a simple matter to guide it to the maternal opening.	0.7096102
And if it is narrow in the belly or the chest, you must extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and split the belly or the chest, until the fluid runs out;	If it be stuck about the abdomen or thorax then pull on it with a cloth wound around your hand and cut an opening in the abdomen or thorax to allow the contents to flow out.	0.75436926
and if the other limbs are removed, and the head remains, the midwife places her hand deep in the uterus, and pulls it to the mouth of the uterus; then places one or two hooks, and pulls it out;	If all the limbs are removed but the head is turned backwards and is jammed, the midwife should introduce her left hand and, if the mouth of the womb is open, should put the hand into the cervix of the womb and investigate the head and, with her fingers, draw it down toward the opening and fix a hook or two in it, and extract it with these.	0.7256902
and if the mouth of the uterus is narrowed by a hot abscess that has formed there, then do not try to work, but administer moist and greasy things; and administer plasters, and seat her in softening and moistening water.	If it should be that the mouth of the womb is closed on account of an abscess, then one must not be rough with it but should use in this case instillations of moistening greasy substances; plasters also should be applied; and the woman should sit in a bath of softening and moistening waters.	0.7670806
And if the child is on its side, and you can align it, then administer what we have said for the live child;	If the foetus present laterally and it is possible to reposition it, there should be applied the things mentioned for a living child.	0.6800169
and if it cannot be done, pull it out in pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.	But if this be not possible then it should be cut away piecemeal and extracted. It is necessary that not a scrap of the afterbirth be left behind in the womb.	0.6973097
And when you have done this, administer what we have said for hot abscesses that form in the uterus;	When you have completed your treatment then also apply those treatments we have mentioned for abscesses occurring in the uterus.	0.65149415
and if a flow of blood occurs, put her in restraining water, and administer other treatments.	If haemorrhage occurs, the woman should be put into styptic fluids and the usual treatment applied.	0.6199131
And I saw a woman in whose womb a child had died, then another was conceived over it, and the other also died. After a long time, an abscess formed in the belly, and it swelled until it opened, and began to greatly fester.	Now I myself once saw a woman who had become pregnant and the foetus had then died in utero; then again she conceived and the second foetus also died; and after a long while she got a swelling in the umbilicus which grew and eventually it opened and began to produce pus.	0.88661975
I was called to treat it, and I thought a long time, and the wound could not heal.	I was called in to attend her, and I treated her for a long while but the wound did not heal up.	0.79035306
I applied a strong drawing plaster, and a bone came out, and after a few days, another. I was very surprised, because there are no bones in the belly.	So I applied to it certain very strongly drawing ointments, and then a bone came away from the place; then a few days passed and another bone came out; and I was mightily astonished at this, seeing that the abdomen is a place where there are no bones.	0.8196342
So I thought these were the bones of a dead child.	I formed the opinion that these were bones from a dead foetus.	0.77244496
I cleaned the wound, and extracted many bones, until the woman was in better condition; and the woman lived a long time this way, and a little pus always came out from the place;	I continued this procedure and got a great number of bones out of her, the woman being in the best of health; indeed she lived for quite a while like that, with a little pus being exuded from that place.	0.85299367

chapter-2-subchapter-77.txt
Here is the form of the press, with which books are moved; it has two turners at the two ends of the two bindings. However, the horns should be more delicate than the restrictor and made of ebony or boxwood;	This is the type of instrument with which books are pressed. It has two screws at either end of two pieces of wood; but this instrument should be more slender than a book press, and should be made of ebony or boxwood.	0.88826025
and the mouth of the wood should be a finger wide, and the edges of the boards a finger, and one and a half palms long; and in the middle of the two bindings, there should be two adjustments of the same wood, fixed in both, half a palm long or a little more;	The width of each piece of wood should be about two fingers' breadth and the thickness about one, and the length a span and a half; and in the middle of both pieces of wood, firmly attached, should be two projections made of the same kind of wood, each half a span long or a little more, and two fingers wide or a little more.	0.903306
and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the uterus to open it when the two horns are turned.	It is these two projections that are to be introduced into the vagina so that it is thereby opened when you turn the screws.	0.72179276
Another form, similar but more delicate and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood, similar to tongs; and has at the two ends two adjustments, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide;	Another instrument, for the same purpose, but smaller and lighter. It is made of ebony or boxwood in the shape of forceps, but at the end it has two projections as you can see; and the length of each is about a span and the breadth two fingers.	0.88627386
and when you want to open the uterus with the instrument, make the woman sit on a bed, with her feet hanging and her legs open, then insert the two adjustments joined together into the uterus, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs; then operate the instrument with your hand, as you have done with the tongs, according to the amount you want to open the mouth of the uterus, until the midwife does what she wants.	When you wish to open the womb with this, make the woman sit on a couch with her legs hanging down, parted; then introduce the two projections pressed together into the orifice of the womb while you hold the end of the instrument lower down between her thighs; then open your hand in the same way as you would do with forceps, to the extent to which you wish to open the womb, so as to allow the midwife to do what she desires.	0.9115642
These instruments are all topped, and their forms are multiplied; and when the doctor has prepared them, the work is faster, and higher for men due to their size.	The more types of these instruments the practitioner has ready by him, the more rapidly he operates, and the greater his reputation among men.	0.6623635
Do not despise the instrument without having prepared it, for its necessity is undeniable.	So do not neglect to have ready by you a single one of these instruments, for you will certainly need it.	0.633112

chapter-2-subchapter-78.txt
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze with snuff, and squeeze her mouth and nose with your hands; and if it comes out that way, that is good.	When in a confinement the afterbirth is left behind, you should bid the woman hold her breath then make her sneeze with ptarmica, with your hand holding her mouth and nose; and if it come away thus, good.	0.8682287
If not, take a pot, make a hole in the lid, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the uterus, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia wood, and centaury;	But if not, then take a pot, pierce a hole in the lid, and put in it herbs that will open the womb, such as pennyroyal, rue, anise, chamomile, artemisia, cassia, and centaury, some or all of these remedies, submerge them in water, and place on the fire.	0.7790282
all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water in the pot over the fire; then put one end of a tube into the hole of the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the uterus,	Then fix a silver tube to the hole in the cover and bring the other end into the orifice of the womb and hold it in position so that the vapours may reach the body of the uterus.	0.47255617
and hold it until the vapor reaches the uterus; then make her sneeze, as we have said. The afterbirth will come out quickly. And if it remains after this treatment, and does not come out, instruct the midwife to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or marshmallow mucilage, and then insert it into the vagina,	Then let her sneeze, as we said, and the afterbirth will quickly come away. But if, after this treatment, it still remains and does not come out, then tell the midwife to dip her hand in oil of sesame or mucilage of marshmallow and introduce it into the vulva and search for the afterbirth, and when she has found it, to take hold of it and very gently draw it until she bring it out.	0.90111125
and search for the afterbirth; and when she finds it, let her take it and gently stretch it straight, so that the uterus does not fall during extraction; but she must move it gently to the right and left, then pull; it will come and detach.	But if it be adherent to the depths of the uterus, then let her piss her hand in as we described until she find the afterbirth; then let her draw very slowly and gently lest by violent pulling she cause a prolapse; and she should slowly move it from side to side, left and right; then let her increase the traction, for then it gives way to the pull and is freed from its adhesions.	0.7749256
And if the mouth of the uterus is already narrowed, we have mentioned the treatment of sneezing and fumigating with herbs;	If the uterine opening be narrowed, we have earlier mentioned the treatment by induced sneezing and that of the pot and herbs.	0.71931374
and if it does not come out after all that we have said, be careful not to pull recklessly;	But if it does not come away by all the means we have described, beware of treating her roughly with repeated traction.	0.5681241
but what is at the mouth of the uterus must be tied to the woman’s thigh, then give her a clyster with tetrapharmacum ointment;	Whatever of it comes out of the opening should be tied to the woman's thigh, and then syringe her with Tetrapharmacon ointment; for that will cause putrefaction in a few days and it will loosen and come out.	0.65039706
it will rot and detach, and come out; but always, when it rots, there will be a bad smell to the stomach and the head, and harm the patient.	However, when it necroses foul odours arise from it that ascend to the stomach and head and these cause harm to the patient; so she should have suffumigations appropriate for this.	0.61892
So suitable fumigations are necessary: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.	One of the Ancients tried suffumigation with nasturtium and dried figs.	0.5151261
The form of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated for retained menses and afterbirth is this:	The form of instrument for suffumigating a woman for retention of the menses and of the afterbirth and the like.	0.77091473
It is glass, similar to a tube, with the thin end inserted into the vagina, and the wide end over the fire;	It is made of lead, resembling a funnel, or it may be made of bronze. Its narrow extremity is introduced into the pudenda and the wide end is put over the fire, and the suffumigation is produced on the hot coals.	0.5834829
and the fumigation is done over coals, and hold it until it is done, then start another.	Keep it there until all the fumes are gone, and repeat once.	0.4963969

chapter-2-subchapter-79.txt
Of piercing the anus	On imperforate anus.	0.41750807
Many children are born who do not have their anus pierced, instead it is blocked by a delicate membrane: so the midwife must pierce that membrane with her finger, and not with a sharp spatula, and ensure she does not touch the lace;	Infants are quite often born with the anus imperforate, closed by a fine membrane; then the midwife should perforate the membrane with her finger or pierce it with a sharp scalpel, being careful not to touch the muscle.	0.77321434
then apply wool soaked in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until it is healed.	Then wool dipped in oil and wine should be applied, and treat it with ointments until healed.	0.9194273
And if you fear it might close again, place a lead tube in the opening, and leave it for a few days, and remove it when the child needs to go to the bathroom.	If you are afraid it may close up, put into the opening a leaden tube for many days, which will be removed when the child wants to evacuate the bowel.	0.8199489
And sometimes this blockage comes from the healing of a wound or an abscess; then it must be cut: so it should be treated, as we have said with the lead tube.	Sometimes also the anus is closed by the scarring of a wound or an abscess; then the scarring should be incised, and then dressed by those methods we have mentioned, including the leaden tube.	0.75178945

chapter-2-subchapter-80.txt
Of anal fistula Fistulas that come below the anus are nodes, and swellings that come beside the anus externally, or in the space between the two parts,	On the treatment of fistulae occurring in the lower parts. Fistulae in the lower parts are a knotting and thickening of the tissues occurring externally near the anus or in the perineum to one side.	0.7798244
there is one fistula or several; and when this node is old, it opens, and discharges watery moisture, whitish or subtle pus,	A fistula may be single or multiple. When a thickening of this kind has become chronic it opens and there flows out a white watery humidity or thin pus.	0.78068185
and sometimes these fistulas are piercing; and they are known by the fact that feces or gas come out when the patient defecates, and sometimes a worm comes out.	These fistulae may be perforating into the rectum or bowel, or non-perforating. The former may be known by faeces or flatus coming out of them when the patient opens the bowel. Often also worms come out of them.	0.74064195
And there are fistulas that pierce to the bladder, and to the middle of the penis; and they reach to the joint of the thigh, and to the anus.	Often also worms come out of them. Sometimes also there are fistulae occurring in the perineum which penetrate to the urinary bladder and to the urethra; and some also penetrate to the hip-joint and to the coccyx.	0.72484905
And thus one recognizes the piercing fistula in the anus, and the non-piercing one: and it is by inserting your index finger into the anus, and inserting a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula when it is not tortuous.	A fistula penetrating to the anus may also be distinguished from one not so penetrating by introducing the finger into the anus and a fine probe into the fistula, made of either bronze or iron, if there be no bend in the course of the fistula.	0.7824034
And if it is tortuous, insert a fine lead probe, or a horsehair, until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger;	But if the course of the fistula be tortuous, then introduce a thin leaden probe or a horse-hair, until you feel the probe or horse-hair come on to your finger.	0.7589862
and if you do not feel it, and no feces or gas or worm comes from the opening, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so hurry to treat it.	But if you do not feel it at all and if no faeces nor flatus nor worm come out of the opening, as we said, you may know it is not perforating; so hurry on with treatment.	0.8134202
And when the fistula pierces to the bladder or to the urinary tract, urine comes out, and it cannot heal with medicines.	When the fistula penetrates to the bladder or the urinary passages it is signified by the passage of urine and by the fact that medical remedies cannot cure it.	0.8201093
If it pierces to the joint of the thigh, the probe reaches to the place; if there is no tortuosity and the discovery of the pain around it, it means that pus always comes out, and no medicine or ointment can heal it;	But if it penetrate to the hip-joint or coccyx, this will be signified by the probe's passing right through to there if it be a straight passage to the bone; and by the pain felt in that part; and by the chronic purulent discharge; and the fact that medical treatment does no good and ointment does not heal it.	0.69839483
and in these piercing fistulas, there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of foolish doctors who get involved.	There is in these perforating sinuses no cure whatever; and their treatment is labour in vain for all the ignorant doctors who pretend that they understand them.	0.673929
In those that are not piercing and not old, there is hope of healing by surgery, as I have proven,	But there is hope in operative treatment for those that are not perforating and chronic, as I know from experience and shall now describe.	0.67187244
and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you raise his legs to his thighs, and his thighs are inclined to his stomach; then insert a brass probe, or lead if it is tortuous, until you know where the probe comes.	Thus: have the patient lying on his back before you and let both his legs be raised with the thighs flexed back upon his belly; then introduce a probe of bronze, or of lead if the course be tortuous, until you determine where the probe reaches.	0.8375981
If the patient feels it around the anus, you must insert your index finger,	Then, if the patient feel the probe somewhere in the region of the anus, put your forefinger into the anus.	0.7109654
and if you feel that the probe has pierced it; and it is discovered where you feel between your finger the membrane or the flesh, then know that it is piercing; then do not bother because it cannot be healed.	If you feel the probe itself with your finger, coming through bare, and you do not feel anything interposing between your finger and the probe, either membrane or flesh, then you may know for certain that it is a perforating fistula; do not spend your energy over it, for, as we have said, there is no cure.	0.79969925
It is said that some can be healed, but this happens rarely;	Yet some have said that it may be cured in certain cases, but rarely.	0.7341523
and the aid given is that the fine cautery is heated according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned; and insert it hot into the fistula, until it comes near the anus; and do this two or three times, until you know that these foul flesh are burned, which resemble a bird's feather;	The treatment from which some relief may be hoped is to heat a fine cautery corresponding to the width of the fistula, as we have said before, and pass this, hot, through the fistula to the anus; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those compact tags of superfluous flesh, which resemble quills, are burnt away.	0.8348556
and then treat it with probes soaked in butter, until that flesh comes out, then treat it with ointments that generate flesh and heal.	Then dress with a pad soaked in oil until the burnt tissue comes away. Then treat with healing ointments and, if it heals, well and good.	0.7610432
If it is healed this way, it is good. If not, otherwise it cannot be healed;	If not, it will never heal with any other treatment.	0.48914787
and if the probe enters, and does not pierce to the finger in the anus, and there is between your finger and the probe a thick cover of flesh or membrane, and you see the fistula under the cover of the skin; then cut it from the beginning of the fistula, and always insert the probe further, and then the cautery, until it comes to the end of the probe;	If you introduce the probe and it does not come through to your finger in the anus, and there be between your finger and the probe something firm interposing, either tissue or lining, and you see the fistula to be close under the skin, then cut open the skin at the origin of the fistula and continue your incision, with the probe in the fistula, until you come to the place where the tip of the probe has reached and the probe is freed and falls out.	0.8803909
and the probe will be released, and will fall; then clean that foul flesh that looks like a bird’s feather, and nothing remains.	Then clean out all the solid quill-like pieces of tissue and let none remain.	0.49501896
And if the blood overwhelms you, and runs between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.	If the haemorrhage be too much for you and interferes with your operating when cutting away the tissues, then the best and most speedily efficacious thing you can do is to cauterize, either with fire or with caustics.	0.6131533
For the fire cautery combines two good things: namely, the burning of this added flesh, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;	For cauterizing with fire unites two good characteristics, the burning away of those superfluous tissues, and the stanching of the bleeding, as well as the drying-up of humidity.	0.77983177
then treat it with probes soaked in butter or crushed things, until the place discharges pus, and the burnt flesh comes out in the pus;	Then treat with a dressing soaked in butter, or sulphur pounded with oil, until the place putrefies and the burnt tissue comes away in the pus.	0.80519223
then treat the wound with healing ointments generating hard flesh, and these are dry medicines.	Then treat the wound with salves to encourage healing and the growth of firm flesh, these remedies having also a styptic and drying quality.	0.6494687
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.	Then when the wound is healed over it is cured for good and there is no fear of a recurrence.	0.52148736
And if the fistula reaches the depth of the anus, and is away from the body, insert your finger into the anus, and investigate it.	If the fistula reaches deep into the anus and is far from the surface of the body, then put your finger into the anus and palpate.	0.8393729
If you feel the probe, and between them is the membrane or flesh, or it is about to pierce, there is no other way but confidence and hope, by administering one of the three methods:	If you feel a barrier of flesh or membrane interposed between the probe and your finger, and it be nearly through, then there is nothing to be done except to try a remote hope. There are three methods that you may employ.	0.77440155
either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can place probes and treat it as before;	The first is to cauterize it, as we have said.	0.41939172
and do not go too deep, so as not to cut the support that holds the anus, and feces come out there involuntarily; then treat it as we have said;	Or you may cut it open until you reach the termination so as to be able to insert a dressing and bring the medicament into contact with it, but do not extend your incision too far lest you cut into the sphincter muscle and the patient become incontinent of faeces; then dress in the manner we have said and perhaps it may heal.	0.56276965
then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that cover and clean it since it is cut near the anus, either by probe or other pointed instrument; then clean that foul flesh in the wound as much as you can;	Or you may perforate the barrier and pierce it through, after incising to the vicinity of the anus, as we have said, either with the probe or with some other sharp-pointed instrument; then clear away the fleshy granulations in the incision as far as you are able; then attempt the repair of the whole wound with the incision and the upper opening, until it heals.	0.84059536
then work to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part away from the anus: it will be easier for the patient.	Let the inner end of the fistula remain open, for this will ease the patient.	0.64270455
And sometimes there are fistulas like this: and it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the anus near the skin above, then take a probe pierced at the end in this form: And insert a twisted thread into it, and insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it is at the end.	Sometimes also a fistula is cut out in this way: namely, you pass a probe into the fistula; it should be near the circle of the junction of the outer skin with the anal mucosa; then take a probe with an eyed point like a shoemaker's needle; put into it a thread twisted of about five threads, and insert into the fistula until it reaches the end.	0.77742624
If it is piercing in the margin of the anus inside, then pull the thread from that hole, as you insert your finger into the anus;	If it has perforated through at the anal margin within, nearby, draw the thread out of that perforation by introducing your finger into the anus.	0.841887
and pull the end of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and tie them tightly, and leave it for one or two days;	Draw out the end of the thread and tie the two ends together and leave for one or two days.	0.7609948
and tighten it sometimes, until the thread cuts through the flesh that is between them, and they fall;	As the thread cuts into the tissues, tighten it up well until those tissues enclosed in the thread are cut through and fall away.	0.5117892
then treat the wound until it is healed and closed.	Then dress the wound until it be healed and sound.	0.80431235
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways you can, if it is not too deep.	If the mouth of the fistula is not perforated, perforate it as best you can, unless the depth is too great; in which case you must not do so lest you cut the muscle.	0.7771179
Because it is not necessary to cut too deep for the ligature, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.	Then treat as we have said until it heals.	0.54166657
The form of the sharp spatula with which the fistula is cut is very sharp on one side, and cutting; and not on the other side, so as not to cut what should not be cut, as you see here:	Figure of the sharp-pointed scalpel for cutting open fistulae; the curved edge should be exceedingly sharp and the other blunt, lest you cut what should not be cut, as you see.	0.8083

chapter-2-subchapter-81.txt
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: they are either inside the anus, like grains of resin, and some are small and large, and blood always flows, and there is one or several, and they are outside the anus and at the top of the anus; but those that are outside have little moisture,	Haemorrhoids are of two kinds: either internal, resembling red bubbles or grape-seeds, small or large, with blood perpetually flowing, and they may be single or multiple; or they may be external, round about the anus.	0.82594687
and always ooze a little yellowish water or a little blood, and have the color of the body;	External ones are for the most part fairly dry; a little yellowish fluid or blood constantly oozes from them, and they are of the colour of the body.	0.6613671
and the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is to instruct the patient to strain to go to the bathroom, until the anus comes out, and the hemorrhoids appear; so hurry, and grab it with forceps, or hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots;	The treatment of internal piles: bid the patient open his bowel and bear down until the anus opens out and the swellings are disclosed to you; then quickly take hold of them with hooks or with your finger-nail and cut them off near the roots.	0.6956006
and if the forceps cannot hold them because of their moisture, grab them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camel hair; and pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and sprinkle hot powders on them in place of cautery; or you cauterize them as mentioned in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;	If the hook does not retain its hold on them because of their humidity and softness, then cut them with a piece of rough material or a rag of goat-hair, or draw them out with your fingers and cut them off; and after excision sprinkle some caustic powder on to act instead of the cautery; or cauterize them as previously described in the book on cauterization; then dress in the usual way until healed.	0.888347
and if the anus cannot come out, give the patient a biting and sharp clyster to wash what is in the anus, so it can come out clearly;	But if the anus will not open out for you then give a slightly corrosive enema so as to wash out what is within, and then, the anus will open out quickly when the patient bears down.	0.6905674
when the patient strains, and the hemorrhoids come out of the anus, the treatment is easy; it is to grab them with your fingernail or forceps, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision by iron.	Now the treatment of external piles is easy and simple: take hold of them with your finger-nails or catch them up with a hook and cut them away; and treat as before mentioned until cured.	0.66807497
So you must administer the suture in this manner: take a twisted thread, and insert it into a needle, then pull the thread through and pierce the needle on the other side, and twist the two ends of the thread under the needle, and it should be wide; and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and pull the needle, and do the same for all the others, and leave one to drain the excess blood;	But with the patient who refuses excision with the knife, this manner of removal should be practised: thread a twisted thread into a needle, then draw the piles upward and run the needle through the root of each, from one side to the other, and wind the ends of the thread round beneath the needle as it lies crosswise, and bind the pile firmly; then knot the thread and remove the needle. Do this with each pile, but leave one not destroyed so that the superfluous blood may flow from it.	0.78352493
then place on the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and place it on the anus, and instruct the patient to rest;	Then apply to the anus a piece of material soaked in oil of roses or wax; apply it and bid the patient lie quiet; then leave him until the piles fall away.	0.8274186
and then leave it until they fall, and when they have fallen, treat them with ointment and other treatment, until they are healed.	When they fall away, dress with ointments and the usual dressings until healed.	0.55649084
So you must scrape the top with the point of a spatula or your fingernail, which does not let it soften; then treat it until it is healed as it should be;	If they become chronic, and medical treatment is unavailing, you should scrape them with the edge of a scalpel or with your finger-nail until they become soft and the upper layer, that prevents healing, is removed; then dress until they mend as they should.	0.65630776
and if it cannot heal, then start the scraping stronger than before, until it bleeds a lot, and is skinned; then treat it until it is healed.	But if they do not heal, repeat the scraping more strongly than at first until they bleed freely and become raw; then apply dressings and they will heal.	0.76029396

chapter-2-subchapter-82.txt
Of tremor Formice is a small foul appearance around the body, and goes very deep;	A pimple is also a little compact thick prominence on the skin surface, going deep; when it gets cold there is a feeling as of an ant's sting in it.	0.58828187
and sometimes it is found cold, and it is felt like death tremor, and it comes in the whole body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.	It is found all over the body but mostly on the hands.	0.45310318
And the treatment is to take a quill of a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place that quill on the tremor, so that the circles take the tremor all around; then turn your hand with the quill until you cut all around the tremor, and put it deep, and scrape the tremor from its roots.	The treatment is to take the quill of a strong feather of the goose or the vulture, and place the quill over the pimple so as to encircle it with the circumference of the tube; then revolve the quill with your hand so as to cut all round the pimple, and go deep into the flesh, and then the pimple may be drawn out by the roots.	0.8749337
And if you want, do this with a brass or iron quill in this form, and it should be fine below and pulling above:	If you wish you may extract it with a tube of bronze or of iron, of this form.	0.629846
not piercing, for better holding to the finger, and better pressing. And if you want, cauterize the tremor, as mentioned in the chapter on cautery.	The upper closed part of the tube should be fine, solid, and twisted, to give easy purchase for the fingers in holding and revolving it. If you wish you may cauterize the pimple as described earlier on the cauterization of warts in the book on the cautery.	0.5600841

chapter-2-subchapter-83.txt
Of the form of the clyster Sometimes one makes a clyster from silver or brass, or cast or hammered bronze; and sometimes these instruments are made small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.	On the kinds of instrument for administering enemata in diseases of the rectum, and in diarrhoea and colic. A clyster may be made of silver or of Chinese alloy or of cast or hammered bronze.	0.6297027
Those that are administered for the treatment of children and who are weak and painful are small.	Large and small varieties of this instrument are made, to suit those on whom they are to be used; those for the treatment of children will be small. Patients with stricture of the anus, or pain, will have very slender clysters.	0.5520163
The shape of the small and large clyster is wide at the top, where the body is tied in this manner:	Figure of a large clyster. The upper end of the funnel to which the membrane is bound should be broad like this; it should have a rim where the membrane may be bound down, as you see.	0.536783
and it has a separation where the body is tied, as you see, and the lower part is pierced inside; and it has two holes on one side, and one on the other;	The lower extremity, which is introduced into the anus, should be closed and smooth, and on one side of it should be two holes, and on the other, one; the width of the holes should be about that of a probe or a little wider.	0.63451964
and the body where the medicines are placed is made of an animal bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes,	The membrane to hold the medicament is made out of an animal's bladder or of parchment, made up in the form of a small bag, a span in diameter.	0.68208385
and has between each hole a finger's width of space, then insert in these holes a strong thread twisted ten or fifteen times around, and assemble the body like a goatskin; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then administer the clyster; and this is the form of the circle:	It should be pierced with a number of holes in a circle a finger's breadth apart; and into these holes pass a strong thread of yarn, twisted of ten or so threads, and with this gather up the skin like a bag; and when the medicament is placed in it tie it down firmly between the two rims on the upper end of the clyster; and then give the enema. This is the figure of the circle of skin with the holes.	0.8205612
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg white, or a similar thing, then insert it gently;	Then anoint the tip of the clyster with oil or egg-white or mucilage of fenugreek or the like; then gently pass it into the anus; then let an assistant take the membrane in both hands and together firmly squeeze it until all the contents are squirted into the bowel.	0.67363346
then the administrator presses it with both hands together, until it is completely empty, then withdraw the clyster, and raise the patient's legs to the wall,	Then the clyster should be removed and the patient should raise his legs against the wall.	0.6273769
and if the medicine wants to come out, hold it as long as possible; and if he sleeps with it overnight, it is more helpful.	If the enema stimulates him to evacuate, let him hold it as long as he can; if he delay all night long, it will be all the more efficacious.	0.7696698
And if you administer the clyster in the disease of diarrhea, and the medicine rushes to come out, repeat it until he is healed.	If the enema be given in a case of diarrhoea and he has to evacuate hastily, then the use of the enema should be repeated until he is cured.	0.6957942
And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus, or an abscess, the clyster should be as subtle as for a child;	If there be haemorrhoids or painful tumours in the anus, the clyster should be exceedingly slender and smooth, of the sort employed for children.	0.7059855
and this is the form of the subtle clyster on which the leather is tightened:	Here is a figure of a fine clyster with its skin tied on.	0.6529209

chapter-2-subchapter-84.txt
Of wounds	On the cure of wounds.	0.5544447
We have already mentioned in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments by hand and by medicine, according to the fulfillment.	I have already mentioned in the appropriate section the treatment of such wounds as are suitable for cauterization. Here I shall describe the operative and medical treatment in full.	0.6999871
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.	So I begin by saying that wounds differ according to that which causes them and according to the site.	0.73505867
The things by which wounds are made are by throwing stones, and cutting with a sword and a knife, or a lance or wood or an arrow, or similar things;	Those things that cause wounds are many: a knock from a stone, a cut from a sword or a knife, a blow by a spear, stick, or arrow; and many such things.	0.823952
or they are made according to the places of the body, like wounds that fall on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar members;	To consider wounds according to their site on the body, they are such as a wound occurring in the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or liver, and so on.	0.780002
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and will start with the simple head wounds, for the reminder will come in its chapter.	I shall begin particularly with the simple wounds of the head; for mention of the compound wounds will be made at the beginning of the third book.	0.70887864
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is from a stone throw or similar things, and the skin is still torn and the wound is large, and you fear the development of a hot abscess: then immediately make it bleed from the cephalic vein especially if little blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be on the opposite side of the injured part;	I say then, that when there occurs a simple wound of the head, with no accompanying bone-fracture, you should look; and if it be caused by a knock from a stone or the like, and has only broken the skin, but it is a big wound and you fear lest there occur an abscess, then bleed the cephalic vein at once without delay; draw off from him blood in proportion to his vigour if there is no contra-indication to venesection; and particularly if the haemorrhage from the wound be slight.	0.8448529
and avoid the patient's overconsumption of wine and heavy foods.	The venesection should be on the opposite side to the wound; and caution the patient against gluttony and wine and rich food.	0.59520364
And if he does not want to bleed, let his food be reduced, and he should not drink any wine, nor eat any meat;	But if from any cause venesection is prevented, he should be on a light diet and avoid meat and wines.	0.5270254
and put on the wound, if a hot abscess develops, cotton soaked only in rose oil, or in styptic wine;	And apply to the wound, if there be any inflammation, cotton wool soaked in oil of roses, either alone or with a somewhat astringent wine.	0.73168266
and if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh with its blood, and it is not altered by the air, a powder, which I will describe a little later;	And if you are sure there is no inflammatory swelling, then apply directly to the wound, if its blood is fresh and it is unaltered by the air, the powder that I shall describe to you a little later.	0.7979196
and if the burn has altered it, apply some ointments, until it is healed.	But if the air has already changed the wound, apply to it one of the ointments to cause it to discharge the pus; then dress until healed.	0.66221756
And if the wound is large as from a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by probes, then join them by stitching, as I will describe for the wounds of the abdomen, in the suturing.	Now if it be a great wound, being caused by a sword-cut or the like, and dressings will not bring the edges of the wound together, you should suture them together in the manner I shall describe in dealing with the suture of abdominal wounds.	0.79751694
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and hangs, and holds only a little, then cut it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of the skin, and instruct the patient to eat heavy foods, like heads and cooked wheat, as well as pulses, and similar things.	But if the skin has actually disclosed the bone, and is attached by a small strip only, then cut it away and dress the wound with medicaments that will produce firm flesh to replace the skin, and bid the patient go on a diet of solid food such as brawn and gruels and the like.	0.7887927
And if you find rot in the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then cut out all the rot, and discard it, then treat it;	And if decomposition arise in the skin and it will not adhere to the bone, then excise all the diseased part and discard it and then dress.	0.74607944
and if there is an artery in the wound or a vein, from which blood flows, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then seek the artery, and if you find it dislodged, then tie it with a thread; and if that does not help, then cauterize it.	If in these wounds there be an artery or vein shedding blood, and medicinal applications do not stanch it, then examine the artery, and if you find it not quite severed then cut it through with a scalpel and ligature it; and if you are compelled, our directions being unavailing, then cauterize until the haemorrhage stops.	0.8458655
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: and it is to put in this powder that seals before the burn has altered it.	If these be small and simple wounds their treatment will be a light and easy matter; it is sufficient to sprinkle some of this powder on while they are still bleeding, before the atmosphere causes a change.	0.7322278
And the composition of the powder is: take one part incense; two parts dragon's blood; three parts quicklime, and grind it finely, and fill the wound, and press it firmly, until it is well ventilated and joined with its blood;	Description of the powder: let one part of olibanum and two parts of dragon's blood be taken, and three parts of quick or slaked lime, all beaten up together and passed through the sieve; and let the wound be packed with this and bound up tightly so that the powder sticks in position and coagulates with the blood.	0.8022703
and then bind it well, and leave it without untying, if it does not swell; because the medicine is not removed until it is healed.	Then bind pads above and let it be, not undoing it so long as it remains without swelling; for the dressing will not come away of itself until it is healed.	0.7900239
And sometimes this is done with just quicklime, when incense or dragon's blood is not available, but the burn has not altered the wound.	Lime alone can do this if you have no olibanum and dragon's blood at hand. It has exactly the same effect too on most large wounds, when the application and bandaging are properly done, and when the haemorrhage is recent, so long as the air has not changed them.	0.5801308
And if the burn has altered the wound, especially in summer, then do not use this powder;	If, however, the air has brought about some change, especially if it be in the summer season, then there is no point in the application of this powder.	0.66437465
but apply some digestive ointments, or barley flour poultices made with water and honey, until it expels pus; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.	Treat it then as we have said, by applying one or other of the suppurative ointments; or by applying a gruel of barleymeal with water and honey, so that the pus flows; then treat by all the usual methods until cured.	0.75297964
And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with fine pincers;	If, with the wound, there be also fracture of a bone, if it be slight, you should extract it with forceps.	0.69033676
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.	I mention the treatment of fractures of the head later on.	0.7183881
Of the wound of the neck	On wounds in the neck:	0.7063732
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.	If a wound occur in the neck the treatment of it does not differ from that of a head wound, if it be simple.	0.73280656
If it is the nerve, there is no other remedy but to leave it untreated, and not to apply anything constricting, because it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not apply anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;	But if a nerve or artery in the neck happens to be cut: if it be a nerve, there is no device that will serve except to avoid treatment of it by strong styptic remedies such as verdigris and vitriol and the like; for these injure the nerve and cause spasm; and under no circumstance let anything cold be applied to the wound, for the substance of the nerve is cold and it is continuous with the brain, which is the most noble among the organs.	0.7499944
but the medicine should be gentle, like lime washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cucia washed also in sweet water, and other mineral stones in this manner, and moist ointments.	But let your remedy for it be mild, such as lime slaked in sweet water many times and moistened with olive-oil or oil of roses; and with tutty, likewise washed in sweet water; and other minerals according to this prescription, and with bland ointments.	0.806809
And if the wound is large, sew it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.	If the wound be large, use stitches or draw the edges of the wound together with pads; then dress until cured.	0.720313
And if the wounds are deep and it is hollow and full of pus, pierce it in a lower place;	But if there be depth to the wound and a sinus appears at the bottom of it, in which pus has collected, then make an opening at the site of greatest depth.	0.60310614
and if the artery is cut, and blood flows from it, open it, tie it, and cauterize it if necessary;	Now if an artery has been cut in the wound and you are in time to find it still bleeding, divide it or ligature it; or cauterize it if you are compelled to.	0.7107213
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the gullet, and the passage through which food goes is preserved, then sew the gullet over the pipe of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape; and then bind it appropriately, and leave it for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed;	If it be such a wound that some of the cartilages of the trachea are laid open, or the whole trachea, the jugular veins being safe and sound, then join the skin edges together with a suture over the windpipe, and do not touch the windpipe, but straighten it and restore to its natural form; then tie firmly and leave for some days; then treat with salves having some styptic and astringent quality, until healed.	0.764013
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, look for it; and if there are pieces of bone, pull them all out if you can, and those you cannot get, leave them until the wound rots, and it is separated and the exit is relieved;	If the wound has affected bone, examine it, and if there be fragments of bone in it get them all out, or all you can. Those you cannot get hold of, leave until the wound suppurates and heals, and it will be easy to extract them.	0.88070536
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.	If it be a fresh wound, sprinkle on the powder I have described ; and if any bone corrupt in the wound and it becomes a fistula, treat it by those means we shall mention in their place.	0.8810712
Of the wound from a lance or knife	On wounds in the chest and between the shoulders:	0.44726965
If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, see if air escapes from the wound when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal;	If it be a piercing wound by a spear or a knife, and you see that it is deep, examine if there be a passage of air out of it when the patient breathes; whence you may know that the injury is mortal.	0.8754139
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with its blood, do not put the powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it for the blood to not stay deep, and return to the heart, and kill the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;	But if it is not deep and the haemorrhage is fresh, then do not straight away apply powder or bandage lest it keep the blood in the depths, so that it be returned to the heart and kill the patient; but apply to it a drawing ointment, and uncover it twice daily.	0.8191087
and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,	If you have no ointment, apply carded cotton to the opening of the wound to soak up the humidities issuing from it.	0.7090698
and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; so there will be no spasm, nor trembling of the heart nor difficulty in breathing; and when you see good signs, know that the wound is safe. Then treat it with probes and other remedies, until it is healed;	And make the patient sleep on the (side of the) wound so that what collects therein may flow out. And if three or four days pass by after the wound, and the patient have no spasm or harmful palpitation of the heart nor obstruction to drawing breath, and you see that in other respects he is doing well, you may know that the wound is not dangerous; so treat it with pads and the usual dressings until it heals.	0.8809476
and if it cannot heal, and it works, know then that there is a fistula; treat it as it should be.	But if it will not heal and it permanently discharges pus, you may know that it has become a fistula; look for the treatment of this in the proper place.	0.70515466
And if the wound is from an incision of a sword or knife, and it is simple, or on the chest or back, treat it as described above;	If the wound be from a cut with a sword or knife, a straightforward surface wound in the breast or back, then treat it as described before; that is, by suture if it be a great wound or by powder if it be a small one.	0.77667797
if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and there are broken pieces, seek the wound, and pull them out if they are separated; and if they are not separated, let the wound rot, so the extraction will be easier;	But if there has also been injury to the bone, cutting out fragments from it, you should explore the wound and hasten to draw out the fragments if they are detached from the bone; but if they are not detached then let be until the wound suppurates, when the removal of the fragments will be easy.	0.7188067
and for other wounds on other members, the judgment is as we have said.	Then with regard to other wounds occurring in other parts of the body, the same class of treatment should be used for them as for those already mentioned.	0.570518

chapter-2-subchapter-85.txt
Regarding the rupture of the abdomen	On wounds of the abdomen, and protrusion of the intestine; and on suturing them.	0.464545
The rupture of the abdomen can be large, medium, or small;	The tear that occurs in the abdomen may be great or small or it may be middle-sized.	0.77057236
from the large wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, causing their prolapse;	From a large tear one or more segments of gut may protrude.	0.54627216
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one,	The reduction of this and the suture of the wound is an exceedingly hard and difficult matter.	0.42405295
because it is harder to put the intestines back in, unless done immediately; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, making it harder to return them,	Small openings may also be difficult in another way, for they are bound to be harder to reduce, and if you do not hurry to return the gut to its place at once it will swell up and enlarge, thus rendering reduction difficult.	0.6136886
and this is why the medium wound is often better, because the intestines are easier to reposition than in the other two.	So the best tear is the medium-sized, for in this case the reduction of the intestine will not be as difficult as in the two other cases.	0.7212095
And know that the rupture of the abdomen can occur in four ways:	Then you should know that suturing the abdomen may be carried out in four ways.	0.7473272
the two common stitches happen in the sewing of the abdomen,	Two of them are general; suitable both for suture of the abdomen and for other wounds of the body.	0.5088731
and the stitching of other body wounds and two other specific stitches are common for other wounds;	The other two sutures are special; they may be used for other wounds, but are more suitable for abdominal wounds.	0.61364305
yet they are more appropriate for the stitching of the abdomen, and I will describe each and explain.	I shall describe each one to you separately, with comments and explanation.	0.5539977
I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestine protrudes, and it is difficult to put it back, it is due to one of two reasons: either because of the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to the cold.	I begin then by saying that when the wound is small, and a piece of intestine protrudes from it, rendering the reduction of it difficult, the difficulty will be due to one of two causes: either on account of the smallness of the fissure, as we said; or because the gut has become inflated on account of the coldness of the air.	0.8818816
And when it is cold, warm it in this way: wet a sponge or a soft cloth in lukewarm water, or you boil squinant (wormwood), cypress, and spike (lavender) in water, and pour it over the intestine until the swelling is reduced;	If the latter case obtains, the gut must be warmed by fomenting with a sponge or piece of cloth bathed with warm water or water in which have been boiled rushes and cyperus and hyacinth, bathing the gut until the inflation is gone down.	0.6601378
and sometimes restraining wines are used, which are better than plain water for reducing swelling.	Wine that is somewhat astringent may do; in bringing down the swelling it is better than plain water.	0.69592065
And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestine with water where althea (marshmallow) and mallows have been boiled, because this eases the reinsertion a little;	When you see that the swelling has come down, bathe the gut with water in which have been infused althea and mallows; for with this the reduction of the bowel becomes easy, using the lightest effort.	0.8005953
and if it cannot enter, slightly enlarge the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;	But if after this treatment the reduction is still difficult, open up the wound a little with the instrument for opening up haemorrhoids.	0.56991535
and the first treatment is better than cutting, as no one should cut without great necessity;	The first method, if possible, is better than incision, but one may be compelled to incise when other means have failed.	0.5513133
and this is the instrument for the incision:	This is the form of the instrument.	0.52911365
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine protrudes, put it back according to its natural shape in its proper place, if you can, because it is very beneficial.	When the wound is opened up a little with the instrument and the bowel is reduced, it is important to return it to its natural shape and proper position, if you can, for that is better.	0.74630594
When the wound is large, and it is on the lower part of the abdomen, it is necessary to make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is on the lower part of the abdomen,	When the wound is large and in the lower abdomen the patient should lie on his back and have his legs higher than his head; but if it be in the upper abdomen his head and chest should be placed higher than his lower parts.	0.87257904
and similarly if the rupture of the abdomen is in one of the two parts pay attention to make the injured part higher than the other;	And in the same way if the opening be on one side of the abdomen you should always make it your object to put the wounded side higher than the other.	0.6838015
and thus manage what I say for large and medium wounds.	So must you proceed in large or middling wounds.	0.6250433
In small wounds apply what you have prepared,	But in small wounds put the patient in a position convenient to yourself.	0.4461282
then have a compassionate assistant who holds the whole rupture in his hand, and bring the edges together; and this is the common method of stitching,	Then have an assistant under your direction to enclose within his hands the whole of the wound and bring the edges together, and then uncover it bit by bit for the one who is putting in the stitches.	0.69614124
and this is the common method of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the size of the wound, then leave a finger's width from the edge of the wound, and insert a needle with a strong thread; and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the membrane (siphac),	Now this is the description of one general suture, namely: one or more needles are taken, depending on the size of the wound; then, leaving about the width of the little finger from the end of the opening, pass an unthreaded needle from within through both edges of the skin together with both edges of the peritoneum which lies beneath the skin, piercing from one side to the other; thus you will have brought together both skin edges and both peritoneal edges, making four layers.	0.72087216
then tie a double thread around the needle from both sides, then bring the two edges of the wound neatly together,	Then wind a double thread several times round the needle, and tighten up from both sides so as to bring the two edges of the wound perfectly together.	0.8197477
and then leave a finger's width and insert another needle; then tie it with the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing this as necessary with the needles, until the whole wound is closed;	Then again leave about a finger's breadth and put in another needle and fasten it with thread as you did in the first instance; and go on doing this with as many needles as you need until you have finished mending the whole wound.	0.92072636
and the needles should be medium-sized, between fine and thick, because fine needles cut all the flesh, and too thick needles cannot enter well: therefore they must be medium;	The needles should be of medium fineness; for the very fine needles soon cut into the flesh; while thick needles, on the other hand, are difficult to pass through the skin; so they should be medium between fineness and thickness.	0.83661175
and it is not necessary to push the needles too much outside the flesh and skin,	You should not introduce the needle too near the edge of the skin lest the tissues be soon cut through and the wound gape before it has joined.	0.546226
so that they do not cut and open the wound before healing;	Nor should there be too great an interval between the stitches, lest the wound be prevented from scarring up.	0.5588595
then cut the heads of the needles so that they do not injure the patient while sleeping, and place tents or cloths on the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed;	Then cut off the ends of the needles lest they hurt the patient during sleep; and make for him pads of linen scraps to cover the needle ends on both sides; and let them be until you know the wound is healed up.	0.7964798
and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because one or two needles suffice.	This method of suture with needles is most suitable in small wounds, for one or two needles or thereabouts will probably be enough for such.	0.8334646
The second stitch is common, and it is that you bring together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the siphac with one needle with a strong medium thread; and when you have pierced all four edges together,	Now the second kind of general suture is to bring together all four edges, the two skin edges and the two peritoneal edges, at one and the same time, with a needle furnished with a twisted thread of medium thickness.	0.72436976
and when you have pierced all four edges together, then bring the needle back to the part where you started, as you sew cloth;	Then when the needle has pierced these four edges bring it back precisely to where you began, so that the thread may lie knitted over the wound to make a stitch in the manner of sewing up the bags in which goods are packed.	0.68102473
and leave a space between each stitch the size of a small finger;	The distance between stitches should be a little finger's breadth.	0.59805846
this stitch is known by people,	Everybody is familiar with this stitch.	0.6383159
and I sewed a wound that a man had on his abdomen,	With this stitch I once sewed up a wound that a man got in the belly.	0.6758665
which was caused by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in size, and two palms of intestines were protruding,	He had been wounded with a knife; and the opening of the wound was more than a span long; and by that time there protruded some two spans' length of his mid-gut.	0.7076669
and the wound was in the middle of the abdomen. I put the intestine back after it had been out for 24 hours,	The opening was in the middle of his belly; and I reduced it after the bowel had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.	0.8060107
and the wound healed within 15 days, and I treated it, and he recovered.	The wound healed in about a fortnight, and I treated him until he was better; and he lived for many years after this, carrying on as usual.	0.60098195
And the doctors had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;	The verdict of the doctors was that he could not be healed.	0.51971483
and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where none were available, nor any medicines; and I only placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.	The remarkable thing is that I did not treat him with any ointment, for I was in a place where there was no sort of medicine; so twice a day I applied teased-out cotton wool to the wound, and carefully washed it with honey-water until he was healed.	0.8428698
Now I will tell you about the two specific ways of stitching:	I shall now describe one of the two kinds of special suture according to the text of Galen.	0.61010176
take the needle, and insert it from the outside part to the inside;	You begin at the skin, running the needle from without inwards.	0.5427631
and make it pierce from the inside to the outside;	When you have done this, pierce the same edge of the abdominal wall from the outside inwards, leaving the edge of the peritoneum which is on that side, and pierce the other side from within outwards. As you pierce, make the needle pass through the peritoneum to the edge of the abdominal wall that is adjacent to that part until it pierces right through the whole.	0.546312
and the idea of this stitch is that you sew as the furrier does with skins, and that you leave the siphac on one side once, and take it on the other, until the stitch is completely done.	In short, this way of suturing is to sew with the stitch used by furriers in sewing skins; thus you stitch the peritoneum once one way with the skin edge and leave it once the other way, until you have done.	0.6972301
The second manner of stitching, which Galen specifically mentions,	Now the manner of the second type of special stitch which Galen mentioned is this (these are his own words): that you suture it in the same way as many practitioners.	0.66685957
is like some do, who join the two parts together naturally, and they apply one end of the siphac to the other end, in this manner:	That is, they suture each part to the part that corresponds naturally to it; so they join one peritoneal margin to the other and one skin margin to the other, in the manner I shall describe.	0.62929344
insert a needle at the nearest point of the wound, and pierce only that place, and leave the two ends of the siphac; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside to the inside, with the two ends of the siphac;	You should put the needle from without inwards, in that edge of the abdominal wall that is nearest to you, and make it pass inward through that alone, leaving out the peritoneal edges; then turn the needle round and run it from without inwards through both peritoneal edges.	0.7469781
then make each one pierce from the outside to the inside, on the other side of the wound;	Then turn it round again and make it pierce, from within outwards, the other edge of the abdominal wall, on the opposite side.	0.6430338
and this is the best and most common manner of stitching.	This type of suture is better than the easy general suture that has been mentioned.	0.46320185
Galen said this, and some testify,	These are Galen's very words.	0.58265764
that one should sew the abdomen with two needles, each with a thread;	Some have said that the suture of the abdomen may be performed with two needles, thus: you thread one thread into both and begin by introducing the needle into that part near you and carrying it through to the other side.	0.55890083
and one should insert one needle on one side and the other on the other side, like those who sew belts;	Then you insert the other needle on the far side and bring it through to the near side, after the manner of the shoemaker's stitch.	0.45834208
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the stitching is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.	You must understand that when the fissure is in the middle of the abdomen the sewing of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.	0.84841204
The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds:	But the medical treatment of the wound comes under just the same heading as that of other wounds.	0.5799432
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with its blood, before it has changed, then put the intestine back, and sew it; then apply the powder that generates flesh,	When you find a wound with its blood quite fresh, before the atmosphere has altered it, and you have reduced the intestine and have sewn it up and closed it firmly, apply to it powder to encourage fresh growth.	0.66065866
then put the intestine back, and sew it; then apply the powder that generates flesh, and if it has changed, then apply any available ointment, until the wound opens; and let the threads fall, and let the siphac and the wound heal; then treat the wound like the others, until it is healed;	But if the air has altered it, then apply to it some of the available ointments until it suppurates and the threads come away and the peritoneum and abdominal wall heal; then dress it as you would any other wound, until it is better.	0.6839878
and if you do not have medicines, then apply, as soon as it starts to discharge, old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.	If you have no medicaments to hand, apply cotton wool as soon as suppuration begins, and change it twice daily, as I have taught you, until it heals.	0.79448104
Because you do not need other medicine in many situations when the wounds are simple;	You will need no other treatment in the majority of cases when the wounds are simple.	0.7427983
and if you doubt that the wound might cause complications to the principal members, then it is necessary to moisten light wool in oil of moderate heat, or in rose oil, and place it around the groin, and under the armpits;	But if you fear that the important organs may share the hurt of the wound, then you should dip some soft wool in moderately warm olive-oil or oil of roses and bind it round the various sites between the groin and the axillae.	0.7261299
and if there is pain or decay in the bowels, and it often happens, then give them an enema with warm dark wine, especially if the decay reaches the intestine;	If pain or gangrene be felt in the bowels—and that frequently happens—then clyster him with tepid astringent black wine, particularly if the gangrene has already set in in the bowel and has become a wound penetrating to the abdominal cavity.	0.7779544
and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.	You should know that if the injured bowel be the large intestine it will heal the more easily, while if it be the small its healing is more difficult.	0.6051169
The intestine called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the abundance of veins there, and the delicacy of the whole body, and its proximity to the nerves.	But the part of the bowel called the jejunum is not likely to recover from an injury to it at all; and that is due to the number and size of arteries in it and to the thinness of its structure and to its nearly approaching a nerve in its character.	0.69151556
And if the fat protrudes from the wound, put it back just like the intestine, as long as it is fresh;	If what protrudes from the wound be omentum, and you find it freshly protruding, then reduce it as you do intestine.	0.6058606
and if it is old and has become green or black, it is necessary to tie the place that is black, so that no blood flow reaches it, because there are veins and arteries;	But if some time has lapsed and it has turned green or black, you should ligate it above the site where it has gone black lest there be a haemorrhage; for the omentum contains veins and arteries.	0.77169824
then cut what is between the ties, and place the two hanging ends from the lower part of the wound to the outside to ease the extraction when the fat falls, and the wound opens.	Then cut off what is below the ligature and leave the ends of the thread hanging out from the lower part of the wound, so that it will be easy for you to draw upon it and extract it as the omentum falls away and the wound suppurates.	0.76802146
Regarding the rupture of the bowel	A note on the wound occurring in the intestine.	0.44174755
When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people,	When a break occurs in the intestine and it is a small one, it is possible, in some men, that it may mend.	0.7987105
because I saw a man wounded in the abdomen with a lance;	For I myself saw a man who had been wounded by a spear-thrust in the abdomen.	0.8005002
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it festered and became a fistula, and excrement and gas came out;	The wound was to the right of the stomach, and, being chronic, became a fistula whence issued faeces and flatus.	0.7001221
I treated it as best I could, and did not stop treating it until it was healed, and the place sealed.	I set about treating him, though I had no hope of his recovery, and I continued to attend him, and eventually he recovered and the place healed over.	0.5902301
And when I saw it heal, I feared that the patient might have pain in his abdomen; and he had no pain, but remained in better condition, eating and drinking;	And when I saw that the place had healed over I was afraid for the patient lest some harm should occur in the abdominal cavity; but absolutely no harm arose from it, and he remained perfectly well and healthy, eating and drinking and engaging in coitus and going to the bath and carrying out the duties of his office.	0.77987325
and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this way: take ants with large heads, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the ant opens its mouth, place it on the two edges,	Some men of experience have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, it should be sutured in this manner, namely: ants with large heads are taken; then the edges of the wound are brought together and one of these ants is applied by its open jaws to the two edges of the wound, and when it seizes it and closes its jaws then the head is cut off, and it will stick and will not loosen.	0.85698175
then place another ant afterwards in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed;	Then another ant is applied near the first; and you proceed after this manner with a number of ants according to the size of the wound.	0.61257154
and sew the wound. These heads stick to the intestine, and cause no harm to the patient,	Then reduce the intestine and sew up the wound; for the heads will remain sticking to the intestine until it is healed up; and no harm will come to the patient.	0.74129164
and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread made from the intestine of an animal,	The intestine may also be sewn up with the fine suture which is extracted from an animal's gut and sticks to it after being threaded in a needle.	0.66354746
in this way: take the end of this intestinal thread that is well cleaned, then tie to the end of this thread a fine twisted linen thread, then thread the needle, and sew the intestine, and return it to the rupture;	The method is that the end is taken of this suture made of gut, well scraped; and to this end is fixed a fine linen thread, twisted, and then that thread is passed through the needle affixed to the suture of animal's gut, with which the intestine is sewn and then replaced in the abdominal cavity.	0.7849722
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no skill or health, except subtlety.	But if the opening be great and wide, and especially if it be in one of the small intestines, there is no technique to deal with it, nor any cure.	0.7341014

chapter-2-subchapter-86.txt
Regarding fistula wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes old, is universally called "fistula", and especially when it is deep and discharges pus.	On the treatment of defluxions and fistulae. You should know that any wound or tumour, when it becomes old and chronic, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal over, but discharges pus chronically and constantly, is generally called a fistula, in whatever part of the body it may be; but we call it a defluxion.	0.7378142
And fistula is according to its nature a hardened and white scar tissue, where no pain is felt, and it is as deep as a bird's feather;	The fistula proper is a compact hard white painless induration with a central hollow like a bird's quill; on which account some call it a quill.	0.6824747
and sometimes clear pus comes out, and other times thick; sometimes little, and other times a lot;	At certain times it may be moist, constantly discharging pus; and again at certain times the moisture may cease; and the discharge may be greater or less; and it may be thick or thin.	0.76373845
and I have already spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only because of one of the eight causes:	I said previously in the appropriate section, when I was discussing abscesses, that any ulcer that would not heal nor show growth of tissue was due to one of nine causes.	0.6691578
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.	I have indeed already, in their proper place, explained all these causes and their symptoms and their medical treatments.	0.7246383
Now I must tell you about the cure of fistula done by manual work.	Now here I must explain to you the operative treatment of fistula and defluxion.	0.7305055
Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; because there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and to the arteries, and to the nerves, or to the membrane, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine, or to any joint of the hands or feet;	You should know that a fistula may happen in any part of the body; and some fistulae reach as far as some great vein or artery or nerve or membrane or intestine or the urinary bladder, or one of the ribs or dorsal vertebrae, or some highly complex joint such as the hand or foot, while some terminate quite near some major organ, and so on.	0.8405499
And all fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but labor, and ignorance;	Fistulae of this kind are among the diseases from which recovery is difficult; they are not amenable to treatment and to occupy oneself with them is labour in vain.	0.63337874
and if there is a fistula that does not reach the place I mentioned, and you have confidence in the cure, and you want to know it, then take a bronze or iron probe, if the fistula is straight, search it;	But if there are any fistulae which do not reach in depth the places we have mentioned, and you have some hope and expectation of curing them, and you wish to attain to recognizing these, then you take a probe of bronze or iron, if the fistula run in a straight line, and investigate it with that.	0.7572298
and if the fistula is twisted, search it with a fine lead probe, because lead bends well around the twists;	But if the fistula be tortuous then investigate it with a thin leaden probe; for lead is soft, so as to flex on entry and follow the curves of the fistula.	0.7225603
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot search it well with probes, then give it an enema through one of the openings,	But if the fistula have multiple openings so that you cannot explore it with the probe, then make an injection into one of the openings.	0.7936183
because the moisture runs from one opening to another, and cleans it;	The fluid you inject into that one will run to the other openings and flow out from them.	0.55538654
then search it carefully as best you can, to know if there is bone or nerve, and it is deep,	Then make a complete exploration by whatever means you can, to find out whether there be at that place a bone or nerve, and whether the fistula be deep or superficial, and whether the fistula be one with multiple openings.	0.6970216
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where he feels it;	Inform yourself of all these points, exerting yourself to inquire of the patient whether he feels pain while you are compressing with the hand, and seeking other indications and causes of tumour that may arise.	0.5313159
and when you truly know where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places I mentioned, then cut it as I told you,	When you have made quite certain of all these points, then proceed confidently with the treatment, namely: see if the fístula be obvious and accessible, or in a harmless situation far removed from a joint or vein or artery or tendon or any of the other places I have mentioned to you.	0.6308756
or in any of the places I mentioned, then cut it as I told you, and remove the scar tissue and the decayed flesh inside; and then treat it until it is healed,	Then lay open the fístula by the method I have described and fetch out of it all the granulations and diseased and superfluous tissue and whatever tissue or growth be arising in its opening, and dress until healed.	0.624571
and if the fistula is very deep in the right place, it is necessary to cut it deeply, as much as you can, then put tents soaked in medicine, and insert them to the end of the fistula,	If the termination of the fistula lies deep and its course be straight, you should cut it open as far in as you can and then clean out of it all diseased tissue; then use swabs soaked in corrosive, and push them to the bottom of the fistula, which is as far as you can reach with the probe.	0.69325966
then put tents soaked in medicine, and insert them to the end of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess remaining at the bottom;	Do this repeatedly until the caustic has destroyed all the superfluous matter remaining at the bottom of the fistula.	0.5097623
then apply ointments that generate healthy flesh, until it is healed;	Then dress it with ointments that make the flesh grow sound, until it heals.	0.77194345
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,	But if it does not heal thus, then cauterize it in the prescribed way.	0.6490511
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it. If vein or nerve does not hinder you or principal members, as we have said;	If a bone be the cause of the fistula, and you are sure of that, then examine the fistula and open it up in the way I have told you, if there be nothing in the way like a blood-vessel or nerve or important organ, as we said.	0.5943457
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, scrape it until all the corruption is removed, then treat it with things that generate flesh until it is healed;	And if the bone is laid bare to you and there be in it some corruption and blackening, then scrape it until all the corruption be removed; then put on dressings that will encourage granulation, until it be healed.	0.8305532
and if it is not healed, and discharges pus as before, know that you have not gone to the bottom:	If it does not heal but discharges pus in the way it did before, then you may know that you have not yet managed to extirpate the corruption completely.	0.5639274
and if it is healed this way, it is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; there is no other means but to leave it to nature;	Then dress it; and if it heals, good; if not, then you may know that this corruption is very deep-seated in the body and out of reach, and there is nothing you can do for it but leave it to nature.	0.74266315
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it with forceps, pull it with an appropriate instrument,	If the diseased bone be a small one, and it be possible for you to extract it, then do so with a pair of fine forceps suited to the purpose.	0.70491576
and if there are many bones, pull them all, do not leave even one;	And if there be a number of bones then you must accurately carry out the extraction of all of them, and spare no effort to ensure that none is left.	0.68843186
And if you cannot remove them in one hour, then apply to the wound something that generates decay, and leave it until the place is decayed around the bones,	If it is not possible for you to extract the bone immediately, apply over the wound something to induce suppuration, and leave it for some days until suppuration has set in in the tissues and ligaments around the bones.	0.68174607
and then the bones will be easier to extract;	Then, when those ligaments have been softened by putrefaction and the bones crumble, it will be easy to shift them and take them out.	0.5802605
and if it is a large bone, like from the leg or thigh, scrape only the corruption until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound;	If it be one large bone such as the tibia or the femur or the like, and the diseased part be only the surface, then scrape it thoroughly until all the blackness and corruption is gone, then close the wound.	0.7491803
and if there is a large part of the corrupted, and it reaches the marrow of the bone; it is necessary to saw and cut until the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed;	If the corrupt portion be very extensive and reach to the marrow of the bone, you will not be able to avoid sawing it off and cutting it all away to the point where the corruption ends; then dress until healed.	0.74075985
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred to a man on his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.	Now I shall tell you of a defluxion that once occurred in a man's leg, as an example and a help to you in your treatment.	0.7817713
He was a young man around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from inside the body,	This man was young, about thirty years of age.	0.5944675
until the substances came to the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no external cause to open;	He once got a pain in the leg from something internal, which so worked that eventually matter came into the leg and caused it to swell greatly, there being no external cause.	0.57696795
but the doctors by their folly opened the abscess, and much matter flowed out, and it became a fistula, and many openings discharged pus and moisture from the body;	And time passed by, to the accompaniment of error on the part of the doctors, until the tumour opened and much discharge came away; and the treatment was so mismanaged that fistulae formed in the leg and many sinuses opened up, all of which discharged pus and body humours.	0.694132
and many doctors treated it for about two years, and there was no one skilled in the art of hands,	A whole host of doctors had been treating it for a matter of two years, not one of whom had any skill in the surgical art.	0.78115857
until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines used to treat him, and what flowed through the openings with great force; and the young man's body was becoming red, and he had a yellowish color.	Eventually he sought me. I saw his leg, with matter coming away from the orifices in large quantities; and the man's body was wasted and jaundiced.	0.6934662
I placed a probe in one of these openings, and then searched all the openings,	So I introduced a probe into one of the openings and the probe touched bone.	0.6269387
and I found that one came against the other from all parts of the leg.	Then I investigated all the openings and found them all communicating with one another in all parts of the leg.	0.62339836
I then hastened, and cut in one of the openings until I uncovered a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption reached the bone inside;	So I quickly cut down upon one of these openings until a part of the bone was laid bare, and I found it diseased, by now eaten away, and black and foul and full of holes, down to the marrow. So I sawed off as much of the diseased bone as I had exposed and could get at.	0.7903445
I sawed what appeared to be the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption, except what I removed;	So I sawed off as much of the diseased bone as I had exposed and could get at. In fact I thought that there was no more disease in the bone beyond what I had cut and sawn away, and that I had completely eradicated it.	0.6255729
and I began to restore the wound with healing medicines for a long time, and it could not heal;	Then I tried for a very long time to heal the wound with medicines encouraging growth of flesh, but it would not heal.	0.6699035
and then I started again, and uncovered the bone as before,	Then I again uncovered the bone, above the first opening, and found the corruption co-extensive with the bone.	0.60048616
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I sawed it, and then removed it, and tried to heal the place;	So again I sawed away as much of the corruption as I could see; then I tried to heal it, but it would not heal nor unite.	0.6219257
but I could not until I cut around a palm of the bone, and pulled it out with its marrow, then restored it with medicines; and it healed and sealed quickly,	Then I opened it up once more and went on cutting away the bone piecemeal and trying to heal it, and it would not heal until I had cut away about a span of bone with the marrow; then I treated it medicinally and it quickly healed over and was cured.	0.75641656
and did not need to restart the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had for him. Because due to the evacuation he often cried, but he was completely healed,	But it would not have been necessary to repeat the operation and the incision thus, were it not for the patient's weakness and inability to tolerate much at a time, and because of my fears for his life, since an evil faint was constantly seizing him on account of the heavy drain.	0.6484957
Because due to the evacuation he often cried, but he was completely healed, and a hard flesh grew in place of the bone, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction at all, neither in walking nor in coming.	But he was completely cured, and in place of the bone there grew up firm tissue; his bodily state was sound and his strength was restored. He went about his business, and no hurt whatsoever came to him from walking.	0.6752863
and stretch the end, so that you pull the corrupted flesh below, and uncover the flesh over the place where you want to saw, so that the saw does not hurt the flesh; and place a splint or a board under the bone to cut the corrupted flesh; and it is necessary to saw as long as one can see and feel the corruption, and saw again another time.	Now in the case of a prominent bone that has been broken in any part of the body, it should be sawn off in this manner: you take a ligature and tie it to the extremity of the prominent bone and bid someone keep it stretched upward; then you put on another ligature of wool thicker than the first, tying it to the tissue that is beneath the bone, and pull on the end so that the flesh is drawn down and you lay bare of flesh the spot where you intend to saw, so that the saw does not injure the flesh. You should place a block of wood or a board firmly beneath the bone; which done, there is no hindrance to the saw's cutting through the diseased bone. The saw-cut should be made a little above the site of the disease in case there should be disease in the cavity of the bone that is not apparent on the surface, which might compel you to carry out the sawing a second time.	0.78259164
And if the bone is corrupted, and not visible, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh; then place a splint under,	If the bone be diseased without any swelling, but it all seems the same from one part to another, and the disease be in the middle or in one segment of it, then expose it on all sides; put the block beneath, and saw it from the first side, where the disease is.	0.7282434
and then saw from one part to the other the corruption, and let the sawing be a little longer than the corruption, as we have said;	When you have finished this, saw it from the other side. The saw-cut should be at a little distance from the diseased part, as we have already said.	0.5542065
and if the corruption is in the joint, cut the corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it connects on the other side;	If the disease be in one of the phalanges, amputate the diseased phalanx and saw through the bone where it is continuous on the other (healthy) side.	0.5546918
and if the corruption is in the connection of the two joints, there is no other way but to cut;	If the disease be in the joint between two members, then there is nothing to be done but scraping.	0.59995705
and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand, or the ankle of the foot, it is very difficult, but nevertheless it is necessary to inquire about the corrosion, how it appears; and clean it in all the ways you can, but make sure the veins or nerves do not contradict you;	If the disease be in the carpus or tarsus it is a very difficult matter treating them; you must peel off the disease in whatever way seems possible, and scrape it away and clean up the part in whatever way you can and by whatever technique is convenient for you, so long as there is no vein or nerve in your way.	0.68601024
and know that the cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the setting of the bones and the appearance of the bones, and their thickness and delicacy, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare the appropriate instrument for each kind of work;	Now you should know that there are a great number of cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones, varying according to the different sites and arrangements of the bones; their thickness or thinness; their greatness or smallness; their hardness or sponginess; so you should have ready for every sort of operation an instrument suitable for that operation.	0.86937267
and know that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the kinds of diseases; so consider the instrument you need according to what is required.	You should know too that when you have long experience and knowledge of the branches of this art the operations themselves may well indicate the kind of instrument needed; for the man who is skilled in the art and has seen various kinds of disease may think out for himself which instrument is suitable for each disease.	0.7300723

chapter-2-subchapter-87.txt
Regarding gangrene The flesh rots either due to an internal cause or an external cause;	Sometimes the extremities become gangrenous, either from an external or an internal cause.	0.6540512
and when you have treated that corrosion with medicines, and it does not improve, it is necessary to cut that member up to the place where the corrosion reaches, so that the patient escapes death, or the greater harm, which is the loss of the member;	Now when you have treated this disease by medical means, ineffectively, and you see that the disease is spreading over the limb and nothing will stop it, you must cut off that limb as far as the disease has spread, so that the patient may escape death or great affliction, greater than the loss of the limb.	0.6833433
so that the patient escapes death, or the greater harm, which is the loss of the member; and the signs are that the member becomes black, as if it were burnt by fire, and rots after blackening, then the corrosion goes from member to member, and spreads throughout the body; so hurry to cut,	Now the sign of the victim of this state is that the limb goes black, so that you might think it were burnt with fire, or, after the blackening, it putrefies, and the putrefaction spreads to parts adjacent to that limb and begins to attack the whole body; cut it away as soon as you can.	0.78118914
and if it is due to the bite of some venomous creatures, like sea scorpion and viper and similar,	So must you do if the disease is caused by the bite of some dangerous reptile such as the marine scorpion, viper, or venomous spider, and so on.	0.7390357
if the corrosion is at the tip of the finger, cut it, and do not allow it to spread to the hand.	If the disease or bite be at the tip of the finger, cut off the finger, giving the disease no opportunity to spread to the rest of the hand.	0.680613
And if it reaches the hand, cut it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the arm;	Similarly, if it attacks the hand, cut if off at the wrist, giving the disease no opportunity to spread and attack the two bones of the forearm.	0.5610126
and if it reaches the arm, cut it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and no treatment helps except the amount of its strength;	If the disease passes onward and you perceive that it has reached the region of the shoulder, by no means cut the shoulder, for that will be the death of the patient; use any treatment but that, as best you may.	0.65573144
and do the same when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, cut it after the next joint;	In the same manner act in regard to the foot when the disease attacks a toe; namely, amputate the toe through one of the interphalangeal joints.	0.60661554
and if it comes to the foot, cut the whole foot; and if it goes up the leg, cut at the knee joint;	If the disease attacks the tarsus then amputate the whole foot; and if it ascends toward the knee, amputate the leg at the knee-joint.	0.8034614
and if it goes above the knee, there is no other means but to leave the patient to die;	If it be that the disease has passed on above the knee, there is nothing of any avail in this case but to leave it, and for the patient to resign himself to death.	0.7254704
and the manner of cutting or sawing the member is that you tie it above and below, and one assistant stretches one tie downwards, and another assistant the other tie upwards, and you separate the flesh between the two ties to a spatula's width, until the bone is uncovered;	Now the way to amputate or saw off a limb is to bind a ligature round below the site and another above; an assistant draws the one downward and another assistant draws the upper ligature upward; while you dissect away the tissues between the two ligatures with a broad scalpel until it is laid bare of flesh; then it should be cut or sawn.	0.84751827
then cut or saw it, and place a linen cloth on each side, so that the saw does not touch the healthy place, and does not cause another lesion and hot abscess to the patient.	You must place linen dressings on every side lest the saw touch a part that is sound and thus cause the patient additional pain and inflammation.	0.7071441
And if blood flow comes when you work, cauterize the place quickly, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete,	If a haemorrhage occurs while you are operating, cauterize the place as quickly as possible, or apply to it one or other of the styptic powders; then continue until finished.	0.7717911
then tie the wounded member with an appropriate bandage, and treat it until it is healed;	Then bind up the mutilated limb with a suitable bandage and dress until healed.	0.8285996
and I will tell you what happened to a man with his foot:	Now I shall relate to you an example; what I am going to tell you is exactly what happened to a certain man's foot.	0.7412021
he had a blackness that seemed like a burn from fire,	He had a blackening of the foot, with a burning like that of fire.	0.7520511
and that corrosion first came to his toe, until it covered the whole foot;	The disease, to begin with, was in one toe, but it went on to involve the whole foot.	0.54730237
and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cut the foot, and was healed;	When the man saw the disease spreading in the limb and felt the violent pain and burning, he hastened of his own accord to amputate it at the joint, and he got better.	0.6151922
and long after the corrosion returned to his finger, and he came to me,	After a long time had passed the very same kind of disease arose in the forefinger of his hand.	0.51968104
and I applied repellent things after cleaning the body, and the corrosion could not be stopped;	He came to me, and I attempted to suppress the superfluity with remedies that I applied to the hand, after purging his body; but the superfluity was not to be suppressed and began to spread to the second finger, and eventually the whole hand was involved in the disease.	0.4453927
and he wanted me to cut his hand, and I did not want to, as I hoped to repel the matter; and I also feared that if I cut his hand, he would die, because the man's strength was weak; and he despaired completely, and returned to his land, and hastened to cut his hand, and was healed;	He urged me to cut off his hand, but I did not wish to do this, hoping I should be able to overcome the superfluity, and also fearing he would die at the amputation of his hand, for the man's strength was on the decline. When he despaired of me he went back to his own country, and I then heard that he had gone and cut off his whole hand, and got well.	0.85884917
and I have told this story so that others may do the same, if needed.	I narrate this story as help against this kind of malady when it occurs; and as guidance for you to take and act upon.	0.5118708

chapter-2-subchapter-88.txt
Sometimes an abscess occurs in a fleshy place, and stays so long that it gathers a lot of pus; and then it bursts and pierces, and the pus comes out, and the place remains empty, like a vessel; and the skin above it is as thin as a delicate cloth, and it does not reach the bone, nor the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain" (healthy),	When an abscess occurs in any of the fleshy parts and becomes chronic and eventually collects pus, and then it breaks open or is perforated, and all the contained matter comes out and the site is left hollow, like a vessel, and the overlying skin thinned like a rag, but the suppuration has not gone so far as to involve bone or tendon or ligament—and hence it merits the name of 'sinus' and is not called a fistula.	0.7932459
but if it is so prolonged that it reaches the bone deeply, it is called "fistula";	But if it goes on until the disease involves any of these parts it is then called a fistula or defluxion.	0.64361274
and the skin is such that you cut around that skin, and especially when it is thin, like a cloth; and it does not adhere because of its corruption.	The treatment of it will be to cut away all that skin with a circular incision; specially if it be thinned and has become like a rag, and you are sure that it will not adhere to the place, because of its corruption.	0.7113154
And if you are confident that the skin will adhere, and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a poultice like this:	But if you are in hope of its adhering, and the corruption has not reached that point, and there is in the skin some thickness of flesh, then treat it by irrigation.	0.61112684
and then take as much as needed, and melt it in water and honey, and treat the abscess, and tighten the opening; and leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;	Then take as much as you need and dilute it with water and honey, and with this irrigate the sinus and bind up the opening, leaving the compound inside for two hours. Then get it out by pressure.	0.7722787
do this many times, until the abscess is clean, and the odor is gone;	Do this for several days until the sinus is clean and the smell disappears.	0.6803024
and sometimes it is treated with lye water, when this medicine is not available, and it is that you take ashes from vine wood, and pour water over them,	It may be irrigated with water of ashes if the medicine is not at hand.	0.5520526
then strain it, and use it as a poultice, until you know the abscess is well cleaned;	For that, you take ashes of vine or of oak, and put water upon them; then clarify the liquor and with it irrigate the sinus until you are sure it is thoroughly clean.	0.49372262
and if the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the lye water, then treat it with water and honey where a little crushed litharge is added; or treat it with honey and mixed wine, as honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the abscess adhere;	But if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then irrigate him with water and honey with which a little pounded verdigris has been mixed; or irrigate with honey and wine mingled; the value of the honey lies in its cleansing and washing, while the wine closes up the sinus, specially if it be a wine which has some dryness and astringency.	0.8964563
and when you have done this, and you are confident that the abscess is well cleaned, then treat it with what makes flesh grow in it,	When you have done this several times and you are sure that the sinus is clean of diseased matter, then irrigate it with those compounds that will encourage granulation in it.	0.5636957
and it is that you take a plaster of diafinit, and melt it with rose oil and in wine; or treat it with some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have mentioned in the treatise on ointments;	For example, you may take a little Palm ointment and dissolve it in oil of roses and some astringent wine; or irrigate it with some of the other ointments and medicines whose prescriptions we have recorded in the treatise on ointments.	0.74770606
and if the opening of the abscess is small, and the tube of the poultice cannot enter, then widen it a little with an iron, and insert a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is widened;	If the opening of the sinus be too narrow for the nozzle of the syringe, open it up slightly with the knife, or put in it a pad steeped in Egyptian ointment or vermilion ointment, until it is dilated.	0.72278666
and if the wound is too wide, then sew it and leave only one place where the poultice can enter,	On the other hand, if the opening be wide, bring the edges together with a suture, and leave of it sufficient width that the syringe may be only just introduced.	0.6366556
and if the opening that discharges pus is above, then cut it to a lower place. Because when the pus is deep, it does not let flesh grow there; and if you cannot cut the abscess below as you wish, then prepare in such a way that the pus flows to the lowest place it is,	In the same way, if the opening from which the discharge flows be raised up, then incise it at its lowest part so that the discharge may flow downward out of it; for when the discharge collects at the bottom of the sinus it prevents the formation of flesh in it.	0.77846634
and if you cannot cut the abscess below as you wish, then prepare in such a way that the pus flows easily down, and leave nothing of the pus; and take consolidating medicines to put on the abscess,	If you cannot open it up as you wish at the lower point, then try to set the part in whatever position you conveniently can to facilitate the discharge of pus, and try to ensure that no pus is held up in it.	0.632132
and the one that is on the opening of the abscess, remove often to remove the pus, and know what flows from the pus, if it is venom or little or much, or digested, or undigested;	But the dressing over the sinus opening you may constantly remove, so that the pus collected behind it may come out and so that you may know whether there be much or little ichor, and whether digested or not.	0.67010033
and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,	And at the same time investigate the site of the sinus itself to see whether the patient feels any pain in it or no pain, and whether there be any swelling in it or not.	0.60885215
and then untie it in the morning, or the third day, and when you untie the wound, then change to another cloth, and renew the ointment.	Then you may unbandage it the next day or the third day, and when the wound is unbandaged make a change of dressing and ointment.	0.8014705
And if the abscess discharges undigested pus after many days, know that the abscess is not adhering. And if subtle venoms flow after a long time, do not despair of health,	But if, after a long while, the sinus discharges a thin ichor, do not despair of its closing up, for its healing is near.	0.5633466
because health is approaching. Because there are men whose flesh growth in their wounds is delayed, and those who do the opposite;	For there are some men whose wounds are slow in healing, and some are the opposite.	0.71728826
and if undigested pus comes out of the abscess after many days, know that the abscess is not adhering;	If, after many days, undigested pus is discharged you may know that the sinus has not closed.	0.68636894
and if the abscess is slow to adhere, and is prolonged, then add drying medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, like diafinit ointment, because it has a large part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine;	If the closing of the sinus be delayed and it be a long affair, make the medicines dryer; let them be medicines that have some humidity in their substance but dryness in their potency, such as Palm ointment with the addition of excess of rock-alum.	0.6567943
take diafinit ointment, and melt it with rose oil, and sprinkle it with old wine equally;	A most efficacious treatment is to take Palm ointment and dissolve it in oil of roses and sprinkle over it old wine of even consistency.	0.5990456
then confit it and use it; and the same does well-cooked honey, when diafinit ointment is not available,	Then knead together, and use that. The same sort of thing may be done with honey if you have no	0.6227824
or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is on the fire; and then glue a cloth, and spread it on the abscess, and sometimes administer aristolochia, and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour of vetches and centaury;	Palm ointment at hand; if you heat the honey to a thick consistency and use that; or take myrrh and aloes and incense of juniper and beat them all up together and sprinkle on the honey while it is heating on the fire, spread on lint and bind over the sinus; or spread on it honey heated to a thickness, and over that sprinkle powdered aromatic roots, and over these place a dressing that you bandage on.	0.7726077
and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour of vetches and centaury; and use it in simple or compound forms: grind them, and make powder, and put it on the honey as I said, and use it; and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment,	Sometimes also in a case of this sort long birthwort and the root of the blue iris and vetch flour and centaury are usable, either separately or mixed, beaten up together, sifted and scattered into honey as I described; use them thus.	0.6918669
and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is deep, and affects the bone, or the hard members, or the joints; then treat it as a fistula, as we have said before.	But if the sinus be chronic, and it does not heal with this treatment, then you may know that there is corruption at the bottom of it, which has affected the bones or motor nerves or ligaments; the treatment then is that of fistula as already given.	0.7329899

chapter-2-subchapter-89.txt
Panaris is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger, or the foot, or sometimes arises on other fingers;	Paronychia is a growth of flesh under the nail of the thumb or big toe; it may also occur in the other fingers and toes.	0.7743
and when it becomes old, and is not noticed, a hot abscess develops, and runs and discharges pus until it affects the root of the nail, and sometimes affects the whole nail;	When it is chronic and the treatment of it is neglected, it comes up as an abscess, or corrupts and generates pus until it eats away the root of the nail.	0.67451125
and the corrosion reaches the bone, causing foul-smelling pain, and the tip of the finger becomes large, and the color is dark.	Often it rots it entirely, and often the disease reaches the bone and gives rise to foetor and broadens the tip of the finger and makes it livid in colour.	0.617575
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, it is necessary to cut with iron all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward. The cauterization is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;	When you have treated it with those means mentioned in their place, and your treatment is ineffective, you must excise all the superfluous growth from the nail and then cauterize the wound, for in this case cauterization is a great help.	0.7554864
and if the nail presses the flesh inside, and begins to prick, and injures it, it is necessary to put a splint under the nail that pricks the flesh, and push it up, and cut that flesh subtly and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh to remove everything;	But if the bone be healthy and the nail also healthy, and the in-turned angle of the nail has pressed the flesh inwards and begun to stab it and injure it, you should pass a thin probe beneath the corner of the nail that presses into the flesh, and raise it up and carefully cut away that flesh and apply caustic to the remainder, until it is all gone; then dress with ointments until cured.	0.78950214
And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it, and pull it out, because as long as the corrupted bone is there, it cannot heal;	But if it should be that the disease has already begun to involve bone, that bone should be excised and removed; for it will never heal while there remains any diseased bone.	0.7256882
and if you see the finger corrupting, cut it at one of the joints as previously mentioned, then treat it until it is healed;	And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading in the finger, amputate it at one of the joints, as has been previously mentioned; then dress it until it is healed.	0.8454432
and if it is bruised, and swollen, and it feels great pain, it is necessary to bleed it first; then cut the nail with a sharp spatula, cutting across the top,	If a laceration or bruising happen to the nail, with violent pain, you should first bleed the patient and then cut away the nail with a sharp scalpel, a swerving cut from top to bottom.	0.70391446
and ensure that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, because the patient would feel too much pain;	But be careful not to cut into the nail-bed, for you will give the patient violent pain and it will cause a growth of superfluous flesh at the place.	0.6091442
and if it happens, apply something that soothes.	Then dress the part with sedative dressings.	0.40444124
The additional finger that grows on the hands of some people is sometimes all flesh, and sometimes it has bones, and sometimes it has a nail,	A superfluous finger growing on the hands of some men sometimes is all flesh, sometimes contains a bone, sometimes has a nail.	0.8957083
and some of them grow at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some joints of the fingers. Those that grow on a joint of the finger do not move, and those that grow at the joint of the finger, sometimes move;	Some of them arise at the root of a finger, or on one of the phalanges of a finger, and the latter do not move, while those that arise from the root of a finger do sometimes move.	0.83389676
the cutting of the one that is all flesh is easy, in this manner: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.	That which is purely fleshy is easily removed; you cut if off at the root with a broad scalpel.	0.7030915
Those that grow at the root of the joint are difficult to treat: avoid cutting.	But the treatment of that which arises at the root of a finger is difficult; you should avoid amputating.	0.6565578
For those that grow at the last joint, it is necessary to first cut the flesh roundly to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable saw, then treat it until it is healed.	In the case of one growing from the finger at a phalangeal joint, you should first cut through the flesh down to the bone with a circular incision; then saw the bone through, with one of the saws that suit the purpose; then dress it until it heals.	0.7694684
The fusion that comes to the fingers together comes by birth, or by fusion of the wound, or by burn, or by similar things.	As for webbing of the fingers one to another, that occurs very frequently. It may be either congenital or from the healing of a wound or burn or the like.	0.7160712
It is necessary to cut that fusion, so that the fingers return to their natural shapes; then put between them tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not fuse; or place between them thin pieces of lead, until the place is healed, as necessary.	You have to cut the web away until the fingers are brought back to their original form; then interpose between them a pad or piece of material soaked in oil of roses, to prevent them from rapidly joining together and to keep them apart; or you can put between them a thin sheet of lead until the healing takes place as it should.	0.86569107
If the fusion comes to any of these fingers with the palm, cut that fusion as necessary.	Similarly, if one of the fingers becomes joined to the palm of the hand, cut through the adhesion according to the form it takes, and with proper regard for the shape of the member.	0.49013442

chapter-2-subchapter-90.txt
Vis are large veins enveloped and full of melancholic excesses, which occur in various parts of the body;	Varices are thick twisted veins filled with melancholic superfluities.	0.56954193
and they occur more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.	They occur in most parts of the body, but generally in the legs, particularly in the legs of couriers and ploughmen and porters.	0.5403466
It is therefore necessary that you sometimes administer purgatives for bile, and then treat it with basilica (a type of medicinal herb).	First you must purge the body free from black bile, several times, strongly. Then venesect the patient in the basilic vein.	0.5463546
The treatment with iron is done in two ways: one is to cut them and draw out the black blood; and the other way is to lift the vein and draw it all out.	The treatment with the knife is of two kinds: one is to incise and bring out all the black blood, the other is to draw out the vein and extract it bodily.	0.9120151
The cutting is done in this manner: first pour very hot water on the leg, until the thick blood is thinned, then squeeze the patient's leg from above the thigh to below the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or two or three, with a wide cut,	The incision is done thus: the leg is first well fomented with hot water to liquefy the thick foul blood; then bind up the patient's leg well from the upper part of his thigh to below the knee; then make an ample incision into the vein in one, two, or three places.	0.93214506
then elevate and draw out the black blood by hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood flows as the patient's strength can tolerate;	Then with your hand press the black blood upward from the lower part and downward from the upper part of the leg and draw off as much blood as you see suffices or as the patient's strength can bear.	0.7569217
and then tie it, and instruct him to abstain from foods that generate black bile;	Then bind up, and bid him abstain from foods that give rise to black bile.	0.8384069
and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and it harms the patient.	The evacuation and venesection should be repeated whenever the veins fill up again to the patient's hurt.	0.7390406
The lifting is done in this manner: shave the patient's leg if there is much hair, then put him in a bath, and pour hot water on his leg until it turns red and the veins swell;	Extraction is carried out in this way: the patient's leg is shaved if it is very hairy; then bring him to the bath and foment the leg in hot water until it becomes red and the veins are filled.	0.91699725
and if you don't have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then cut along the vein from the top of the knee, or the part below at the ankle;	Or if there be no bath available let him take violent exercise until the limb gets hot. Then make a longitudinal incision in the skin over the vein, either at the upper end of it near the knee or at the lower end near the ankle.	0.7010466
then open the skin with the hook, and strip the vein on each side, until it appears when touched;	Then with hooks open up the skin and dissect away round the vein on each side until it is laid open to view.	0.82250047
and it looks red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord;	When it is visible you will see it red almost to the point of blackness; and when it is freed from the skin you will see it look like a cord.	0.7148918
then put the hook underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then hang it lightly with the hook,	Then pass beneath it a probe to lift it up, and when it is clear of the skin hold it with a blunt smooth hook.	0.68603134
then cut it in another place about three fingers up; then strip the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it with the hook as you did before, and hang it on another hook, as you did the first time;	Then make another incision near by, three fingers distant; then dissect away the overlying skin until it comes to view; then raise it with a probe as before and lift it with a second hook as you did at first.	0.8458781
then cut another incision, or more if needed, then lift it, and cut it at the toe of the foot,	Then make yet another incision or several if need be; then draw out the vessel at the lowest incision near the ankle and cut it through.	0.79624206
then draw and lift it to the second incision; then extract it from cut to cut, until it comes all out, then cut it;	Then pull it and draw it out until it emerges from the second incision. Then draw it towards the incision above that and so on until you draw it out of the third incision (or) the uppermost, until it is all extracted; then cut it off.	0.79533565
and if you cannot draw and lift it, insert a needle with a strong double thread, and tie and draw it, and place a hook underneath, and turn your hand one way and the other, until it comes out; and be careful it does not break, because if it does, it cannot be drawn or lifted, and it harms the patient;	But if it does not respond to your attempts to draw and extract it, pass in a needle with a strong double thread and ligate it and draw it up; and introduce a probe beneath it, and twist it all round until it comes out; but be careful lest it break; for if it break the total extraction of it will be very difficult for you and harm will thereby come to the patient.	0.83417255
and when you have drawn it all out, place wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound; and treat it until it is healed.	When you have got it all out, apply to the incisions wool soaked in wine and oil of roses, or olive-oil, and dress it till it be healed.	0.8085455
And if the vein is twisted and entangled together, and it is not straight, as we have said, it is necessary to cut it crookedly, but not cut it; and draw it as we have said before.	If the varix be contorted, with twists and turns from side to side and not in a straight line, as we said, then you should cut down along both sides of the twisted part and the places where it is tortuous, then catch it up with hooks and extract it whole.	0.6684592
it is necessary to cut it crookedly, but not cut it; and draw it as we have said before. The shape of the iron used to cut the vein is curved, and does not cut unless it cuts the vein;	Be careful in incising over it that you do not cut into or injure the vein, for this will render the extraction difficult; therefore be most careful. The lancet for cutting upon a varix. The blunt hook. It is not bent like other hooks, and its extremity must be blunt so as to not injure the vein.	0.61933386
and it is of a large curve, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:	It should be of a broad curve and smooth, for if it is fine-pointed its fineness may cut the vein; rather it should be quite thick, as we said.	0.731639

chapter-2-subchapter-91.txt
This vein occurs in the legs, in hot areas where no grass or trees grow, and in land where there is no moisture;	This kind of vein occurs in the leg in hot countries such as the Hejaz and the lands of the Arabs and in hot arid infertile countries.	0.57142746
and it sometimes appears elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to decay that comes under the skin,	It also often occurs in other parts of the body beside the legs.	0.62416023
just as snakes and worms come within the body, generated between skin and flesh.	The origin of it is a corruption taking place beneath the skin in the same way that round-worms and worms and gourd-worms arise in the inward parts of the body; also the worms that are generated between the skin and the flesh.	0.6125617
And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg with a very great inflammation, then the place changes, and the vein begins to emerge, like a root of a plant.	The sign of the beginning of the occurrence of this vein is a violent inflammation in the leg; then the place swells up and blisters; then the vein begins to extrude at the blistered place as if it were a plant-stem or an animal.	0.7613263
When the head appears, it is necessary to wrap around a piece of lead of one and a half З to two З, and tie it,	When its extremity has appeared it should be wound and tied round a little piece of lead, from one to two drachms in weight, which you leave hanging from the leg.	0.5536505
and let the lead hang on the leg, and every time a point comes out, wrap it around the lead, and tie it; and if it is too long, cut a part, and wrap the rest, and do not cut it at the root, until it is all out; because if you cut it, it reenters the flesh, and causes an abscess and decay in the place, and bad disease;	Then as fast as any of it issues from the leg, wrap it in the lead, and if there be plenty of it cut off part and tie the rest of it; do not cut it right down until it has all come out; for if you cut it right down it will contract and draw back into the flesh and produce at the place an abscess and suppuration and a bad ulcer.	0.8571906
for which reason it is necessary that it be drawn little by little to the end, and nothing remains in the body;	Therefore it should be treated gently, and drawn out slowly until the very extremity of it emerges and not the least bit of it remains in the body.	0.6505737
and sometimes this vein, when drawn out, is five palms long, or ten, and a man once came to me, whose vein was ten palms long, and when you cut it, put a hook in the opening, and pierce it to the bottom,	In some cases the vein comes out five or ten spans in length; indeed I have heard of one twenty spans long that came out from a certain man.	0.68927574
so that it all comes out; and let the matter inside be emptied, and administer medicines generating decay for a few days, then treat it as abscesses.	If it breaks during your treatment of it, then pass a probe into the hole and open it up with a long incision longitudinally, until all the contained matter is evacuated; and try to make the place suppurate with medicines for a few days, then treat as an abscess.	0.6616461
And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or on the foot, and many openings appear, from which branches come out; treat it then as we have said before.	Sometimes also this vein is found branching, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself; and in this case there are many openings and a branch comes out of each. The treatment is as mentioned above in the section.	0.8732954

chapter-2-subchapter-92.txt
This disease is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often happens to oxen,	This complaint is called by us in some regions 'the cattle disease' since it frequently happens to cattle.	0.84966785
and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body, rising and descending, and one can feel it moving from limb to limb, until it tears the skin where it goes, and comes out;	It is in fact a small solitary worm generated between the skin and the flesh, that creeps all over the body, both up and down; it can be felt as it creeps from one part to another until it breaks out at a place where it can break through the skin, and out it comes.	0.8435714
and it is generated from the decay of some humors, just as worms, serpents, lumbrici, and ascarides come in the stomach;	It arises from the putrefaction of certain humours as do worms, round-worms and gourd-worms in the abdomen.	0.6097047
and one fears its malice, because when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and comes to the eye, sometimes it reenters and destroys the eye; and this happens often.	Part of the harm that may be expected of it is that when it creeps about the body and goes up to the head and reaches the eye it may make an opening in the eye and come out and destroy the eye; this frequently happens.	0.7482426
When you want to cure and draw it, you can only do it when it moves:	If you wish to treat this and extract it, it must be done while it is creeping about and can be felt.	0.63279766
so it is necessary to tie the place above and below with a strong tight band,	You must tie a tight tourniquet above and below it, then cut down upon it and extract it.	0.587721
then cut above and draw it out, and if the worm is deep in the flesh, and you cannot find it, cauterize it with fire on top, until it dies;	But if it burrows into the tissues and you cannot locate it, then apply the actual cautery to the place until you have burnt the worm.	0.5831356
and the greatest harm it does is that it affects the eye, as we have said;	The greatest damage to be feared from it is damage to the eye, as we have said.	0.80555105
and if you see it coming to the head near the eye, press the eyebrow strongly below it, then cut above and draw it out;	So if you see that it has entered the head and is near the eye, then bind a strong bandage over the forehead beneath it, then cut down upon it and draw it out.	0.78724086
and it is necessary to treat the patient with body purifying medicines for the rotten humors,	It is important also for the patient to take care to cleanse his body with laxative medicines from all corrupt and evil humours.	0.6373933
and avoid foods that generate decay.	He should also avoid all foods giving rise to putrefaction.	0.6897981

chapter-2-subchapter-93.txt
Pain that comes from flatulence This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I tell you.	On incision for the disease known as 'flitting disease'. The disease known in our region as 'the flitting disease' is a pain arising in a limb and then passing from limb to limb.	0.70732224
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;	I have personally seen it as I shall describe to you: I was called to a woman patient in a country district, who uncovered her arm and showed me a small inflation of the cephalic vein.	0.7134489
and a little later, I saw it rise like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, like quicksilver when it runs from one place to another;	After I had waited a while I saw the swelling creep like a worm along the forearm, ascending towards her shoulder, with the greatest possible speed, as of quicksilver running from place to place.	0.75772214
the pain left that place, and fixed itself in the shoulder,	Then the pain left that place and settled in the elbow.	0.78236127
and then a little later ran through the whole body, until it came to the other arm;	Then I waited a while and the pain ran through the whole body until it reached the other arm.	0.70750815
then she told me it kept turning around her body, as I saw.	Then she related to me that it used to pass all round her body as I had seen it.	0.83910346
I marveled greatly at how it moved from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner. However, I had seen many who had seen pain move from place to place, but I had never seen it as I saw it in the woman;	I was amazed at the speed with which it migrated from one part to another, as I had never before seen this disease in this form, though I had seen many who had a pain that passed from limb to limb; but never with my own eyes had I seen anything like what I saw in this woman.	0.91821694
and I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and exposed veins, and because of that appeared this constrained windiness;	The only opinion I could form of it was that it was due to the woman's being of the dwellers in the wilds, dry of body, with outstanding veins, and hence that moving vapour was perceptible.	0.6664015
and it does not appear this way in those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and full veins.	But it follows then that it does not appear in that manner in people leading a leisured life, with humid bodies and hidden veins.	0.6543331
And when you want to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then tie it above and below quickly, and then cut above so that the constrained windiness in the place comes out; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,	When you want to cure this, and the patient feels the pain of it, and if you observe the appearance we have described, then tie a bandage round above and beneath it as quickly as possible and cut down on it so that the vapour enclosed there may come out; and cauterize the place.	0.8609576
then treat it with what expels windiness, such as fetid pills, and serapinum pills, and similar others.	But if there is nothing visible to you then treat by purging of the body and by medicines dispelling and getting rid of flatus, such as foetid pills and pills of sagapenon and the like.	0.61705816

chapter-2-subchapter-94.txt
Of the arrows	On the extraction of arrows.	0.51828855
Arrow wounds are diverse, according to their appearances and the places on the body where they fall.	Arrows vary both as to types and as to the different parts of the body pierced by them.	0.7717898
The diversity among them is that some have large points, small, barbed, and welded; and some have two angles, and others that are long, and some with pieces; and those that fall in any member do so in two ways: either in a principal member,	They differ thus as to type: some are big and some are small; some with hollow heads and some with solid; some of them have three angles and some four; some have tongues; some have spikes.	0.7830479
and if these signs appear to you, avoid the cure, and draw the arrow if it is not inside.	If you observe these signs, avoid treating the patient and extraction of the arrow if it has not come out.	0.7382638
The signs of the arrow when it falls in the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it is stuck in something hard, not empty; and sometimes the arrow moves like the pulse, and black blood flows, and coldness and cold sweat come, and syncope: know then without doubt that death is coming.	The signs of an arrow in the heart are: nearness to the left breast; the patient feels it as if it were fixed in something solid, not hollow; often also there will be imparted to the arrow a pulsating movement; and black blood will issue from the wound; and after this follow coldness of the extremities and a cold sweat and unconsciousness; then you may know that death is surely on its way.	0.8995286
And the signs of the arrow that injures the lung are that blood full of foam comes from the wound, the throat swells, the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks cool air.	The sign of an arrow that has wounded the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound; also the vessels that lie along the neck swell up and the patient changes colour, breathes heavily, and seeks to inhale fresh air very strongly.	0.8722646
And if the arrow falls in the covering of the chest, it is near the small ribs; and causes heavy breathing and great pain and sighing; and all the shoulder muscles move.	But if the arrow strike the pleura then it will be close to the small ribs and he will breathe deeply with much pain and heaving of the chest, and all parts of his shoulders will be agitated. If the arrow hits the liver, there ensues violent pain, and blood flows from the wound, resembling the liver in its redness.	0.8157312
And if the arrow falls in the stomach, sometimes some undigested food comes out of the wound.	If the arrow strikes the stomach, often undigested food comes out of the wound and renders the case obvious.	0.70348823
And if the arrow falls in the abdomen, and feces come out through the torn intestine, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.	If the arrow wounds the belly and is fixed in it, and from the wound there comes excrement or omentum or torn bowel, there is no hope in treatment nor in extracting the arrow.	0.77356446
And if the arrow falls in the bladder, and urine flows out and comes externally, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is fatal.	If the arrow has hit the urinary bladder, and urine comes out and some of the bladder protrudes and the patient has violent pain, then you may know that the wound is mortal.	0.7090086
The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, auxiliary muscles, spine, buttocks, thigh, and legs, and similar members, are safe according to many conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do the same.	But as for the other parts, such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, dorsal vertebrae, collar-bone, hip, leg, and the like, in most cases they will heal if the arrow does not happen to strike an artery or nerve, and if the arrow is not poisoned.	0.77698684
It happened to a man that an arrow fell into the tear duct at the root of the nose: I probed it, and drew it from the other side under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without harm.	For example, once an arrow struck a man at the corner of his eye near the root of the nose, and I extracted it from him on the other side beneath the lobe of his ear, and he got well, and his eye was none the worse.	0.7530815
And I drew an arrow from a man whose arrow fell into the fat of the eye under the lower eyelid, and the arrow was embedded, and I could only reach the point towards the shaft, and the arrow was large from a Turkish bow, with a light iron head without barbs; the man was healed, and no bad accidents occurred.	Also I extracted from a Jew another arrow that had pierced the orbit beneath the lower eyelid; the arrow had sunk out of sight and I could take hold only of the tiny extremity of it which is secured to the shaft; but it was a big arrow from a compound bow, the iron tip four-sided, very smooth without barbs. The Jew recovered, nor did any ill befall his eye.	0.8180634
And I drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with barbs:	I also extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.	0.62794137
I sawed off the barbs, and worked carefully until I drew it, and the Christian was healed.	It was an Arab arrow, one of those with two barbs; and I cut down upon it between the two jugulars (for it lay deep in the throat), and worked gently at it until I extracted it; and the Christian was saved and recovered.	0.50057507
And I drew an arrow from a man, who had it fall into his abdomen, and I thought he would die;	I also extracted another arrow from a man, that had struck him in the abdomen, and our opinion was that he would certainly die from it.	0.7528243
and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, and manipulated it, and drew it out, and no bad accident occurred.	But when it had remained in him for the space of thirty days or thereabouts, and his condition was unimpaired, I cut down upon the arrow and manoeuvred it out and extracted it; and he recovered, nor did any harm befall him.	0.8253848
And I saw a man whose arrow fell into his back, and the wound was sealed over;	I also saw a man who had been struck in the back by an arrow and the wound had closed over it; and when the space of seven years had elapsed the arrow came out at the root of the hip.	0.68370646
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change his natural dispositions, and found no harm in any of his natural functions.	And I saw a woman who had been struck in the abdomen by an arrow and the wound healed with the arrow remaining in it, and her condition was unimpaired; she felt no harm from it and her natural functions were not harmed.	0.6354346
And I saw another man, whose arrow fell into his face, and the wound was sealed over;	And I saw a man who had been struck by an arrow in the face, and it had healed over, and he did not feel much pain from it.	0.7263236
and it remained thus without great pain; and many other similar cases.	And many such have I seen.	0.44784358
And I drew an arrow from one of the king's princes, which had fallen into the middle of his nose, and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was fully embedded	I once drew out an arrow from one of the officers of the State, that had struck him in the middle of the nose and was inclining a little to the right, and the whole arrow was buried.	0.78041947
I was called to the treatment after it had fallen for three days. I found the wound very narrow.	I was called to treat him three days after he had received the arrow wound; and I found the arrow wound very narrow.	0.8388444
I probed it with a fine probe, and did not feel it; and he felt pricking and pain under his right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow	I explored it with a fine probe but did not find it; but the patient felt a pricking and a pain beneath the right ear, and I hoped that the pricking was due to the arrow.	0.832458
I applied a drawing and digesting plaster on the place, so that it would not swell; and the place of the arrow appeared.	So I applied a poultice to the spot, a poultice with power to draw out and cause suppuration, desiring that the place should swell and that a sign to indicate the arrow should appear so that I could cut down upon it.	0.66196156
and the place of the arrow appeared. I applied the plaster for several days, and the wound healed again, and the patient remained thus for a long time,	But nothing happened at that place to indicate that the arrow had come through to there; so I persevered with poulticing it for many days; yet nothing fresh manifested itself and the wound healed up meanwhile, and the patient despaired for a time of its extraction.	0.6734059
until he felt the arrow one day in his nose; and he told me. I applied corrosive liquid medicine on the wound for several days, until it was open,	Then one day he felt the arrow inside his nose, and he told me of this; so for a number of days I applied a caustic medicine to the wound until it opened.	0.89294726
and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow that was stuck in the place; then I added the liquid medicine in the opening of the wound, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;	I explored it, and felt the slim end of the arrow which is fastened to the shaft; then I enlarged the opening of the wound by the use of the caustic until the tip of the arrow was plainly visible to me.	0.7660017
and about four months passed,	About four months passed.	0.8171812
and then the wound widened enough that I inserted the forceps, and moved it one way and the other, and it could not come out;	Then when the wound was enlarged and I was able to introduce forceps into it I pulled on it and moved it, but it would not come out.	0.7307829
then I did not stop working carefully and manipulating with various instruments, until one day I took it with well-made forceps, according to its shape that will come at the end of this chapter, until I drew it out, and restored the wound.	And I went on skilfully and gently trying for it with various instruments until one day I caught hold of it with a pair of strong forceps (their shape will be described at the end of the chapter) and drew it out; then dressed the wound.	0.8058403
And the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sealed, and the patient was completely healed.	The medical men judged that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, but I restored it and the wound healed up and the patient made a complete recovery nor did he suffer any harm.	0.7798686
Now I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you apply your treatment to what I do not say, for the book cannot encompass everything;	Now I shall tell you the method of extracting certain arrows so that you may take it as a guide and an analogy for others that I have not mentioned; since all parts and details of this art cannot be comprehended in any description, nor can any book include them.	0.6312395
but the wise master can infer great things from very little, and from what is present and lacking, find new works, and new instruments, to deal with strange things that happen in this art.	A skilful worker will form a judgement on much, from little; and on what is not present from what is before him; and he will think out a new method and a new instrument for an unaccustomed case when it occurs in the practice of this art.	0.713457
I say that arrows do not come out of the members where they are stuck except in two ways: either through the place where they enter, or through another part;	So I would state that arrows come out from the parts of the body they have transfixed, in two ways: either by drawing out from the site of entry; or from the opposite side.	0.80553395
and the one that comes out through where it enters is an arrow entering fleshy places, and sometimes comes out immediately.	An arrow that comes out by the track of its entry: the arrow may be visible, standing out from a fleshy part, in which case it may be extracted by pulling.	0.5217896
And if it does not come out immediately, leave it until the flesh around it rots, and the exit is easier;	If it does not respond to traction immediately it strikes, you must leave it for a few days until the surrounding tissues have suppurated, when the pulling and extraction of it will be made easy.	0.55211943
and also if it is stuck in the bone, and it cannot come out, leave it thus for some days, and move it each day;	Similarly if it has stuck fast in a bone and will not come out, leave this also for a few days, repeatedly pulling on it and shifting it day by day, and then it will come out.	0.79767317
and then it will come out, and if it does not, pierce around it with a fine drill, until the place around it is widened, and then draw it.	But if it will not come out after some days, you will have to drill away the bone from all round with a fine drill so as to make room for the arrow; then draw on it and pull it out.	0.6216105
And if the arrow is embedded in a place of the body where it cannot be seen, probe for it with a probe; and if you feel it, draw it with an appropriate instrument;	If the arrow is buried in some part of the body and is quite lost to sight, explore for it with a probe, and if you can feel it then draw it out with any suitable instrument.	0.8054046
and if you cannot because of the tightness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, cut it until the wound is large; and draw the arrow if you can, and if the arrow has barbs by which it holds,	But if you cannot get at it on account of the narrowness of the wound and the depth at which the arrow is, and there be no bone nor nerve nor blood-vessel, then cut round it until the wound be sufficiently wide to enable you to take hold of it and extract it.	0.8247626
and draw the arrow if you can, and if the arrow has barbs by which it holds, remove the flesh that is stuck on both sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the barbs of the arrow, until you can draw it;	And if it have two barbs by which it is held, free them from the adherent flesh all round, in any way you can; or, if you cannot free the tissues, try skilfully to break off the two barbs and twist them about until the arrow comes free.	0.74719054
and then break or bend the barbs of the arrow, until you can draw it; and work carefully not to break the arrow, or it will be much harder to draw it.	Whenever you try to extract an arrow from any part, employ a twisting motion of your hand with the forceps in all directions until you free it; and use the utmost gentleness not to break the arrow and thus make it hard to draw it out and remove it.	0.5654938
And if you cannot at once, leave it until the place around is rotten, then draw it, because the extraction will be easier. And if the blood flow hinders you, administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter;	If you are unable to get it out at once then leave it for some days until the tissues that surround it putrefy, then return to it, for then the extraction will be easy; and if haemorrhage interfere use the remedies prescribed in the chapter dealing with that.	0.770975
and beware of cutting the nerve and the vein, and devise how you can draw the arrow without danger,	Exercise the utmost care not to cut a blood-vessel or nerve or tendon; and employ the greatest skill in freeing the arrow; it should be done gently and unhurriedly and with perseverance, as I have told you.	0.6179712
whether quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently; and place the patient as he was when the arrow fell into him, for that is the greatest help, and if you cannot, place him according to what the signs show you.	When extracting an arrow you should place the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is more convenient; but if you cannot do this then let him be in whatever position is possible for you.	0.63278294
The arrow that comes out the other way, where something of it appears, or the skin is swollen in the place so that it can be seen or felt clearly:	The arrow that is to be extracted from the opposite side either has some part protruding through or else the tip of the arrow gives rise to a palpable swelling just beneath the skin and you see it sticking out; then cut down upon it; the incision should be wide enough to admit the forceps.	0.6189461
cut above it then, until the forceps can take hold, and then draw it: so it comes out immediately.	Then pull on it, for the extraction of it will be easy.	0.4918797
And if it is held in the bone, rotate your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then draw it.	If it is stuck in bone, twist it round with your hand until the arrow makes an impression in the bone and opens up a way for itself; then pull it.	0.7778653
And if it cannot come out, leave it again, and then restart the extraction until it comes out;	If it does not come out, let it alone for some days, and repeat until it does come out.	0.66933477
and if the shaft of the arrow is there, push it with the shaft;	If the arrow-shaft be in the wound, then thrust the arrow out with that.	0.68883437
and if the shaft falls, and you want to administer pushing, use an instrument with a barbed point, so that the point of the arrow enters the barb of the instrument; then push out,	But if the shaft has fallen out, and you wish to employ thrusting, introduce down to it the hollow instrument whose cavity will enter upon the ferrule of the arrow, then push it forward with that.	0.7714036
and if the arrow is barbed, insert an instrument with a point inside, to ease the extraction.	If the arrow be hollow, thrust it forward with an instrument that will enter into the cavity, for the exit of the arrow will thereby be made easy.	0.74151427
And if the arrow is poisoned, it is necessary to cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as necessary.	If the arrow be poisoned you must, if you can, cut out in a circle all the flesh into which the poison has entered; then treat it with what is appropriate.	0.83412373
And if the arrow falls in the chest or abdomen or bladder or side, and it is near, and you can cut above, then cut there;	If the arrow that has struck be in the chest or abdomen or in the urinary bladder or in the flank and it be close enough for you to explore it with the probe and you can cut down upon it, then do so, but beware of cutting into a blood-vessel or nerve.	0.67554975
and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, then draw it, and then sew the wound, if necessary; and treat it until it is healed.	Then remove the arrow. Afterwards suture the wound, if suture be necessary, and dress it until it heals.	0.7013051
The shape of the forceps used to draw arrows is like a bird's beak, and here is the shape:	Forceps for extracting arrows. The extremities resemble the bill of a bird and are engraved like a file so as not to lose grip when you close them upon an arrow or some other object.	0.48394832
And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.	They are made in several kinds, large, small, or medium, all according to the bigness or smallness of the arrow and the breadth or narrowness of the wound.	0.6749532

chapter-2-subchapter-95.txt
Of the common veins of the body Of the veins from which bloodletting is done, there are thirty-one, of which sixteen are in the head,	On venesection. The blood-vessels in the body which it is customary to open are thirty(two) in number.	0.580737
The veins commonly used for bloodletting are five in each arm:	As for the veins that are bled in the arm and hand, they are five.	0.58949506
And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and has two branches;	And the salvatella which is the vein between the little and ring fingers; it has two branches.	0.9186516
and in the leg and the foot are three veins: one is under the curve of the calf on the left side, and the second is the saphenous which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side;	There are also three veins in the leg and foot; one of these is the sciatic vein on the outer aspect; the second is the saphena situated near the heel on the inner aspect; and there is the external saphena situated near the heel on the outer aspect.	0.8087367
and in the other leg are three veins below those.	And there are three veins, counterparts to these, in the other leg.	0.80641973
The bloodletting of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrh, and migraine; and the quality of the bloodletting, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head,	Venesection of the two veins behind the ears. Bleeding from both of these will give relief in cases of chronic catarrh, migraine and chronic foul pustules, and scabs of the head.	0.57783353
and the quality of the bloodletting, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then squeeze the patient's neck with a band, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head: find them with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, then bleed from there;	The method of venesecting these two is as I shall now describe: the patient's head should be shaved and the hinder part, in the region of the two veins, should be strongly chafed with a rough cloth; then the patient should bind his neck with his turban until the two veins are visible; their position is behind the ears in the two flattened places of the head; feel for them with your finger and when you feel their pulsation beneath your finger then mark the place with ink.	0.817148
then take the lancet, and insert it under the vein to the bone, then raise your hand with the vein upward, and cut both the skin and the vein well for two fingers' breadth, and let as much blood flow as you want;	Then take a knife-scalpel, known as a lancet, and insert it beneath the vessel into the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone; then lifting with your hand both vessel and skin make an incision dividing both skin and vein; the length of the incision should be about two fingers side by side; then draw off the quantity of blood you wish.	0.85564077
then compress and tie it, until it is healed;	Then bind them up with dressings and leave it until healed.	0.6827203
and I have already discussed incision and cauterization in the first book.	The incision and cauterization of these two vessels has been discussed earlier in the book.	0.62891877
The bloodletting of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for old migraine, and sudden migraine, and chronic eye inflammation, and acute tearing in the eyes;	The section of the two arteries in the temples gives relief for chronic migraine and severe headache and constant ophthalmia and the flow of acrid superfluities into the eyes.	0.6871156
and the quality of the bloodletting is as I say: and it is that the patient squeezes his neck, until the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse under your finger, then bleed from there;	Now the manner of incising them is as I shall describe: the patient should bind his neck with a sash until the vessels stand out clearly to the eye and their pulsation is manifest under your finger; then mark with ink.	0.711116
then lift the skin over the vein upwards with your index finger, and insert the lancet below, and lift the vein upwards, and cut it, as you did with the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;	Then with your forefinger raise the skin over the vessel and introduce a lancet beneath and lift up the vein and divide it as you did the other two; and draw off as much blood as you need.	0.88009536
then untie the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on it;	Then loosen the band round the patient's neck and put your finger on the vein for a while; then apply cotton wool and a pad, bandage securely, and leave until it heals.	0.6797035
then tie it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have already discussed their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.	They and their incision and extraction have been mentioned earlier in the book.	0.52591336
The bloodletting of the vein of the forehead is as valuable as the bloodletting of the cephalic for old face diseases, and for migraine, and for redness;	Venesection of the vein in the forehead is, after venesection of the cephalic, a relief to chronic diseases of the face such as pustules and scabs and erysipelas.	0.59364116
and the quality is that the patient squeezes his neck while twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", of which here is the shape:	Now I shall relate to you the method of cutting: you bind the patient's neck until the vessel stands out; then you take the instrument called the 'pickaxe'.	0.67593306
And place the point on the vein, and strike it with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount you want; then untie the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and sometimes work with a wide flame.	The spike in the head of the instrument you place on the vessel itself and then strike with a comb or some similar thing; and let the blood flow to the extent you wish; then loosen the band round the neck and bandage the vein until healed.	0.79572785
However, the flame should not be too sharp; and bleed transversely, because the bone is near, and the flame might break when it is thin.	Sometimes it is opened with a broad scalpel; the scalpel, however, should not have a sharp point like other scalpels but should be a little broader at the tip, and the vein is cut obliquely, because the bone is close and the scalpel, if it is too fine, may be broken on it.	0.59581155
The bloodletting of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts helps with the eyes, and ringworm, and redness, and stye in the eye, and face diseases;	Venesection of the two lachrymal veins gives relief in diseases of the eyes such as granular conjunctiva and inflammation and pannus, and in diseases of the face.	0.6662773
then bleed, and let the bleeding be transverse, a little along with a slightly wide flame, because there is no flesh there.	The incision should be oblique, slightly longitudinal, with a small, rather broad scalpel, for in this place there is no flesh; so if the knife have too narrow a point it may be broken on the bone.	0.5767734
And if the flame is thin, it might break; then let the blood flow, as much as you need, then tie cotton on it, and tie it well.	Then let flow what blood you wish, put cotton wool on both, tie for one night, then loosen.	0.5461941
The bloodletting of the vein of the nose is good for acute, and sudden frenzy, and face diseases, such as migraine and redness that comes on the face, and especially when it is old;	Venesection of the vein of the nose helps in acute fevers, in violent headache, and in diseases of the face such as the red pustules that arise on the nose, especially if they are chronic.	0.65739423
and the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient squeezes his neck, then squeeze his nose with your left hand, and take the thin long flame, and insert it in the middle of the upper lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not appear well there, and the blood will start flowing immediately;	This is how you make the incision: the patient binds his neck and then you hold his nose with your left hand and take a long fine scalpel and stick it in the middle of the very lobule of the nose, perpendicularly in the nasal septum (for the vein is not obvious at that spot) and blood will immediately flow out.	0.6890067
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then tie it for a night, because it heals very quickly;	You should advance the scalpel a little and cause the blood to flow as required; then bandage for one night, for it will quickly heal.	0.6729598
The bloodletting of the two jugular veins helps with the narrowing of breath, and the onset of measles, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and scrofula;	Venesection of the jugular veins helps tightness of breath and the early stage of elephantiasis, and the melancholic diseases arising on the surface of the skin, such as the black vitiligo and impetigo and malignant ulcers and cancrum oris.	0.51836216
and the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient squeezes his neck below one and the other, as we have said; and the master stands over the patient's head, and the patient sits on a seat,	Now the way to venesect them is for the patient to bind his neck below them both with a band; let the operator stand behind the patient and let the patient be seated upon a chair.	0.61088294
then bleed the vein lengthwise a little broadly, then draw the blood moderately, or as much as needed;	Then incise the vein longitudinally with a rather wide opening; then let a moderate amount of blood, or according to what you think necessary; then do the same with the other vein.	0.8236587
then do the same to the other vein, then untie the band, and squeeze both veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.	Then loosen the band and tie the veins with a moderate pressure lest the patient be suffocated; leave him until the next day and the wound will be healed.	0.79857093
Of the bleeding of the lips The bloodletting of the veins in the upper lips helps with bile in the mouth, and gum decay, and cracks in the lips, and nose and around.	The four veins of the lips: venesection of them is effective, second to section of the cephalic vein, for pustules on the mouth and rotting of the gums and malignant ulcers and fissures of the lips and for malignant ulcer in the nose and round about.	0.5830452
And the quality of the bloodletting is to make the patient sit before you, and squeeze his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, of which one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them because they are black, and because there are small black veins around them: then cut both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,	The way to venesect is to seat the patient in front of you and bind a sash round his neck, then roll back his lips and look for the two veins, one of which you will see to the left and the other to the right; their dark colour will show them up against the lip and also the fact that round them are fine dark veins; so cut down upon both, dividing them. But if you are in doubt about the matter and are not sure what they are, set about incising the largest and most obvious.	0.80727506
then cut both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then cut the largest on each side, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.	But if you are in doubt about the matter and are not sure what they are, set about incising the largest and most obvious. Do the same with the two veins in the upper lip.	0.6448077
Of the bleeding under the tongue The bloodletting of the veins under the tongue helps after the bloodletting of the cephalic vein, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and diseases of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth;	The two veins under the tongue: their venesection is, after section of the cephalic, of good effect in the quinsy arising in the throat from disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.	0.6681377
and the procedure is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and raises his tongue, and you look under each side for a black vein:	The way to venesect them is to seat the patient before you in the sunlight and raise his tongue, and look, and you will see beneath the tongue one vein on each side, blackish in colour.	0.75029004
then bleed both, and do not go too deep, because the arteries are below.	Cut them; but be careful not to go too far in your incision, for beneath them lie arteries from which there may be haemorrhage.	0.62355745
The veins of the elbow from which bloodletting is commonly done are treated in two ways:	The three veins that are opened in the elbow are the veins which universal custom has used for bloodletting.	0.50502795
either by pricking with a broad myrtle flame, or a fine olive-shaped flame like cutting knives, and it is called "anesil"; and they are broad or fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the myrtle flame is very renowned, and is broad as you see:	There are two ways of venesecting these: either by piercing with a broad myrtle-leaf scalpel or a rather fine olivary; or by cutting with a knife-edged scalpel, the lancet whose figure follows. The broad myrtle-leaf scalpel.	0.6614373
And it is used to open swollen veins full of apparent thick blood, and that contain thick and cloudy blood; and here is the shape of the olive flame:	As you see, it should be broad so as to serve for opening hollow, full, outstanding, obvious and thick veins, and those containing turbid blood. The olivary scalpel.	0.6860725
and it is more finely pointed, and is for bleeding fine veins, where there is fine citrine blood.	It is suitable for venesecting fine veins that contain thin jaundiced blood. The lancet. This is the lancet for making a slit.	0.5995585
The bloodletting of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, in the neck, in the chest, and in the abdomen;	The basilic vein, which is one of these three vessels, helps, when cut, by extracting blood from disorders below the throat and neck, in the parts neighbouring the chest and abdomen.	0.7312051
and it is necessary for the bloodletter to bleed carefully, and to avoid the artery that is below. And if he cuts the artery, and bleeding occurs, it must be stopped, as I have said; and the flame should not be pricking, but cutting like an anesil.	When one venesects it one must be careful and wary of it, for beneath the vein is an artery, so that if one is inaccurate and sticks the scalpel in too far one will cut the artery and cause a haemorrhage; therefore venesection of it should not be done with a transfixing scalpel but should be an incision with the lancet.	0.70118463
And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, it is necessary to squeeze it, and change to another; or you seek a branch of it, or you bleed in its place the vein in the middle of the arm: it appears clearly; and cut it with the anesil flame, as we have said.	If the basilic vein is not clearly discernible, leave it and turn to another, or look for a branch of it; or venesect the brachial cord instead, for that is evident; incise it with the lancet as we have said.	0.8613978
And if you want to know the place of the bloodletting, it is necessary before squeezing the arm, to touch the place until you know the pulse; then mark the place with ink, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with the anesil flame;	But if you wish to open the basilic vein itself you should, before you bandage the arm, palpate the place till the site of pulsation is found; then mark it with ink; then bind the arm and cut the vein obliquely with the lancet as we said, and take care that the stroke fall some way from the artery.	0.799618
and beware of hitting the artery when you see the place swelling, because it is from the artery: avoid it then.	If, when tying the bandage, you see a swelling in the place that you have marked with ink, that swelling is the inflation of the artery, so avoid it.	0.6451449
And if you see it spurting up like a child's urine, and the blood is red and fine, know that it is arterial blood: then hasten, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops, which often happens;	And if, on section, you see the blood spurt out like a child's urine, and it is clear and red, then you may know that it is arterial blood; so then be quick and put your finger upon it for a long while; then remove your finger and if the bleeding stops, as it often will, then bind up the arm and leave it.	0.89689726
then tie the arm, and leave it like this, and do not let the patient move it; and be on guard, and do not let him move it until it is healed.	Caution the patient against neglecting it; let him be careful and not move it for some days, until it heals.	0.6159605
And if the blood does not stop, and it overwhelms you, and you do not have medicine, then cut the artery if it appears, because the ends will retract; and stop the blood.	But if the bleeding is not stayed but resists your treatment and you have no medicament there at the time, then cut the vessel through if you can see it; for the two ends will contract and the haemorrhage will stop.	0.7831558
And take a piece of pistachio bark, and split it, and take one half and tie it well until the next day;	Or else take a pistachio nut shell and split it and take one half and bind it over the site of the haemorrhage with a pad and bandage until next day.	0.6626942
if the blood stops, that is good; if not, then treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding;	The bleeding may stop; if not, then treat by those means mentioned previously, namely the application of styptic powders.	0.6605195
and the stopping is not difficult in many situations due to the small place of the wound, and the pressure of the arm band.	It is not difficult in most cases to stop the bleeding, because the wound is small and it is easy to bandage the arm.	0.7125056
The bloodletting of the middle vein helps as it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said;	Venesection of the median vein results in drawing off blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; this being due to the fact, as we said, that it is composed of a branch of the cephalic and a branch of the basilic veins.	0.82619673
and it is necessary for the bloodletter to avoid the nerve that is below, and if he pricks too deeply, and finds the nerve, and it swells and the healing is difficult, and perhaps it cannot heal;	The venesector should be very careful in opening it because there is a nerve beneath; and if he takes the scalpel too deep and hits that nerve it will cause stupor, the healing of which will be difficult and perhaps even impossible.	0.68489087
and this nerve appears many times, and if it does not appear in some people due to its fineness, then it is necessary to bleed it with the anesil instrument; and avoid the nerve as much as you can.	Generally this nerve can be felt, but if in some persons it lies hidden and is slender and not discernible, then you should make your venesection an incision with the lancet and diligently avoid the nerve.	0.5832628
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it lengthwise.	If the vein lies between two nerves you should cut it longitudinally.	0.8237085
The bloodletting of the cephalic vein helps, as it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;	The cephalic vein: section of it is effective in drawing blood from the head and in diseases of the eyes.	0.6686417
and it is necessary to bleed by pricking with the olive flame or the myrtle flame, because it is the safest of all the veins, as there is neither nerve nor artery below it.	Particularly in this vein you ought, if you wish to incise it, to make your incision by puncturing with the olivary or the broad myrtle-leaf scalpel, for this is the safest of all veins as there is neither artery nor nerve beneath.	0.75960946
However, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and it does not matter if one fails the first time, and one tries again; and perhaps the place swells in some people, when one fails the first time, but it does not matter. The quality of the bloodletting is according to your thought.	When you are cutting it you have only to avoid with the scalpel the head of the muscle and to look for the soft place. It will not injure it, if at the first cut you miss the vein, to repeat the incision several times; except that in some people it will sometimes swell up if the section is not made at the first stroke; nevertheless that swelling will do him no harm. The manner of venesection, the accidents that may supervene, and the necessary preliminaries for performing it properly.	0.6229899
The first thing you should know about bloodletting is that it is administered only to maintain health,	First you should know that venesection may be employed either for the preservation of health or in cases of disease.	0.56931955
and to avoid future illnesses; and the bloodletting should be done in one of the three veins that are in the elbow: that is, cephalic, median, and basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring on an empty stomach, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of repletion appear;	When used for the preservation and maintenance of health and for guarding against the occurrence of disease, the venesection should be in one of the three vessels at the elbow, cephalic, median, or basilic; and it must be performed at the beginning of spring when the signs of repletion appear.	0.76113164
and one should bleed on the first or the third day, after two or three hours of the day.	The venesection should be done on a Sunday or Tuesday, after three hours of the day have passed.	0.62151843
The bloodletting that is administered for illnesses has no fixed time, but whenever necessary, day or night, at all hours and at all times;	On the other hand, venesection administered for diseases has no fixed hour but when need and necessity arise, either by night or by day, at any hour, in any season.	0.8056214
and children should not be bled until fourteen years old, nor pregnant women except from the fourth month to the seventh. Nor should old people who have passed sixty years old be bled.	Children should not be venesected until their fourteenth year, nor should you venesect old men of over sixty years.	0.80789566
And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary to cleanse the intestines with a light enema, if there is a lot of retained feces, so that the veins do not draw the rotten superfluities from the intestines that harm the principal members;	When anyone has decided to be bled, for whatever reason, first of all his bowels must be purged with a gentle enema if they contain much excrement, lest at the venesection putrid superfluities be drawn from the bowels into the veins, that might harm the chief parts of the body.	0.7598476
and one who is too full of food, or who is drunk, until it is out, or hydropic, should not be bled;	No one suffering from indigestion or surfeit or drunkenness should be venesected until recovered from these; nor a dropsical patient.	0.64335203
and one should avoid bloodletting after colic pain, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and excessive intercourse, and work, and staying awake, and fasting, and anything that exhausts the strength, whether by soul or body;	Beware also of venesection after stomach-trouble or vomiting or diarrhoea or much intercourse or fatigue or exercise or sleeplessness or fasting and anything else that diminishes the strength both bodily and spiritual.	0.74090004
then refine the humors, if the blood is thick, by food and drinks and medicines, if you have the power;	Then, beforehand, see to the refining of the humours, if the blood be thick, by means of food and drink and medicines, if that is practicable for him.	0.75064
then enter the bath, if nothing forbids it, to refine the blood,	Then, if there is no contra-indication, let him enter the bath; or let him take a little exercise to make the blood thin.	0.68002045
and bleed yourself from the vein of the arm around the third hour, as we have said;	Then perform the venesection in the early part of the day, as we have said.	0.5591243
and avoid work, and pain, and lust, and similar things that day;	Let him endeavour on that day to have his mind free from all such evil spiritual affections as anxiety, anger, or fear; and from all bodily affections such as excessive fatigue and weariness and intercourse and the like.	0.614884
and be happy and joyful, and let the bloodletter be higher than the one being bled, and rub his arm two or three times,	Then let him stretch out his arm, and let the venesector chafe it two or three times with his hand; then he should bind a bandage round it by means of thongs twisted two or three times.	0.5923963
then tie the band above moderately, because if it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow;	The ligature should be moderately tight, for any other sort of ligature, be it too tight or too loose, will hinder the flow of blood.	0.6166885
then rub the place with your hands, until the veins swell, and can be felt;	After putting on the tourniquet the patient about to be venesected should chafe his own hands together until the veins swell up and become obvious.	0.50494134
then the bloodletter moistens the flame with a bit of old oil, then places his left finger on that vein below the place where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not flee and avoid the prick. Because there are veins that flee like cords when being bled, and some that are full of wind, so that when the flame is applied, it retracts the flame, and the vein cannot open, and so it is with those;	Then the venesector should wipe over his knife with a little olive-oil, preferably old. Then he should place the forefinger of his left hand on the vessel itself below the place where he wishes to cut, lightly, so that the vein does not slip away and elude the stroke; for there are some veins that you may find like cords slipping away at venesection, while others are filled with flatus and when the knife is applied to them they contract under it and deceive the operator and the knife fails to open the vein or makes only a narrow opening.	0.8123536
And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; if not, then try again a little below or above that place quickly, if the place is not swollen.	Then he should apply the knife and if the vein is opened first time, good; but if not, let him repeat a little lower down or a little above, quickly, if the place does not swell.	0.89416635
And if the place is swollen, and the patient is frightened, leave it for one or two days, and do not tie the arm: perhaps a hot abscess will come; do not enter the bath, then try the bloodletting again if he likes;	If it does swell or the patient be anxious, then leave him for a day or two and do not bandage, for that might perhaps provoke an abscess; nor let him go to the bath. Then if he likes, let the venesection be repeated.	0.82059586
and if the opening is small, or the blood flows slowly and you doubt that enough blood will come out, then prick in that same opening with the flame directly;	If the knife has made an opening but it is small and the flow of blood is feeble and you fear that the amount of blood you require will not come out, then gently insert the knife again straight into the same opening and widen it a little.	0.7460089
and open it a little quickly, before the place is swollen; because this often happens when the wound is small.	Do this speedily before the place swells up; for in many people the place swells up at once from a small opening.	0.791082
If you see the place swelling, do not start the bloodletting again, and put on a bit of oil dregs, because it relieves the flow of blood, and in this place the dregs are better than the oil;	But if you see it swell up, on no account make another incision for it will be ineffectual; but apply to it a little lees of oil, for that will facilitate the flow of blood; it is superior in this situation to the oil itself and to all other unguents.	0.735266
and thus administer the oil dregs in each bloodletting when you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood;	Therefore use lees of oil in all cases of venesection when the flow of blood is hindered.	0.6900896
and the same is done by theriac and mud, when applied to the place; it refines the blood and spreads it when it is too thick.	The great theriac and shakhzanaya both have the same effect, for when the blood is thick it is rendered thin and running.	0.6178094
And if a large abscess appears, which often happens, especially when it is not bled except at that time when the vein opening is small, then hasten, and put on the place a sponge soaked in water and a little warm salt, and press it for an hour;	If there occur a big tumour at the site of venesection, as often happens, especially with a man who has not previously undergone venesection or if the opening in the vein be small, then quickly apply to the place a sponge soaked in lukewarm salt and water and bandage it for a while, then it will go down.	0.74164236
and it is necessary to do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if any blackness or greenness remains in the place after a few days, it does not harm him; and if you wish, put on something of aloe or myrrh mixed in the juice of calamint, mustard, or similar.	You should do this after the blood has gone out altogether from the same vessel or from another one. If there remain after some days some discoloration or greenness at the site it will not hurt; if you like, apply some solution of myrrh and aloes, or juice of penny-royal or something similar.	0.8475403
And many times an abscess and appearance occur with the bloodletting of the basilic vein: then put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the touch of the hand, then that appearance is bad. Avoid then putting on anything of what we have said, because perhaps blood will flow from the artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healed.	Often in section of the basilic vein there occurs tumour and swelling. Put your hand upon it, and if you find that it sinks when pressed then it is a harmful swelling; be careful not to apply to it any of the things we have told you; for often arterial blood comes from it. But apply a poultice with some styptic qualities, to harden the place; then treat in the usual way until healed.	0.87347543
And draw blood from each according to the amount of his strength, and the color of the blood.	Now in each case you should extract blood in proportion to the person's strength and to the prevailing colour of the blood.	0.6875353
Because if the blood is black, let it flow until it is red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it is refined; and if it is too hot, let it cool.	If the blood be black, let it flow until it becomes red; in the same way, if you see it is thick, let it run until it is thin; and again, if it be sharp, until its sharpness is gone.	0.8841095
And for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, make a larger wound, and let the flame be broad;	In the case that is plethoric, robust, and requiring venesection just the once, the incision should be wide and the knife should be broad.	0.4930024
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and let him be bled little and often, and bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking;	And on the contrary for the debilitated person, in whose case you should venesect several times and the opening should be small.	0.60764325
and this manner of bloodletting is safe from bleeding and cutting the nerve, and is better than longitudinal or broad bleeding.	This manner of venesecting is safe from haemorrhage and from cutting the nerve; it is better and safer than cutting straight across or straight along.	0.8518959
And for one whose body fails from the bloodletting, give him bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if he is hot, draw blood three or four times.	To the patient who habitually faints during venesection you should give to eat beforehand a little bread macerated in the juice of unripe pomegranates or oxymel, if he be of a warm temperament; and draw off the blood in three or four instalments.	0.7197857
And if he is of a cold complexion, let him eat before the bloodletting bread soaked in mulled syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup.	And if he be of a cold temperament let him take beforehand bread macerated in syrup of quinces or in aromatic syrup of honey or in fragrant syrup of basil.	0.7674438
And if he faints from the bloodletting, after the flow of much blood, it is necessary for him to inhale meat broth, and a subtle scented syrup,	If the patient faints during venesection and the cause is great loss of blood, then be should be given to drink meat-juice and thin syrup of basil; and he should perfume himself with galia moschata and anoint his chest with it.	0.69495213
and use the other things we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.	And for the rest, use what we have spoken of in its place in the chapter dealing with fainting due to evacuation.	0.6422421
And if he wants to air his arm, and bleed again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bloodletting, that he be bled little by little, according to the amount of his strength continuously.	As for him who wishes to ease his arm and draw off blood a second time, when he is undergoing the venesection on account of great evacuation and the lowness of his strength, you should let the blood slowly, in proportion to his strength, on successive days.	0.7754247
And if he wants to air his arm after the first bloodletting, and he has a strong body, let him be bled seven hours after the first bloodletting, or after the ninth hour.	For him who wishes to ease his arm and draw off blood a second time, being of robust body, it must be done seven or nine hours from the first venesection.	0.76004493
And if he wants to be bled again elsewhere, let him be bled on the second or third day.	He who wishes to draw blood from his body to the side opposite to that toward which it tends, should be eased on the second or third day.	0.702982
Because there is much blood in the body that is already heated, and it causes fever; so it is necessary to draw a large amount, and widen the opening until he falls into a faint; then you consider all the conditions of bloodletting, and place your hand on his pulse when he faints, so that death does not come in place of fainting, and this often happens, when the bloodletter is negligent;	He who has abundant blood that has become hot and sharp and has produced fever should be bled at one time, and a large amount should be taken with a wide opening, until he faints (all the rules of venesection having been observed by you); but you should keep your finger on the pulse while the blood flows lest death take the place of fainting, for that often happens when the venesector is ignorant and there is carelessness.	0.78055596
and it is not necessary when you want to untie the arm, and make the blood flow a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press firmly on it; nor if it is curved, that he stretches the arm quickly, because that would be harmful;	If you wish to loosen the arm and let blood a second time and you find that the opening of the vein is now closed up and the outflow of blood is difficult, you should not press hard upon it nor twist the arm violently, for that is very harmful.	0.8237393
but leave it until he bleeds a second time; or you prick it with the point of the flame, until the blood that is clotted at the opening of the vein flows out, and put on a bit of salt dissolved in water, and press lightly.	Either you must leave him a while and then bleed him again; or the clot of blood can be removed from the opening of the vein by using the blade of the scalpel, or by applying some salt dissolved in water; or apply some of the great theriac or shakhzanaya; and put light pressure upon it until the blood comes out.	0.73707366
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not press it, until the abscess is calmed.	But if the vein has begun to swell, leave it and do not touch it until the swelling has subsided.	0.7779775
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, bleed in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.	And if you are unavoidably called to let blood again, venesect either above the place or in the other arm or another vessel.	0.8236842
The vein in the middle of the arm is bled in place of the head vein because it is composed.	Section of the cord of the arm: this is cut in place of the median and basilic veins when these are not to be found or are hidden; for this vein is composed of those two.	0.4345593
And the manner of bloodletting is that the patient puts his hand in warm water, until the armpit is red;	The way to venesect it is for the patient to dip his hand in hot water until the forearm is red from the warmth and the vessel stands out distinctly.	0.72792184
then tie moderately, so that the vein appears well, then bleed it immediately across, not lengthwise or breadthwise;	Then bandage a little above it with a moderate pressure, and then cut the vein a little obliquely, neither transversely nor longitudinally.	0.71348387
and let the opening be large, and let it be bled very near the joint of the hand, and if the blood cannot flow, then put the hand back in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough;	The incision should be broad, and you should make the cut a little above the wrist. If the blood does not flow easily, have the hand again put into the vessel of hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have extracted what is needed.	0.7506349
and if it is in summer, do not put the hand back in warm water, because it is used more in winter than in summer;	If it be in the summer time you may be able to dispense with putting the hand back into the hot water; it is mainly in winter that you let the blood flow into hot water.	0.6782261
and the bloodletting of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there is no artery or nerve.	Venesection of this vessel is safer than all others for beneath it there is neither artery nor nerve.	0.8666864
The bloodletting of the salvatory vein of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:	Section of the salvatella of the right hand is efficacious in case of diseases of the liver.	0.6031714
squeeze the hand, and put it in warm water, until the vein is swollen, so that it is visible; and bleed it across, and if you cut it completely, it does not matter;	The method of venesecting it is to tie a band round the wrist or grip it with your hand, after you have put it in hot water until the vein is swollen up and is plainly to be felt; then cut it somewhat obliquely; if you cut it right through that will not matter at all.	0.6781384
and do not go too deep, because the nerves are all exposed without flesh underneath,	But be careful not to go too far with the knife, for underneath there are the tendons of the fingers and the place is bare of flesh.	0.5632885
and then put the hand back in warm water, if the blood is clotted in the wound, and cannot flow out.	Then put the hand again into hot water and let the blood flow; for if you do not put it into hot water again the blood will clot in the opening and will be prevented from flowing.	0.82208645
And when you have drawn as much blood as you need, put oil and salt on the vein to close it quickly, and do the same for each branch.	When you have extracted the required quantity of blood, put oil and salt on the vein so that it does not heal too quickly. You should act thus with every narrow branch.	0.85000855
The bloodletting of the same vein in the left hand is good for the disease of the spleen, and do just as I have told you for the right.	Incision of the salvatella of the left hand is of value in diseases of the spleen. Venesection of it should be carried out in the same manner as you did in the other.	0.66329217
The bloodletting of the saphenous vein is good for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the womb, retention of menses, diseases of the kidneys, thighs, and old leg ailments, and similar diseases.	Venesection of the saphena is beneficial in diseases of the lower part of the body, such as afflictions of the uterus and retention of the menses, and for diseases of the kidneys, and for chronic ulcers of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.	0.8442726
And the procedure of its bloodletting is that the patient puts his foot in warm water, and rubs the vein until it appears, and tie above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and many branches go above the foot;	Now the manner of venesection is for the patient to put his foot in hot water, then friction should be applied to it until the veins fill up; then bind a thong over the joint of the foot; then the site of the vein at the ankle is shown up running toward the big toe and forming many branches on the surface of the foot.	0.8383497
then bleed the largest branch, or at the ankle, which is very beneficial.	Then make your incision either in the broadest branch or at the ankle before it ramifies, for that is better and safer.	0.63192844
And if you bleed it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and bleed it across as if cutting; and let the flame be anesil.	If you venesect it on the surface of the foot, be careful of the tendons that are beneath on the surface of the foot. Make the incision obliquely as though you were cutting the vein through. The knife should be a lancet.	0.6888338
And if the blood cannot flow out, put the foot back in the water, and let the vein empty well.	If the flow of blood be impeded, put the foot back again into hot water and let the blood flow out into it until it is evacuated.	0.7638874
And if the bloodletter fails the first time, start again a second time a little above, because the place is dirty; and do not fear the nerve, as we have said, and do the same for the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.	If the venesector makes a mistake the first time in the vein to be cut, let him repeat the section a little higher up, for the.place is safe; you need fear no mischief as long as you are careful of the tendons, as we said before. In the same way you may deal with the saphena of the other foot.	0.76395375
The place of the sciatic vein is at the outer ankle, and its bloodletting is good for hip pain, when it is due to hot blood.	Now the position of the sciatic vein is, as we said, on the outside near the heel. Section of it is effective in pain in the hip when it arises from hot blood.	0.7588407
And the procedure of its bloodletting is that the patient enters the bath, and squeezes above the ankle four fingers' width, twisting,	The way to venesect it is to make the patient get into the bath. Then hasten and bandage his leg from the hip to a distance of four fingers above the heel, with a long narrow bandage; for only this will cause it to appear.	0.6571021
because otherwise the vein does not appear; and if it appears, bleed it in all the ways you can, and across; and it is much better to cut it, because the place is safe, and it is very well defined in many people.	When it has appeared then open it in whatever way you can; at an angle, which is best, or right through, or only cut it open, for it is a safe place.	0.63420725
and it is much better to cut it, because the place is safe, and it is very well defined in many people. And if you cannot find it, bleed any branch of it that appears on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;	But in many people it is very hard to find; and if you do not find it or it is in no way palpable, then venesect one of its branches, which will be seen on the surface of the foot towards the fourth toe and the little toe. Be careful of the tendons, and let the amount of blood you require.	0.72481257
and let as much blood flow as you wish, then untie the band, and put on cotton and press it; it is now healed.	Be careful of the tendons, and let the amount of blood you require. Then loosen the bandage and apply cotton wool to the site of the section and bandage the place; it will heal quickly.	0.6811991

chapter-2-subchapter-96.txt
Cupping glasses are made of horn, brass, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.	Cupping-vessels are made of horn, wood, bronze, or glass. Cupping is carried out in two ways: one with scarification and drawing blood, and the other without scarification.	0.832498
And this cupping that is without pricking is done in two ways: either with fire, or without fire;	The latter, cupping without scarification, may be carried out in two ways: with fire and without fire.	0.772486
and two others on the two sides of the neck; and the cup below the chin; and the cups on the two shoulders; and the cup on the loins; and the cups in the middle of the two arms; and the cups on the two legs; and the cups on the two ankles; and cupping does not draw blood, except from the small veins that are scattered in the flesh,	The points at which cupping with scarification and extraction of blood is performed are fourteen places in the body: the occiput, which is the back of the head; the interscapular region, which is the middle of the back of the neck; the two sides of the neck, equally on both sides; the chin, that is, beneath the lower jaw; the two shoulders; the coccyx, at the base of the tail; the antibrachium, the middle of the forearms; the two legs; and the two heel-veins.	0.72463703
and therefore it does not weaken one, as bloodletting from a vein does; and it is not necessary for it to be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.	What cupping does is to draw blood out of the fine vessels dispersed over the flesh; for this reason it does not cause the strength to decline as does venesection; nor may you use cupping, either with fire or without fire, in any disease due to plethora, until the whole body has been evacuated.	0.837758
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to cup, or by custom, we will administer it at each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle and at any time;	If disease or custom prescribe cupping we may apply it at any hour, at the beginning or end or middle of the month, at whatever time it may be.	0.7494081
because there are those who, when they need cupping, have a heavy head;	For there are some people who, when there is an abundance of blood in them, so as to need cupping, feel heaviness and pain in the head.	0.7075524
and there are those who find repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and in their neck, and dimness in their eyes;	Some find they have a fullness and redness of the face and also of the head and neck; some have an itching in their face and forehead and a dimness and irritation in their eyes.	0.8418411
and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood; and there are those who dream, and see by night blood and wounded and dead and similar things.	There are some who scratch the places where the cupping-vessels are applied; some laugh immoderately; some find a taste of blood in the mouth, and the gums swell up and they spit blood; some sleep overmuch; some frequently dream of seeing blood and redness and murdered men and wounds and the like.	0.775108
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we recommend cupping after three hours of the day.	So when we see anything of this kind, and especially if it be in the middle third of the month, we thereupon prescribe cupping after the second or third hour of the day has passed.	0.73697203
The bloodletting of the scalp helps with the heaviness of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary for it to be after the evacuation of the whole body;	The effect of cupping the nape of the neck is to help in heaviness of the head and in a fluxion of humours into the eyes; but it should be done after a complete evacuation of the body.	0.65826213
and this cupping is in place of the bloodletting of the cephalic vein,	This use of cupping may take the place of venesection of the cephalic vein.	0.62363195
and it is not necessary for those who are of a cold complexion to use it, or who have catarrh, because it greatly harms them;	But anyone suffering from coldness of the brain or catarrh should beware of using it, for this will cause serious harm.	0.6654773
and therefore it is not necessary for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold diseases in the head.	So it should not be employed on old men or on anyone suffering from a cold disease of the head.	0.8125012
And those who are often bled with it, become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the cup a little lower to avoid forgetfulness.	If anyone becomes addicted to it it brings about oblivion. You should therefore bid the cupper bring the cupping-vessel a little lower down lest oblivion supervene.	0.6327847
The cupping in the middle of the neck is in place of the bloodletting of the head and the basilic vein, and therefore it is good for the constriction of the chest, and the fissure of the bronchial tube, and cough, and repletion;	Now as to the application of cupping-vessels to the interscapular region: it is instead of venesection of the median and basilic veins; so it is effective for asthma and dyspnoea and for rupture of the organ of respiration, and for cough and plethora.	0.6399743
and it is necessary to press it lightly, because if it holds too firmly, it causes forgetfulness or stomach and heart problems.	The cupping of the interscapular region should be made a little high, for if it is too low it will bring about weakness of the heart and stomach.	0.49948177
The cupping on the two sides of the neck is good for head pains, and ophthalmia and migraine, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth,	Cupping the sides of the neck helps in pains occurring in the head, ophthalmia, migraine, and in quinsy and in pain at the roots of the teeth; it replaces venesection of the basilic vein.	0.75678736
and it is in place of the bloodletting of the basilic vein; and it is necessary to instruct the bloodletter to press his hand when placing it, so that he does not cut the artery, and bleeding does not occur.	And you should bid the cupper not to scarify very deeply lest he cut an artery and cause haemorrhage.	0.5362864
The cupping below the chin is good for mouth diseases, and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in place of the bloodletting of the two lips.	The application of cupping under thé chin helps against ulcers in the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar diseases of the mouth ; and may replace venesection of the four labial vessels.	0.7339249
The cupping on the shoulders is good for diseases that come from heat and repletion.	The application of cupping to the shoulders helps in palpitation of the heart arising from plethora and heat.	0.67920697
The cupping on the elbows is as good as the bloodletting of the three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins;	These capillaries draw blood from other larger veins till the drawing reaches those three great veins.	0.62395555
and instruct the bloodletter not to prick too deeply, because the place is bare of flesh, and nerves and arteries are underneath.	You should bid the person who applies the vessels not to scarify deeply; for the place is bare of flesh and there are tendons and arteries beneath.	0.7987757
The cup on the loins is good for hemorrhoids of the anus, and diseases below, and it is necessary for the cup to be large, and made of brass, because it needs to draw well; and perhaps, if it were fine, it would break; and it makes large wounds.	The application of a single cupping-vessel to the coccyx is effective for haemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers of the lower abdomen. You must tell the cupper that the cupping-vessel should be large and of bronze, for the place requires strong suction, and a glass cupping-vessel may break; and he should scarify deeply.	0.6941534
The cups on the legs bleed openly, because they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the kidneys, and the womb, and the bladder, and bring back the menses; and they are in place of the two saphenous veins, and the two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and cause fainting in many situations.	Cupping applied to both legs reduces plethora manifestly, because it draws off blood from the whole body, and so is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys and uterus and bladder; and brings on the menses. It also serves for pustules and boils; and takes the place of venesection of the saphenous veins and the heel-veins. But it greatly exhausts the body and causes fainting in most people.	0.83264565
The way to apply the cup is to place it first empty, and suck lightly, and place it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this, until you see the place red and swollen, and the redness of the blood appears; then prick, and replace the cups, and be careful with the disposition of the bodies, because there are those who have tender flesh, and clear pores: then it is necessary to prick only once, and make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.	The way to apply the cupping-vessels: the vessel is first put in position empty; then you suck moderately; do not long hold the cupping-vessel in place, but apply it quickly and remove it quickly so that the humours gather evenly at the place; and go on doing it time after time until the place is seen to redden and to swell, and the redness of blood is manifested. Then scarify, and repeat the suction very gently; then consider the bodily condition. The person who is tender of flesh and porous of skin you should scarify once only, not more, lest the place ulcerate.	0.8661089
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to prick twice: the first time to refine the way for the thick blood.	If there be a thickness of the blood he should scarify twice; the first time to make a way out for the thinner blood and serum; and the second time to complete the extraction of the thick blood.	0.69280386
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to prick a third time; and when we want to draw a little blood, it is sufficient to prick only once.	If the blood be very turbid let him scarify a third time for completion. In general, one scarification is enough when we wish to draw a little thick blood; but if we wish to draw much blood we make more scarifications.	0.84562147
And if we want to draw a lot of blood, we repeat often; and if the blood is thick, prick deeply, and the end is that the heart is pierced suddenly,	If we judge that the blood is thick we should scarify deeply. A fair depth for the scarification is the thickness of the skin, and no more.	0.54726744
and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and narrow pores, that you anoint the places of the cups with opening and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or gourd seed oil;	He whose skin is thick, solid, desiccated, and narrow of pore: the operator should anoint the place with opening and emollient and resolving oils; if it be in the summer season, with, for example, oil of yellow gilliflower or of violets or of sweet almonds or of pumpkin-seeds.	0.86819285
and if it is in winter, with watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.	If it be in winter, with narcissus oil or oil of lilies or camomile oil, or of jasmine, or the like.	0.8711561
And if the superfluities are thick and cold, take amaranth oil, or balsamite oil, or dill oil, and the like.	And if the superfluity be thick and cold, then with oil of marjoram or oil of wild thyme or oil of ben or oil of dill.	0.77860355
And if the one being bled has tender flesh and large pores, it is not necessary to apply oil,	If he who is to be cupped has wide-open pores and tender flesh, he should be forbidden oil.	0.75224227
but it is necessary to wash him after the cupping with rose water, or cold water, or nightshade water, or gourd water, or purslane water, or something similar.	After cupping, such people should wash the sites with rose-water or cold water or water of black nightshade or of gourds or of garden purslain, or the like.	0.776173
And those who have a lot of moisture, rise from wormwood, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.	But he whose blood is very humid should wash the sites of his cupping with vinegar or water of myrtle or sumac, and the like.	0.633597
And those who have thick superfluities rise from old wine, or elder water, or dill or chamomile decoction, or others similar;	He that has thick superfluities should wash the sites of his cupping with old wine or water of purslain or decoction of dill or of camomile or the like.	0.7128387
and it is not necessary to bleed with a cup before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath one or two hours; and do not sleep after the cupping,	One should beware of cupping in the bath or just after the bath, but should use the vessels one or two hours after leaving the bath. And no one should sleep after cupping.	0.87094945
and it is necessary to be cautious, when he should be cupped and when he is cupped. And be careful if the one being bled is choleric, and if the blood is too sharp and inflamed; then it is necessary to take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce with wormwood, and similar things;	It is necessary for you first to consider, and if he that is to be cupped or venesected be bilious, and bitterness and inflammation prevail in his blood, he should take cooling things such as pomegranates and endive with vinegar and lettuce and oxymel and julep, and the like.	0.76284105
and eat chickens, and castrated meat, and moist foods.	His diet should be chicken and mutton made into stews with vinegar, and soups with verjuice, and the like.	0.4175831
And those who have a cold complexion, take honey syrup, and medium-scented wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat chickens and small birds and pigeons;	The man of frigid constitution should drink syrup of honey or syrup of quince or spiced oxymel; he should also take perfumed raisin wine, not too old and not too new; he should be bidden to be moderate in eating and should make his diet young pullets and larks and sparrows and young pigeons in white stews.	0.68410987
and on the day he will be cupped, he should drink more than eat;	And on the day of cupping and venesection he should drink rather than eat.	0.7448194
and it is necessary to give some people sometimes theriac or nutmeg before cupping, or after, to comfort the principal members; and let the blood be refined, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.	It may sometimes be necessary to have some people drink the great theriac or musk-medicine or shllitha before cupping and before or after venesection, to strengthen the chief parts and to render the blood thin; but these draughts should not be given to the feverish.	0.80759126
The cups that are applied without pricking are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and on gout, and on the stomach and the abdomen and the kidneys and the hips, because those members do not tolerate pricking well,	Cupping without scarification is the cupping practised on the liver, the spleen, the breasts, the belly, the umbilicus, the region of the kidneys and the acetabulum of the femur; for these parts do not tolerate scarification.	0.69317883
and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we place them on the breasts when the nose bleeds; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place cups on the stomach and the abdomen to reduce the member;	Now the purpose of the vessels is either to draw blood from one part to another, as when we apply cups over the breasts in the case of nose-bleed; or to loosen from the part a frigid vapour that has become fixed in it, as when we place cupping-vessels on the abdomen and umbilicus; for they stimulate the part and warm it and remove the pain because they loosen the vapour.	0.7607572
and it removes the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the obstruction, or moves the stone from its place;	Sometimes they are applied over the kidneys when there is an obstruction or stones in them; for often, by virtue of their drawing, the obstruction is opened up or the stones are dislodged from their site.	0.60372806
and so it does when it is placed on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained wind,	They act in the same way when they are applied over the liver and the spleen when flatus is permeating them.	0.58154684
and these cups are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water,	These cupping-vessels may be used empty with suction only; or they may be used with fire. Sometimes in pleuritic complaints they are applied filled with tepid water.	0.7303679
as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a manner that the cup is filled with pure warm water, or water in which herbs suitable for this have been boiled.	Sometimes in pleuritic complaints they are applied filled with tepid water. This is done by filling the vessel, which should be large, with plain hot water, or with hot water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.	0.7204286
The shape of the cup administered with fire is this:	This is the figure of the cupping-vessel for use with fire.	0.52625334
It should be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and have on the side around the middle a small hole, like to insert a needle,	Its mouth should be the width of two opened fingers, as we have illustrated; the depth should be half a span; and in the side about halfway down there should be a small hole of a size to admit a needle.	0.8169354
and it should be of brass, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the member;	The edge should be thick, smooth, even, and polished, so as not to injure the part to which it is applied.	0.5279017
and it should have in the middle a transverse rod of brass or iron, to place a lit candle,	And in the middle there should be a transverse rod of bronze or iron to carry the lighted lamp.	0.8573216
and there should be large and small ones according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;	You may make this kind of cupping-vessel in a large size, larger than we have described; and in a small size too, to suit various ailments and the age of the user.	0.46618265
because the cups for children are different from those for the old, and for the thin than for the fat.	For the cupping-vessels for boys and thin persons differ from those for men and stout persons.	0.6986186
And one should place this cup on the member in this way:	Now this is the manner of applying this cupping-vessel with fire to a part of the body.	0.4712079
take the candle of wax or a wick, and place it in the middle of the cup across the rod that is in the middle of the cup, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cup so that it does not burn the patient;	You set light to a strongly twisted wick of linen or a small wax candle, and you set it on the middle of the cross-piece in the middle of the vessel so that the flame be directed toward the lower part of the cupping vessel and not burn the patient's body.	0.7308264
and then place it on the member, and your fingers should be on the hole we mentioned, so that when you want, the vapor goes out, and you remove the cup;	Then the vessel should be placed on the part with the finger kept over the above-mentioned hole; then when we have held the vessel sufficiently long there the finger is taken away, the vapour will come out through the hole, and the vessel will become loosened at once.	0.68511844
and take the wick as before, and repeat often, if you need to.	Then light the wick as prescribed and repeat if necessary.	0.7043912
In the cup that is administered in disease of pleurisy, with water, there is no rod or hole, and it is only administered when it is full of water, and placed on the member only;	But the cupping-vessel that is used in pleurisy, with water, has no cross-piece nor hole; it is used by simply filling with water and applying to the part.	0.72020715
and this is the shape:	This is the figure of it.	0.5879743

chapter-2-subchapter-97.txt
Leeches are only administered in members where cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in places bare of flesh, such as fingers or nose, and other similar places;	Leeches are mostly used on those parts of the body to which application of cupping-vessels is impossible, either because of their smallness, such as the lips, the gums, and so on; or because the part is bare of flesh, like the finger, the nose, and so on.	0.7999402
and the procedure of their use is that when you find leeches in clean fresh water without rot, take them;	This is the way to use them: you seek some leeches that are in fresh water free of dirt.	0.59523624
and place them for a night in fresh water, until they are hungry, and have nothing in their bellies; and then bleed the vein and the cup, then rub the member until it is red, and place the leeches on;	Then you leave them in fresh water for a day and a night until they are hungry and nothing is left in their bellies; then you purge the patient's body, either by venesection or by the application of cupping vessels; then you scrub the afflicted part until it is flushed; and then place the leeches on it.	0.7909056
and when they are full, and fall off, if it is a place where you can put a cup, place it, because it is very beneficial after.	When they are full they will fall off. If it is possible to make suction with a cupping vessel, the effect will be greater.	0.58734095
If not, clean the place with wormwood, and then with water, very well, and then press it;	But if not, wash the part with vinegar followed by much water; then rub and put pressure on it.	0.7377502
and if the place bleeds too much after the leeches, soak a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on, until the blood is stopped;	If the blood continues to run after the leeches have fallen off, and becomes an ooze, let linen dressings be wetted with cold water and apply them over the place until the oozing stops.	0.7698042
and if the blood increases, place powdered vitriol, or galls, and similar things, until it is stopped;	But if the bleeding be serious then sprinkle upon the place powdered vitriol or gall or similar styptics, until the haemorrhage is stopped.	0.7523819
or place peeled fava beans on the place, and leave them until they stick to the place, and it will stop immediately;	Or let split shelled beans be applied to the place and left until they stick there, and then the bleeding will stop.	0.71794385
and if you need more, take other leeches.	If it is necessary to repeat the application, the same leech should not be applied but another one if you possibly can.	0.5108279
And if the leeches do not want to attach, rub the place with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until the blood flows, and then place them on, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach;	If the leeches fail to stick on, the place should be wiped over with fresh blood or pricked with a needle to bring out a little blood; then apply them, for if they smell any blood they will immediately adhere.	0.8209823
and when you want them to fall off, sprinkle a bit of powdered aloe and salt, or ash, and they will fall off immediately.	When you wish to remove them, sprinkle over them a little powdered aloes or salt or ashes, then they will at once fall away.	0.8380225

chapter-3.txt
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations.	This third part of the book, too, is an essential necessity in the practice of medicine; it concerns the setting of the fracture or dislocation occurring in bones.	0.6405003
Know, dear son, that foolish doctors avoid this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books nor read any text on this subject;	You should know, my sons, that ignorant practitioners and laymen and those who have never turned the pages of a single book of the Ancients about it, nor studied a single letter of it, arrogate this part of the art to themselves.	0.7065122
and for this reason, science is rare in our land, for I have never found anyone good in this field;	For this reason this section of the science has died out in our parts; I have myself found no one competent in it; and whatever skill I have, I have derived for myself by my long reading of the books of the Ancients and my thirst to understand them until I extracted the knowledge of it from them.	0.5780574
and I know nothing of it except through the science of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have drawn science from them, through experimentation, and by the practice of my life;	Then through the whole of my life I have adhered to experience and practice. So now I have described for you in this book all that my knowledge has encompassed on the subject and that my experience has encountered; I have made it accessible for you and rescued it from the abyss of prolixity; I have reduced it to a brief outline; and have explained it most clearly.	0.5925802
and I have already described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, just as I have done in these two previous chapters.	I have made for you many drawings of the instruments that are used in it, which is an adjunct to explanation, as I did in the two previous books.	0.68795323

chapter-3-subchapter-1.txt
It is therefore fitting that we state in the prologue of this book the summaries of the discourse and the chapters where the wise man sets his understanding and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.	Before we begin to speak of the fractures and dislocations of individual members we must, as an introduction to this book, give the general and particular information which compels your understanding and your being versed in it; both you and anyone else beside who is eager to learn this noble art.	0.6158773
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or break comes to someone, you must hasten to bleed the patient on one side and the other, unless something prevents it, such as weakness of the body, or children, or old people;	So I say that when anyone has sustained a fracture or dislocation or luxation or fall, you should first hasten to venesect him, or get his bowel open, or both, if there be nothing to hinder such as physical weakness, or unless it be a small boy or a very old man to whom an accident of this kind has happened; or unless the weather be excessively hot or cold.	0.7509557
or if the weather is not too hot or too cold; and he should eat cool foods, that is to say, cold broths, and meat of birds and goat, and not drink wine, nor eat fatty meats, and not fill himself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, so that you do not have to worry about hot abscesses or the spreading of matter in the limb; so the patient should return to his previous diet that he has used.	Next, let his diet be restricted to cold vegetables and the flesh of fowl and kids; he is to be forbidden wine and rich meat and gluttony and all foods that fill out the blood-vessels, until you are sure that there is no abscess and see no reason to suspect a flux of matter to the place. Then let the patient return to his former diet according to his custom.	0.75726634
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that provide thick nourishment, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and cow tripe, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment the fracture heals much faster.	When the broken bone has begun to mend, the patient should be nourished with very nourishing food, fat, strong, having some glutinous property, such as porridge, rice, heads, trotters, the tripe of cows, eggs, fresh fish, heavy wine, and the like; for on this diet the mending of the fracture will be quicker and better.	0.87602305
And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot heal well or fuse according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs, nor can those that are too tender, like the bones of small children;	You should know that fractures occurring in mature and old people cannot join and mend into the original condition, on account of the dryness and hardness of their bones; though any bones that are extremely soft, like those of infants, may make a union and heal.	0.76920664
but it does not matter, the broken bone forms a thick tendon that surrounds and joins the limb together, strengthening it as before; and it does not lose its function, so it must be nourished with substantial foods, as we have said.	Yet nature produces around the bone on all sides something like glue, with a certain viscosity, with whose help it joins, and it binds so that one part adheres to the other and they are linked to one another until it be good and firm as it had been before; so that there is no impediment to any of its functions. It is on this account that the patient's food should be the sort that has solidity and glueyness and thickness, as we have said.	0.69346154
And know that fractures are varied in many ways.	You should know that there are as many different types of fracture as there are members.	0.60966086
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the chest or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that are splintered, and others that are sharp, like the cut of a writing pen.	Thus a fracture of the leg bone differs from a fracture of the cranium; and a fracture of the breast bone differs from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly there are differences among the other parts. We shall give an exposition of each kind of fracture, each in its own chapter and distinguished from the others.	0.7010783
For there are fractures that are splintered, and others that are sharp, like the cut of a writing pen. And there are fractures with a wound, and fractures with just a small crack.	The fracture of each bone also has its own variations; for the fracture may be a clean break without splintering; or the fracture may be along the bone, with splinters and projections which may be sharp or may not; and the fracture may involve a wound and a laceration of the skin; and the fracture may be a crack.	0.59193087
And each type has its method and its appropriate instrument for restoration, according to what memory serves in its place;	Each kind has its own special technique of setting which will be mentioned in detail, each in its place.	0.62765455
and the fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the place is twisted, and it is clearly visible from the outside, and it sounds when pressed by the hand;	Among the diagnostic signs of a broken bone are: distortion, protrusion, the aspect of it, and the crepitus when you press on it with the hand.	0.46065652
and when there is no twisting or sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture;	When there is no obvious distortion or crepitus at the site, nor do you feel movement when you manipulate the bone, and the patient does not experience severe pain, there is no fracture there.	0.71292627
but it can very well have twisting, or a crack, or a small fracture. So you should not move it with your hand, but apply medicines that will be described later, and then gently bind it.	But it is possible that there is a luxation or a slight fracture or a little crack; so you must not disturb it with any extension or pressure, but apply one of the remedies suitable to the site, such as will be described later; then bind up gently.	0.7909294
And know that splintered fractures, where the two parts are disjointed, must be immediately set in place evenly before hot abscesses occur;	If the bone is parted and broken in two and there is no fragmentation but a simple separation of one part from its fellow, then you should lose no time in straightening and aligning it before an abscess sets in.	0.51296043
and if hot abscesses occur, leave it for a few days until the abscesses subside; then set it evenly as much as you can, lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration of one with pieces; then bind it, as will be described later.	If an abscess does set in, then let a few days pass until it has subsided; then gently and skilfully straighten it in whatever way you can. You should know that the setting or alignment of this is easier than that of a splintered bone. Then bandage as will be prescribed.	0.80367744
And if the bone has broken pieces, stretch it from two sides, if it is a hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand;	But if the bone is splintered, extension from either side is necessary, whether it be hand or foot; with your own hands if it be a small member, or with two ropes or with one hand and a rope.	0.8606889
and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, bring all the pieces back to their places by all means possible, and ensure that your work does not cause the patient injury or pain;	You should place the part on a flat surface in its natural attitude so that when both parts of the broken bone have been extended you can try to restore the fragments to their proper place with all the skill and gentleness possible; and do your utmost to ensure that the patient experience no pain or distress as you operate.	0.7683379
and align the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.	Try diligently to get one part of the bone fitted in the best form to the other.	0.5634676
And feel it well with your hand to see if it seems not right: if so, adjust it gently, and do not bind it too tightly, nor press it as those do who cause hot abscesses and contraction in the limb by their work, as we have seen many times.	At the same time you should palpate and investigate both of them with your hand, and if you find anything wrong then mend it and straighten it to the best of your ability. But avoid violent extension or compression which many ignorant people apply; for by doing so they often cause abscess or crippling in the limb, as I myself have many times seen.	0.753858
And when the limb is set, instruct the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other manner; and ensure that the limb is so secure that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels any pain, it is not set properly, and it needs to be positioned so that it does not feel any pain;	Then after you have exactly repositioned it and bandaged it, keep that limb still and quiet, and bid the patient beware of moving it while awake or asleep, and in his shifting and stirring, and in opening the bowel, and in every activity, to the utmost of his capacity; and that he should try to let the position of the limb be such that he is free from pain; when pain or distress is felt in any position in which he has disposed the limb, he should move it to a different position in which he feels no pain.	0.8404761
For when it feels any pain, it is not set properly, and it needs to be positioned so that it does not feel any pain; and ensure that it is set straight, so that there is no twisting when it is healed;	At the same time he should try to make that position even and straight, so that when the limb is mended there be no curvature in it.	0.6016658
and the quality of the broken limb is as I have told you.	As to the way to bandage a broken limb, it is as I shall now describe to you.	0.5407456
Know that broken limbs are varied in size, length, and shape.	You should know that limbs which may be fractured vary in their size and shape.	0.7958523
For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar: they need to be wrapped in soft and fine linen cloths;	The strips of bandage for those that are small, such as an arm or finger or forearm or the like, should be soft and fine, while those that are thick, such as the hip, back, or breast, should have broad and strong bandages.	0.59264755
and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: they need to be wrapped with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bandage embraces the entire large limb and compresses it evenly on all sides, so that there is no flaw;	For a broad bandage holds fast to a big limb, binding it all round with an even pressure so that no defect may occur.	0.6107647
then bind around it with light tow, three or four times according to the limb, and tighten it a little with your hand with the bandage, then go above the fracture and tighten less, so that the fracture itself is slightly away from the binding;	Then, after you have finished the setting, begin by applying a suitable liniment on soft tow over the site of the fracture, then start to wrap the bandage over the actual site, three or four turns of bandage as the part may require, winding it fairly tight.	0.6079616
and soften the bandage little by little, so that you cover a large part of the healthy area, then take another bandage, and wrap again over the broken place;	Then carry on the bandage above the site of the fracture, winding it more loosely than on the fractured place, and continue a little with the bandaging beyond the place of fracture, loosening the tension gradually, until you have taken up a good amount of the sound part.	0.6506354
then go below the fracture, and bind it moderately, not too tight nor too loose, as we have said in the first binding above;	Then take another bandage and wind it several turns over the fracture and then carry it over the part below the fracture, the tightness and looseness being arranged in the same way that we prescribed for the first covering, of the upper part.	0.6272638
then place between the bandages flax tow or cloths, until it is all even, then bind everything with a band, and then place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.	Then put between the bandages enough soft tow or soft rags to correct the curves of the fracture, if any; otherwise put nothing in. Then wind over it another bandage and at once lay over it strong splints, if the part be not swollen and effused.	0.74620736
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then apply something to soothe the hot abscess and reduce the swelling, and leave it for a few days;	But if there be swelling or effusion in the part, apply something to allay the swelling and disperse the effusion; leave it on for several days and then bind on the splints.	0.79525614
then bind over the splints, which should be half of a wide split cane, or made of wood used for stakes, or palm branches, and should be in this shape:	The splints should be made of broad halves of cane, cut and shaped with skill; or the splints may be made of the wood used for sieves, which are made of pine; or of palm branches; or of brier or giant fennel or the like, whatever wood be at hand.	0.71957195
but it is necessary that the splints placed on the fracture are a little thicker and wider than the others;	The size of each splint should be of this form and shape, except that the splint that is placed on the fracture itself should be a little thicker and broader than the others.	0.6123799
and be as long as necessary for the size of the limb, whether small or large;	As to the length of the splint, it should be greater or less as suits the fractured part.	0.5597779
then bind over the splints as you did with the first binding, then bind above with a fitting thread, as with the first binding on the fracture;	Then bind over the splints another bandage just as tightly as you did your first; then over that tie it up with cords arranged in the way we have said, that is, with the pressure greatest over the site of the fracture and lessened as you move away from it.	0.74818027
tighter at the top, gradually less; and the thread should be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and should be of soft linen;	The cords should be of medium thickness, of linen supple of quality.	0.58399713
for if the threads are thick, as I have seen the work of fools who make their bindings with twisted linen cords, it is a great error, for the binding cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should be at least a finger's width between each splint.	For if the cords are too thick, such as I have seen ignorant people use who made their cords of twisted bands of linen, that will be a grave error, for moderate tension with these is impossible. Nor are fine threads suitable either, for with these you cannot achieve sufficient tension. Between splints there should be a space of not less than a finger's breadth.	0.85422385
And if the patient is injured by the ends of the splints after binding on healthy areas, then place under them flax tow or teased wool, so that he does not get hurt.	If, after bandaging, the patient is hurt in the sound parts by the ends of the splints, then put a little soft tow or carded wool under them until they no longer hurt him thus.	0.76297206
When the wound is with the fracture, and the skin is broken, I will describe its treatment later.	As for the case of a fracture accompanied by an open wound, it will be mentioned in a special section on its own.	0.5171408
And know that it is not necessary to bind all fractured limbs with splints on the first day. For when the limb is large, it is not necessary to place splints until after five or seven days, or more depending on your certainty of preventing a hot abscess;	You should know that not every fracture should be bound up with splints on the first day; that is, when the part is big you should not apply splints until five or seven days after, or more, depending on when you are satisfied that there is no effusion.	0.8650728
and here is the method of the ancient poultices for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, mix it with plenty of eggs, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it; this is the common method of the poultice for restoring fractures in various conditions, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.	This is a description of the plasters that the Ancients used for repair, applied to a fracture, dislocation, or sprain. Description of a common simple plaster for the repair of fractures, suited to most constitutions, particularly for women and children, because in it there predominates neither hot nor cold. Take mill-dust, that is, the fine flour that sticks to the walls of a mill as the grindstone moves. Pound it as it is without sieving, with egg-white, to a medium consistency; then use.	0.7029165
Another method of poultice for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take 3 drachms of abareis and ladanum and enula and asafoetida and gum arabic and mastic, each 10 drachms; myrrh and aloes, each 5 drachms; frankincense 9 drachms; and make a powder, mix them with plenty of eggs; if the person's complexion is warm, use this poultice, for it is a good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is beneficial for many people.	Description of another plaster for the repair of a fracture, luxation, or dislocation: take ten drachms each of pulse, gum-mastic, acacia, elecampane, mughath, and sukk; five drachms each of myrrh and aloes; twenty drachms of tamarisk and twenty drachms of clay of Armenia or Asia Minor; all should be pounded fine and mixed with water of tamarisk, or with eggwhite if the patient be of a warm constitution; then use this plaster, which is excellent for uniting, quickly repairing broken bones, and suits most people because of its mildness.	0.76266193
Another method of poultice for twists: take mastic and mallows, each 10 drachms; myrrh and aloes, each 9 drachms; acacia 6 drachms; Armenian bole 10 drachms, and grind well, mix with water or plenty of eggs, and apply.	Description of another plaster valuable for a fracture or sprain: let there be taken ten drachms each of mughath, pulse, and white marsh mallows, five drachms each of myrrh and aloes, six drachms of acacia, and twenty drachms of Armenian clay. Let them all be well beaten up and passed through a sieve and made into a paste with water or egg-white and used.	0.7071719
Another method of poultice for joints and bones separated from their places, and to soothe the resulting pain, and the cut uses the bone and the fracture: take new wool, soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and place it on the area. This poultice does not restore, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly removes pain.	Description of a plaster for dislocated joints or bones, soothing the accompanying pain, and for a crack or fissure of bone: let unwashed wool be taken and soaked in a decoction of oil and vinegar and applied to the place. Now this plaster has no power of repair but it is outstanding for reducing effusion and dispersing pain.	0.74186003
Another method of poultice that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and leaves of ground ivy, and grind them together, and make a poultice.	Description of another plaster for the repair of a broken bone: let there be taken the leaves of the hard fig and of the wild poppy and both be beaten up together and a plaster made of them while still fresh and damp.	0.7320441
Another method of poultice for the restoration of a bone fracture and to reduce the remainder of the abscess. Take root of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, vetch flour, each one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with coriander water or plain water, and apply.	Description of another simple plaster used when a fracture is mending and you wish to disperse residual swellings: take one part each of marsh mallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, and flour of vetch; pound it all and make a paste with decoction of wine, if the part be not inflamed. But if it be inflamed make it up with water of fresh coriander or plain water, and use.	0.8253276
Another method of poultice, stronger than the first, when a hard abscess occurs during the restoration of the limb. Take roots of mallow, linseed, pomegranate flowers, melilot, and elderflowers, and violet flowers and chamomile, each one part; and grind, and mix with saltwater or fresh water, or with wine, depending on the heat of the limb and its rest.	Description of another plaster stronger than the former for resolving, used if a hard swelling arises as the bone sets: let there be taken equal parts of each of marsh mallow roots, linseed, fenugreek, melilot, sweet marjoram, violet flowers, and chamomile; they should all be beaten up together and made into a paste with willow infusion or sweet water or wine, according to whether the part is inflamed or its heat has subsided.	0.8280078
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not place on the broken limb for restoration anything other than a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.	Now Hippocrates in his book did not mention any application for the repair of a fractured part except a wax plaster made of wax and oil, nothing else. He prescribed that it be of a consistency midway between thick and thin.	0.79561883
And Galen suggests that one should put on the broken limb, for restoration, slightly warm dry things, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.	Galen, on the other hand, thought it good to apply to the broken limb, when it is mending, things which have a certain power of drying, with some heat, such as myrrh, aloes, olibanum, and the sort of thing we have mentioned.	0.8050349
Another method of poultice that is good for injuries and pain: take mastic and cut human hair, or bird feathers, and mallow, and salt equally, and grind them, and make a poultice and apply it.	Description of a plaster valuable for debility and pain: let equal parts of each be taken of mughath, chickpease, minced human hair or birds' feathers, marsh mallows and salt; grind it up and pass through a sieve and make into a paste and use as a plaster.	0.7395899
And then untie it a little later, and see if the patient does not feel any pain, and the bone has not moved from its place; if so, do not untie it for several days	As to the length of time the bandages should remain on before being loosened: you should keep an eye on the patient and if he suffers no pain or itching or any shifting of the broken bone, then they should not be loosened for a number of days; but if he experiences at the place a violent itching or a disturbing pain or swelling, then hasten to loosen them and make no delay; and remove the plaster.	0.6565102
And if pain comes to the area, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hasten and untie it, and remove the poultice immediately; and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and clean the area, until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry wool, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it for a night, until you are sure of preventing a hot abscess;	Then you must take a soft cloth or a soft marine sponge and dip it in tepid water and bathe the place until the itching subsides and the pain settles; then let the limb rest for an hour; then apply to it raw wool soaked in oil and vinegar or oil of roses, and bandage it on for one night until you are sure there is no effusion and the swelling of the limb has subsided and the pain has gone.	0.87405205
and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then restart the subtle binding, and a little poultice, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and refine it until it is healed.	Then put the bandage on again gently, and a light plaster; do not bind it up as you did at the first but go gently with it until it heal.	0.6726537
And if you see that the hot abscess and redness and pain and swelling are already gone, and you need poultice and bandage, then restart it, just as you did at first equally.	If you see that the effusion, inflammation, pain, swelling, and other symptoms are totally gone, and you need to plaster and bandage it, then repeat just as you did at first.	0.8319025
And if none of what we said occurs to the limb, do not untie it until after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, depending on what is seen, until the fracture heals, and the joining of the flesh approaches;	But if none of these things that we have mentioned occur, then do not loosen it until after three, four, or five days or a week; sometimes it may be left up to twenty days, depending on how the limb appears to you, as we said, until the fracture be united and the flesh over it be near to joining.	0.89503133
then bind it tighter than before, and enrich its nourishment, as I said earlier; and if you see the area drying more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come to it; then moisten it with warm water every time you untie it, and this should be every third day, and loosen the binding a little;	Then bandage more tightly than before, and increase the heaviness of the patient's food as has been mentioned. If you see the place of the fracture getting more dry and thin than it should, you may know that nourishment is being prevented from reaching it; so foment it with tepid water each time you loosen it; do this every three days, and ease the bandaging somewhat.	0.86284876
thus the nourishment will flow to the limb, and quickly correct what the foolish doctors do, who restore the limb crookedly: this is bad, and such work is dangerous, and I see no other way than to bind and work it properly.	This action makes nourishment flow to the limb and it will quickly heal. What some ignorant bone-setters do is to break the bone again if at first the repair is not as it should be and has mended crookedly. This operation of theirs is mistaken and dangerous; if it were right the Ancients would undoubtedly have spoken of it in their books and would have used it.	0.6908828

chapter-3-subchapter-2.txt
of the various types of fractures There are many kinds of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct;	The kinds of fracture occurring in the head are many, of various forms and differing causes.	0.7589556
for there are fractures caused by sword strikes, where the blow removes all the bone down to the membrane beneath the bone, like an axe or a club; and for this reason, this type of fracture is called "hack".	Some fractures are due to a sword-stroke which may cut right through the bone and reach the membrane beneath the bone, like an adze-cut in wood, for which reason this kind of cut is called 'ascial'.	0.6836609
Or the sword cuts the bone on the surface without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound from these two fractures can be large or small.	Or the sword may cut through part of the bone, only slicing through the surface and not reaching the depth; this kind is called an absolute avulsion. The wounds in these two fractures can be either big or small.	0.8072166
And if there is a blunt impact, or a crack from a blow from a stone, or from falling onto a stone, or similar incidents.	There are also some fractures accompanied by smashing or crushing; such as by a blow from a stone or by falling on a stone, and the like.	0.7317705
And if there is a penetrating fracture, which approaches the membrane beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound can be large or small.	A fracture of this kind will be either penetrating, reaching the membrane beneath the bone; or superficial; the wound in these two fractures may be either big or small.	0.8010188
And if there is a wound that is visible on the bone as fine as a hair, and the crack is small, and for this reason, this fracture is called "capillary";	Then there is a type of fracture that is hidden in the bone, as fine as a hair, a thin crack; therefore this kind of fracture is called 'capillary'.	0.8049189
and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or similar incidents, and it causes a piece of bone to enter, and the place is dented as potters do when they strike the pots; so the stone enters inside.	There is a fracture due to a fall or a blow from a stone and the like, making a dent in the surface of the bone and a hollow at the site as occurs in a bronze bowl when a blow falls on it and a portion of it is pushed in.	0.7772895
And this happens more often to those who have soft bones in the head, like the heads of children;	This mostly occurs in heads whose bones are soft, as those of children.	0.81701756
and it happens in all these types of fractures that small pieces are separated like splinters; and I will speak of this in its place.	Any of these kinds of fracture may also have splinters, jagged or otherwise; we shall deal with the treatment of all these in their place.	0.59286165
And we recognize all types of fractures by the detraction on them, and the investigation with probes, and by the corrupted flesh that is on them.	All these kinds of fracture are diagnosed by laying them bare and investigating them with probes and removing all the lacerated tissues over them.	0.73566926
The capillary fracture is known by the fact that when the bone is uncovered, and one rubs ink on it, the fracture appears black.	The 'capillary' kind is diagnosed by laying bare the bone, wiping it clean, and rubbing ink on it, when the fracture will appear black.	0.73188597
In the treatment of fractures, pay attention to the patient's symptoms, and if you see any bad symptoms, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, convulsions, fainting, high fever, and the eyes bulging and reddening, and other similar symptoms in various forms, then it cannot heal without doubt.	As to the treatment of the fracture: begin by paying attention to the patient's symptoms. If you observe any symptom clearly indicating something dangerous, such as bilious vomit, convulsion, mental derangement, loss of voice, fainting, high fever, protrusion and inflammation of the eyes, and similar symptoms, then leave the patient alone and do not treat him; for in the majority of cases these symptoms undoubtedly indicate the approach of death.	0.78342956
And if you do not see any frightening symptoms, and you hope for healing, then start the treatment.	But if you find symptoms that do not alarm you and you see hope of recovery for him, then begin treatment as follows.	0.8082209
And when the injured person first comes to you, and it is winter, you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day if you can.	If he be brought to you immediately after his injury and it be the season of winter, you should try to remove the bone, at all events before the fourteenth day.	0.78722
And if it is summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the membrane beneath the bone is corrupted, and the symptoms we mentioned occur.	If it be summer you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the covering membrane beneath the bone and over the brain be infected, and before the above-mentioned symptoms occur.	0.85820293
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, you must split the fractured part like this: take the head of the injured patient, and uncover the bone in any way you can, and on the shape of the wound as gently as you can,	If the fracture has already reached the cerebral membrane with fragmentation of the bone and depression, then you must cut out the splintered and broken part as I shall now describe to you. Shave the head of the injured patient and lay the bone bare in any way you can, following the course of the injury and in the manner least grievous to the injured man.	0.74924594
and if bleeding occurs when uncovering the bone, or a hot abscess, then help it with what is needed, which is to fill the area with cloths soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the hot abscess is soothed, and you are sure the bleeding has stopped; then start to remove the bone around, and this is done according to two methods: one method is to cut narrowly in front, and this is the form:	If, when you lay the bone bare, you encounter a haemorrhage or abscess, meet the case with suitable remedies; that is, pack the place with dressings soaked in wine and oil of roses, and cleanse the wound until the swelling subsides and you are safe from haemorrhage; then begin the trepanning and removal of the bone. This may be done in one of two ways. One way is to cut the bone with a fine-bladed chisel, this being the figure of it. Then after this one employ another chisel, a little broader.	0.8495199
And then make another cut larger than the first.	Then use yet another chisel still broader than the second.	0.7015213
And the second method is to have a number of different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of hard iron; and work gently, so you do not injure the head.	You should have by you a number of different chisels, some broader than others and some shorter than others; their tips should be exquisitely sharp; and they should be made of Indian iron or best steel. Let the strokes upon the chisel be gentle lest the head be shocked or injured.	0.6818559
And if the bone is strong and hard, you must pierce around it before you make cuts with drills, but not too deep so they do not pierce through the bone of the head, and the drill must have a rim or a circle above the point, to prevent the point from passing through the bone; and you must have several, so that each one matches the thickness of the bone, so that you have drills for all heads; and these are the forms of the three types of drills:	Let the strokes upon the chisel be gentle lest the head be shocked or injured. If the bone be strong and hard you should, before you use the chisel, make perforations round about it with drills called 'non-sinking' drills. Their name of non-sinking drills is due to their not piercing the cranial bone through to what is beneath, because the drill has a circular margin beneath its sharp head like a small collar or wheel, that prevents it from sinking in and going beyond the thickness of the bone. You must obtain a large number of these drills each of which will suit a certain thickness of bone; so that for each skull you have a drill whose pointed extremity is of a length to suit the thickness of that skull.	0.8294345
The method for piercing around the broken bone is to place a drill on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know the bone is pierced; then place the drill a little further along, and do this all around, then cut with incising tools the thickness of the bone that is between the holes, and do this as delicately as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with some of the instruments you have such as tongs, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the membrane.	As to the manner of perforation round the fractured bone, you apply the drill to the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced, then you transfer the drill to another place, making the distance between the perforations about the thickness of a probe. Then with the chisels cut out the bone between the perforations, using the utmost delicacy, as we have said. Then take out the bone, either with your hand or with some other instrument you have ready for the purpose, such as forceps or fine tongs. You will have to observe the utmost caution that neither drill nor chisel touch any part of the membrane.	0.8894785
And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, you must then scrape off the remaining roughness of the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other incising tools;	When you have cut the bone circularly, free from the membrane if adherent to it, and have removed it, then you will have to scrape away and smooth out all the roughness in the remaining bone with another instrument, resembling a chisel, except that it must be finer and slenderer than any of them.	0.78375334
and if any small pieces of bone remain, or any scales, remove them gently with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with the probes and ointments we have mentioned.	If there are any little bits or spicules of bone left, pick them out with whatever instrument you can, gently; and then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we shall describe.	0.8814051
And the other method of work is that which Galen describes, which is safer; and he praises it highly, and this is his word. First you must uncover part of the bone, where the fracture is most apparent, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under the head of this lenticular incisor, of which this is the form:	The other way of operating is altogether easy and free from danger; Galen mentioned it and greatly praised it; these are his words: You should begin by laying bare that part of the bone where the fracture is severest and most obvious; when you have done so, place under it the tip of this lenticular chisel figured here.	0.8690028
And it does not cut on one side, and the sharp part is on both sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet on it, so that you cut lightly around the bone, and be very careful of the membrane that is underneath;	The lenticular part of it should be smooth and not for cutting, the sharp part of it being on both sides longitudinally, as you see; so that the lenticular part is resting upon the meninges while the cutting surface is on the bone. Then with a small hammer strike the tool on one side until you gently cut through the bone in a circle, in the confident knowledge that nothing untoward can happen to the membrane even though the operator be the most ignorant and cowardly of men; yes, even if he be sleepy.	0.7081286
if it is attached to the bone, remove it gently, for it can be removed without harm and without fear.	If any membrane stick to any part of the bone, strip it off with the lenticular tip of the chisel and free it gently from it, for it will come away without harm or danger.	0.66773605
And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce the membrane, and the bone is only cut on the surface, and there are small pieces, you must smooth the roughness, and remove the scales with a delicate scraper of which you should have various sizes, to use in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.	If it be a fracture of the bone not reaching to the meninges, only the surface of the bone being separated, and there remain some roughness and fine splinters, you should smooth down the roughness and remove the splinters with fine scrapers, of which you should have a number, of varying sizes so that you can use the one best fitted and most suitable, in the light of what is suggested by your operative method and the broken bone itself and its shape.	0.83470106
So start with large scrapers, and then more delicate ones, and continue this until it is smooth.	When you smooth the bone you must first use the broadest of the scrapers and then a finer one, and so on until you come to use the finest and slenderest of all.	0.64084774
In each of the other capillary cuts and fine fractures, you must administer treatment according to its alignment; and this is something that is not hidden from one who has studied this art.	As to the rest, the little capillary fractures and fine fissures, you will have to apply to each of them that treatment that will bring about a perfect repair. This is obvious to anyone who has the least practice in this art and is acquainted with what we have written in explanation of the big fractures.	0.674613
And if the membrane is uncovered, you must take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth folded in two or three, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can, so you do not harm the membrane, then apply another bandage over it, and do not bind it too tightly, just enough to hold the wound;	If the meninges are left bare when you remove the bone, you should take a linen dressing measured to the wound, soak it in oil of roses, and apply it to the opening of the wound; then take another dressing, folded in two or three, soak it in wine and oil of roses and apply it over the first with the utmost gentleness so as not to press upon the meninges; then employ a broad bandage on top, but tighten it only enough to keep the wound covered.	0.874236
and leave it like this for one or two days, until the hot abscess is soothed, then untie it, and apply medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and make a powder of these things, and apply it to the wound, and always apply cleansing medicines without causing pain;	Leave it with this dressing on for a day or two until you are sure there is no abscess; then loosen it and apply desiccant remedies such as lily roots, vetch-flour, powdered frankincense, birthwort, and the like. The method is that you make a powder of these drugs and sprinkle it, dry as it is, upon the wound; in short, in these cases use drugs whose nature is cleansing and not irritating.	0.7962062
and make sure the wound is always clean, do not leave the ointment on it, nor let any dirt gather on it, for when dirt gathers on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and rots it, and causes great harm to the patient; for when something irritating is placed on the membrane, it blackens on the surface.	In this be most diligent, that the wound, while you are treating it, be clean; nor let there be any dirty vestiges of ointment in it or any filth; and let no pus collect in it; for when pus collects on the meninges it corrupts them and renders them necrotic, which causes great harm to the patient.	0.8340385
Be careful then, if any bad symptoms occur to the patient, as we have said, it is undoubtedly dangerous.	Sometimes the surface meninges go black when the bone is removed, especially when the treatment of them is neglected; so observe, and if the patient exhibit any of the symptoms that we have mentioned you may know that he is undoubtedly doomed.	0.45908523
And if blackening occurs only because of the medicine applied, which has such a property, then take one part honey, and three parts rose oil and soak a cloth in it, and place it on the membrane; then treat it with the appropriate methods of treatment, until it is healed.	But if the blackness be due to some medicament applied to it, which has the power to produce blackness of that kind, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of oil of roses, beat them well up together, spread on a cloth and apply it to the membrane; then treat as necessary until cured.	0.8814795

chapter-3-subchapter-3.txt
Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or only one part, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, it only bends or twists, and then heals.	You should know that the only portion of the nose that can break is the upper portion in its entirety or in one of its two parts; for it consists of two bones. The lower portion is cartilaginous and unbreakable; what can happen to it is contusion, twisting, or flattening.	0.845225
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must place your little finger in the nostril, and align the fracture inside with your index finger, and with your thumb from the outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, and make sure the patient does not feel pain from your work.	If one of the two (upper) parts be broken you should pass your little finger into the nostril and straighten out the fracture from inside, with your index and thumb outside, until you reduce the nose to its natural shape; do it gently, and take care that you do not cause the patient pain in doing it.	0.8668239
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach the place, then you must align it with the end of a somewhat thick stick.	If the fracture be in the upper part of the nose and your finger does not reach it, it should be evened by means of a probe with some thickness to it.	0.83482826
And if the fracture is on both sides, do the same, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can;	If the break be on both sides, follow the same course.	0.45676753
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the hot abscess is soothed, then place tents of linen cloth at the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part.	Haste must be made to set it on the first day if possible; but if not, after the seventh or tenth day when the effusion has subsided.	0.6000271
Or place another on the other side, if the fracture is there; and the tents should be large enough to fill the nostrils.	Then introduce into the nasal foramen a linen pad, if it be a unilateral fracture, or two pads if it be bilateral; the pads should be thick enough to fill the nasal foramen.	0.5809079
And some restorers say the tents should be moistened with butter, and changed every day. This does not seem right to me, but they should be moistened with a mixture of egg white and flour dust; then leave the tent, until the bone is firm, and the cartilage hardened.	Certain of the ancient bone-setters suggest that you should soak the pads in butter and change them daily, but I do not think so; you should rather soak them in egg-white made up into a paste with mill-dust; then leave the pads in until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardens.	0.8325264
And sometimes goose feathers are placed in the nose instead of tents, and there is a soft cloth around, and the fracture holds, and the patient breathes through it; now do whichever you prefer.	Sometimes, instead of pads, the stems of goose-quills are introduced into the nose after being wound round with a piece of soft cloth, so as to make a stronger support for the fracture of the nose and not to hinder the patient's breathing. This is not absolutely necessary; do it if you prefer; or, if you prefer, put in pads.	0.69796646
And if a hot abscess occurs in the nose while you are working on it, apply wax or cotton moistened with rose oil, or a little of diaculum.	If during your operation an abscess occurs, apply to the nose a wax plaster or cotton wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses or a little diachylon ointment.	0.85594845
And if a hot abscess does not occur, apply a poultice externally, made of sesame flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then place light tow on it, and do not bind the nose;	If no abscess occurs you should apply externally a plaster of white flour and frankincense made into a paste with egg-white; then put on top some soft tow, but do not bind up the nose at all.	0.8170091
and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, extract them with suitable instruments, then sew the crack, and treat it with things that generate flesh and heal, such as poultices and ointments suitable for this;	If the nasal bones are broken into small pieces or crushed, you should cut down upon them, remove them with a suitable instrument, and then suture the incision and dress with suitable ointments which encourage granulation and scarring.	0.7512893
and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with tents, and place lead tubes, until it is healed.	If there occur an internal wound of the nose, you should dress it with pads and employ leaden tubes until it heals.	0.7349291

chapter-3-subchapter-4.txt
When the jaw is broken below, and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only external, and it is not broken into two, only curved inside, it is easily recognized.	When the lower jaw is broken and it is a fracture without an open wound, examine it.	0.56058884
If the fracture is on the right side, you must place your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is in the left jaw, place your index finger of the right hand, and gently align the fracture inside, and adjust it with the other hand from outside, and set it evenly.	If it is merely an external fracture, not broken in two but sunken inwards, which is easily recognized, you should introduce the index of your left hand into the patient's mouth if it be a right-hand fracture; but your right index if it be a left-sided fracture; and with this, from within, push the concavity of the fracture gently outwards, with the other hand outside, regulating the correction.	0.8340032
And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two, you must apply traction from both sides, until it is even.	If the break in the jaw be total, into two, traction must be employed, in a straight line on both sides, until it can be set.	0.8137047
And if the teeth are dislodged, or broken, bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place wax on the broken jaw, and apply a double cloth; and place on the cloth a large, well-made splint, or a piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it as best you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.	If any of the teeth be loosened or broken away, bind those that you hope may be preserved with a gold or silver or silken ligature; then put wax upon the fractured mandible, and upon that a doubled dressing, and upon the dressing a large and strong splint or a piece of shoe-sole leather, the length of the jaw; then over that bandage in such wise as you conveniently can and as will conduce to drawing it together so as not to loosen. Bid the patient hold himself quiet and still, and let his food be soft broths.	0.888538
And if you see the alignment change, untie it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and apply a poultice, made of mill dust with plenty of eggs or sesame flour, after you have removed the wax; and place light wool on the poultice, and if the poultice adheres, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed; often it is healed in three weeks.	If you think there is any change of form at all, hasten to loosen it on the third day; then correct the change and apply a plaster of mill-dust and egg-white, or of white flour, after you have removed the wax from it, applying soft tow over the plaster. So long as the plaster sticks on it and the bone undergoes no change of state, let it be and do not loosen until it heals and the fracture mends, for often a fracture of this kind mends in three weeks.	0.89053154
And if a hot abscess occurs, administer what we have said many times.	If during that time an effusion occurs, employ those means of allaying this that we have often mentioned, until the swelling subsides.	0.48459423
And if there is a fracture and a wound together, check if any piece of bone is missing; if so, carefully remove it with suitable instruments.	If the fracture be with an open wound, examine it, and if one or more splinters have been detached from the bone, gently remove the pieces of splinter with any suitable instrument.	0.72487885
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with a flame according to your need.	If the opening of the wound be narrow, open it up with a scalpel as much as you need.	0.639184
And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, sew the wound if it is large, and apply a suitable poultice to it, to generate flesh, until it is healed.	When you have removed these pieces, letting no trace of them remain, suture the opening of the wound if it is wide; otherwise apply one of the ointments that are suitable for that purpose and will encourage the growth of flesh over the wound, until it heals.	0.776363

chapter-3-subchapter-5.txt
of the collarbone The collarbone often breaks in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, which is the easiest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.	The collar-bone is very often broken from the end of the humerus anteriorly, and the fracture of it may be in one of three ways. It may be broken and separated into two without splintering; this is the easiest to repair. Or else splintering occurs, which is most difficult to repair. Or it is a compound fracture.	0.82545835
And the procedure is that when the fracture is without a wound, you need two assistants, one to hold the support for the broken collarbone; and the other to extend the neck towards the area; then align the fracture with your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no misalignment or shortening.	When it is a simple fracture the operation involves having two assistants present; one of them to hold steady the arm adjacent to the fractured clavicle, and the other to stretch the neck in the opposite direction. Then level the fracture with your fingers until it is reduced to its proper form and there is neither prominence nor concavity.	0.87066644
And if you need more extension, place a round ball of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder, and make it thick according to your need; and extend and lift the collarbone, and tighten the ball with your hand, so that you set the fracture evenly, as is necessary.	If there is need of still greater extension, place in the armpit of the patient a ball of cloth or wool made to a suitable size; and stretch and lift up the clavicle and squeeze the roll with your hand until the fracture is set in the proper way.	0.8968844
And if you cannot pull the head of the collarbone outward, because it is deep, the patient must lie often on their back, and place a medium pillow under the shoulder, and the assistant pushes the shoulder down, so that the collarbone is raised.	If you are unable to draw the extremity of the clavicle outwards on account of its being depressed, the patient will have to lie on his back and there must be put under his shoulder a medium-sized bolster.	0.80529106
Then align the fracture with your fingers, and if you find it broken into pieces, you must cut above; and gently extract the pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any overlap, cut it with one of the incising tools you have; but place this instrument under the collarbone to protect the membrane:	The assistant is to press the shoulder down until the depressed collar bone is elevated, and then you can set the fracture and even it out with your fingers. If you feel a splinter separated from the clavicle and movable, you must cut down upon the splinter and gently remove it. If the splinter sticks to the bone, you must contrive to cut it with one of the chisels you have prepared for that, having first put beneath the clavicle the instrument to protect the membrane; an instrument made of wood or iron, of which this is the figure.	0.7961243
and it looks like a spoon, and is not finished, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work; and it has two ends, as you see, one wide, and the other narrow, as is the shape of the wound you made when you extracted the bones;	It resembles a spoon but without a hollow. It should be as broad as you need, having regard to the size of the bone, and as long as you can use at operation. As you see, it should be provided with one wide and one narrow extremity.	0.78353554
and when you are sure of preventing a hot abscess, sew the wound, and if the cut is small, or you fear a hot abscess, fill the wound with cloths and tents, according to its size.	If the opening you made when you extracted the splinter of bone be wide and you feel safe against an abscess, suture the edges together. But if the opening be small or you fear an abscess, pack the wound with material and pads proportional to the opening.	0.69592035
And if a hot abscess occurs there, moisten a cloth with rose oil and vinegar and wine, and apply it.	If an abscess occur, soak the dressing with oil of roses and vinegar or wine and apply.	0.82400423
The binding of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cuts, is to apply a poultice of mill dust and plenty of eggs to the bone, place light tow on it, and place a ball under the armpit if necessary; then take a very large bandage one palm wide, then place a double cloth over the tow, and the poultice; then take a delicate splint three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down; and place the splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the injured armpit; and secure it from each side, and when you see that the binding holds the fracture well, and you see clearly that the splint does not move on the broken bone, adjust it every day, and when the binding loosens, tighten it;	As to bandaging the bone when it is without wound or incision, it is thus: apply over the bone the plaster composed of mill-dust with egg-white and put over it soft tow; then put a pad in his axilla if necessary; then take a very long sling about a span broad; then place a doubled pad over the tow and plaster; then take a splint made of thin board; its width should be three fingers and its length the same; then wrap it in a rag; then wrap the rag together with the splint in that part of the sling that is over the site of the fracture; then tie the sling round the fracture and wind it round his neck and under his sound axilla and under his injured axilla and carry it several times in every direction as you judge best that the bandaging will hold the fracture firmly, for it will be apparent to you. The whole point is that the splint should not slip from over the fracture; so you should examine the patient every day, and whenever the bandage has loosened and you see the splint has shifted, then put it right and tighten the bandage.	0.9205054
and have the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the armpit when they sleep, to lift the support upwards; this will relieve the fracture of the collarbone by lifting the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless bad symptoms occur, for twenty days;	Make the patient sleep lying on his back, and at night when he is asleep place a small bolster under the axilla so as to raise his arm from his side, for with the raising of the humerus the fracture of the clavicle will be elevated. Or bind his arm to his neck. Do not loosen the bandage for twelve days unless there arise at the place any pruritus or swelling.	0.8855074
then restart the poultice if necessary, and tighten it and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored in at most twenty-eight days, and in less for some people.	Then renew the plaster if you think it necessary, and bandage again and leave until the fracture of the collar-bone is set and knits. The majority of these cases are firm and strong in twenty-eight days, though in some people it takes less.	0.7344647

chapter-3-subchapter-6.txt
Of the fracture of the shoulder	On the repair of a fracture of the scapula.	0.5158458
And if a piece of bone protrudes and points under the skin, cut above it, and remove it, and do what we have said for the fracture of the collarbone to soothe a hot abscess.	If a splinter of bone protrudes and starts to prick under the skin, cut down upon it and remove it, and do as I said under fracture of the collar-bone, to allay the effusion, if anything of that kind happen.	0.764518

chapter-3-subchapter-7.txt
Of the fracture of the chest	On the repair of a fracture of the breast.	0.5439431
The chest is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks on the outside. And when it is broken in the middle, it sinks down, and the patient feels great pain, shortness of breath, and coughs, and perhaps vomits blood, and the protrusion of the broken bone is visible, and it can be easily felt.	The breast is sometimes fractured in the middle but this happens rarely; more often it is the extremities of it that are broken and comminuted. The symptoms that occur when it is broken in the middle are that he bows downwards and suffers violent pain, difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and sometimes he vomits blood; and there is an obvious and palpable concavity in the bone.	0.9012089

chapter-3-subchapter-8.txt
Of the fracture of the ribs	On the repair of ribs when they are fractured.	0.44455335
Know that rib fractures occur only in the thick parts near the back, and at the ends inside, and they only bend because they are flexible; and it can be easily felt by probing with fingers.	You should know that fracture of the ribs occurs only at the thick parts bordering on the vertebrae, whereas the anterior extremities are only contused, because they are cartilaginous; this is easily diagnosed on examination with the fingers.	0.81804436
And the restoration is that you set the fracture evenly, as necessary. Then apply the poultice, and bind it with a splint, if needed.	They should be set by levelling out the fracture with the fingers in any manner you can so that the form is as it should be; then apply the plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.	0.76488817
And if the rib fracture is inclined inward, the patient feels great pain and sharpness, like pleurisy, because the bone pierces the tissue; and breathes with difficulty, and coughs and vomits a large amount of blood, and this is very serious, and the ancients devised great ingenuity for it.	If it be a depressed fracture of the ribs, then the patient will have a vehement pain and a piercing sensation like that of pleurisy, since the bone is piercing the pleura; in addition he will have difficulty in breathing and will cough, and vomit much blood; the treatment of this is difficult. In this the Ancients practised many devices.	0.889607
And there are some who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the fracture outward.	Some said that the patient should have food of such a kind as to generate wind and inflation to blow out and stretch the belly and so push out the fracture.	0.6507881
We do not do this, lest hot abscesses occur, if they have not already occurred. And if it has occurred, treat it.	We, however, reject this, since it will excite an effusion if one has not already arisen; and if one has arisen it will increase and confirm it.	0.5954232
And some of them say to apply cups to the spot, to draw out forcefully, and this seems reasonable; however, there is a concern that the cups might draw impurities to the spot due to weakness.	Some of them said a cupping-vessel should be applied to the place and strong suction be made; this seems more reasonable except that there is a risk of the vessel's drawing superfluities to the place on account of his weak state.	0.77739364
And some of them say to cover the spot with wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to even the bandage around, then treat as pleurisy, with food and medicine.	Some of them said that the place should be covered with wool soaked in warm oil and that a pad should be placed in the intercostal space to fill it up so as to make the bandaging level when you wind it round. Then treat the patient with diet and medicines as for pleurisy.	0.8095027
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure because the bone pierces the tissue, and there is a concern for the patient, then cut above the broken rib, and place an instrument underneath to protect the surface; and then the bone should be cut, and removed carefully, and then sew the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat with poultices, until it is healed. And if a hot abscess occurs, place cloths soaked in rose oil on the spot, and treat the spot as necessary for abscess, and the patient should lie often on the side where he should, until it is healed.	If the patient is in such a bad way that he cannot bear it, the bone painfully piercing the pleura, and we are afraid for him, then we shall have to cut down upon the place and lay bare the broken rib; then we place under it the instrument to protect the membrane, which has been described, and gently cut out the bone and remove it. Then the edges of the wound should be joined, with a suture if large, and dressed with ointments until healed. If meanwhile there arise an abscess, quickly soak pads in oil of roses and apply them to the place and treat the patient with internal remedies against abscess too. Let him lie upon the side which is easier for him to sleep on, until it heals.	0.90076447

chapter-3-subchapter-9.txt
Sometimes fractures occur to the bones of the neck, and it rarely happens that they bend; and also to the spine. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, watch if you see their hands softened and swollen and lifeless, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that this is mortal in many cases, and if they can move and feel well when squeezed and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and the patient can be cured if treated.	When a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, which is rare, as mostly they suffer contusion, as do the spinal vertebrae—when it happens to anyone and you want to know whether it will heal or not, then look and if you see both his hands relaxed and numb and dead and he has no power to move or stretch or close them, and when you pinch them or prick them with a needle he does not notice it or feel any pain in them, you may know, as a general rule, that it will not mend, for he is doomed. But if he moves them both and feels in them the pinching and pricking, you may know that the spinal medulla is still intact and that under treatment the patient will recover.	0.87395865
And if similar things happen to the spine, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, watch if the feet are softened, and if the same symptoms appear as in the hands, and if on the back there is wind and involuntary egestion; and when turned on their stomach, there is involuntary egestion. And when turned on their back and they try to sit up, they cannot. Know that this is mortal: do not work on their treatment.	If anything of this nature happens to the vertebrae of the back and you wish to know if he will recover or not, then pay attention to his feet. If you see them relaxed and in the situation we described in the case of the hands, and when he lies on his back he passes flatus and faeces involuntarily, and lying prone he passes water involuntarily and lying on his back he cannot pass water if he wishes, then you may know his case is hopeless, so do not concern yourself with his treatment.	0.7860719
And if these symptoms do not occur, the situation is lighter.	But if nothing of this kind occur then the case is easier.	0.6705421
And the treatment is that you observe if there is a hot abscess, then place rose oil or egg yolk oil on the spine until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and not to sleep on the side where they feel the pain, until they are healed. And if any bones are disjointed, then you need to cut above the heart; and remove the bone, then join the two lips of the wound if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with flesh-generating ointment, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the tail," then place your thumb of the left hand on it, and set it evenly with the other hand as much as you can, then apply the poultice and the splint if needed; then tighten it, and if there is a dislocated bone, cut above it, and remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.	The way to treat this latter kind of case is to try to reduce the swelling by applying over the injured vertebra oil of roses, alone, or with roasted yolks of egg; apply three times a day until the swelling has gone down. Then apply to the place one of the strengthening and absorbent plasters and bind it on; bid him keep quiet and still and sleep only in the attitude in which he has no pain, until he is well. If the injury is accompanied by fragmentation or a separation of part of the bone, you must cut down on it and remove the bone; then bring together the edges of the opening, by suture if it be wide; then treat with granulating ointments until it heals. If the last bone of the coccyx, which is the sacrum of the tail, breaks, introduce the thumb of your left hand into his anus and reset the bone with the other hand in whatever way is possible and affords the best setting; then apply over it a plaster, and a splint if necessary, and bind it up.	0.8795656

chapter-3-subchapter-10.txt
Of the fracture of the hip bone	On setting a fractured hip.	0.5321438
It rarely happens that the hip bone is fractured, and if it happens, it is only a slight thinning at the head; and it fractures lengthwise, and bends inward, and the patient feels pain at the spot, and sharpness, and the fractured part swells.	It is rare indeed that hip-bones are fractured, and if they are fractured the fracture consists of a comminution of the extremities of them and a longitudinal splitting and a bending inward; and the patient feels a pain and a piercing at the site, and the leg on the fractured side is benumbed.	0.8740855
And the restoration is that you place your hand on it, until you are on the fracture; and know what the fracture is and its shape; and if the fracture is at the head only, then set that fracture evenly, so that it is in its natural shape.	To set it, you pass your hand over it and ascertain what the shape of the fracture is. If it is a fracture of the extremity only, set that fracture in whatever manner is convenient for you until it answers to its proper shape.	0.74158216
And if the fracture is lengthwise, or it bends inward, then have the patient lie on their stomach, until the restoration of that fracture is prepared. And when you have set it evenly, then apply the poultice, then place a splint of wood or leather on it, and bind the fracture, so that it does not move; and fill the spot under the ribs, so that the bandage is even.	But if it be a longitudinal fracture or it has bent inwards, have the patient lie on his stomach so as to make it convenient for setting the fracture; and when you have set it apply over it a plaster and over that a splint of wood or leather, and bandage it in such wise that you have no fear that the fracture may extend or the splint slip.	0.8423431
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.	Level out the cavity of the lumbar region with some filling so that it may take the bandage evenly, and bid the patient sleep on his back or on his sound side.	0.548198
And if a hot abscess occurs there, do not touch it, until the hot abscess is soothed, and apply what we have mentioned before; and then return to the restoration, and bind it as necessary, if there are no bad accidents; and this is the method.	If there occur an effusion, then refrain from bandaging or setting it until the effusion subsides; and apply to it something to allay it as before said; then return to setting it and bandaging it as it should be. If there be any splinters in the bone or anything crumbles away from the extremities, it must not be pulled out or touched, but set externally as we have said, and the bandaging should be left until it heals.	0.7234129

chapter-3-subchapter-11.txt
Of the fracture of the clavicle	On setting a fracture of the humerus.	0.499497
The clavicle is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is fractured, it should be restored according to one of two methods: one is that you take a piece of wood of medium thickness, in this shape:	The humerus is what lies between the elbow and the head of the scapula. If it is fractured it may be set in one of two ways. One is to take a smooth bow-shaped piece of wood of medium thickness, like this.	0.75214016
And tie two straps at the two ends, and hang it up, and seat the patient on a chair; then throw the fractured arm over the wood, so that it comes to the armpit, and has in the middle a curvature of wood, then hang some weight on it or the assistant pulls it down; then the physician sets the fracture evenly with his hands together, so that the fracture returns to how it should be.	You tie two bands at the two ends and then it is hung from above. The patient is to sit on a seat; then his broken arm is folded upon the piece of wood in such a way that his axilla fits into the middle of the curve of the piece of wood. Then hang a heavy weight from the arm, or have an assistant pull it downwards; then the doctor should straighten out the fracture with both hands together until it is properly reduced.	0.931587
And the other method is to lay the patient on his back, and tie his hand to his neck, then command two assistants, one holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below with a strap, and each one stretches in his part.	The other way is to make the patient lie back and to suspend his hand from his neck by a band, then you instruct two assistants. One is to grasp with both hands the arm above the fracture, and the other the arm below the fracture; and each should make extension toward himself.	0.910641
And if you see that the stretching needs to be stronger, then bind a strap below the fracture, and above the fracture, and each assistant stretches in his part. And if the fracture is near the shoulder, then you need to place a medium strap under the armpit, and another towards the elbow, below the fracture; and if the fracture is towards the elbow, then lightly place a strap, without effort, until the fracture is even on the spot, and on the elbow; then set the fracture evenly, as necessary, and bind it, if no hot abscess occurs.	And if you wish to extend more strongly, tie a band below the fracture and another above, and let each assistant pull toward himself. If the fracture is near the extremity of the shoulder you will have to put one band beneath the axilla and the other below the fracture near the elbow. Similarly, if the fracture be near the elbow you will have to put a band over the place and over the elbow itself. Then gently and without violence straighten out the fracture until it is restored to its proper shape and fits together well, and then tighten it if no abscess occur.	0.91037834
And if a hot abscess occurs, do not bind it for seven days, and apply wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil, until the hot abscess is soothed; then bind it, and the method of binding is to apply the poultice on the fracture, then place the arm on the clavicle, and place your hand on the shoulder or the breast; and place the cloth, and bind the clavicle, and the arm, so that the arm is in place of splints, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.	But if an abscess occur, leave the bandaging until the seventh day and apply raw wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses until the abscess subsides; then bind it up. The method of binding it is to apply a plaster to the fracture; then wind round the plaster a bandage of new material; then bind the forearm to the humerus, placing his hand open on his shoulder. Then apply pads and bandages to the arm and forearm so that the forearm serves instead of splints, if there is no contra-indication and you see no pathological change in the broken bone.	0.8577993
And if you fear that the bone will move, then use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint a finger's width, and each splint should be so large that it extends three fingers beyond the fracture on each side; then bind the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, stronger and less as you move away.	But should you fear any such change then use splints. The way to use these is to place over the fracture itself a splint that is broader and stronger than the rest; and leave a space of a finger's breadth between splints; the splint should be of a length to suit the fracture with the addition of three fingers' breadth all round. Then bandage over the splints in the manner mentioned at the beginning of the chapter. That is, you should bandage more tightly over the fracture itself and more lightly as you get away from the fracture.	0.88072616
And if you see the placement of the splints, and the binding, as we said, when you restore the fractured limb, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave it bound for seven days, as we said; then check every three days the bandage, that itching or swelling does not occur at the spot, or nourishment cannot come to the limb because it is too tight. Adjust it, as we said.	If you decide to put on splints and bandage, as we have said, at the time you set the limb, do so. But if you fear an abscess, leave the splinting and bandaging until the seventh day as we have said. Then examine the bandaging every third day lest there be itching or swelling at the place; or nourishment be prevented from reaching the limb on account of excessively tight bandaging; treat all these in the proper manner according to our prescriptions. But if you are confident that nothing of this sort is happening then do not loosen the bandaging until after many days.	0.87727445

chapter-3-subchapter-12.txt
Of the fracture of the arm	On setting a fracture of the forearm.	0.48882365
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "fosciles," one of which is small, and it follows the thumb; and the other is large, and it is underneath, towards the little finger; by chance the large foscile alone fractures, or the small one, and by chance both together.	The forearm consists of two bones and is sometimes called 'the two firesticks'. One of these bones is small and is in line with the thumb, the other is large; this is the one placed lower, under the smaller one.	0.84179485
When the small foscile is fractured, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is fractured, the healing is difficult, and more serious than when both are fractured together. If it is the small foscile that is fractured alone, then it needs to be lightly stretched, and set evenly.	The larger alone may be broken, or the smaller alone, or both broken together. When the small upper bone (radius) is broken it is easy to set and its mending is rapid. When the lower bone (ulna) breaks it is bad and its mending is difficult.	0.7882514
And if it is the large foscile, then it needs to be bound more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and hold the thumb higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and the patient should be crossed on himself, and a cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any strain; then the assistant stretches his arm to the part below with his hand, or with a strap, and another assistant to the other part above. And then the physician sets it evenly, according to its best shape.	During setting and extension the hand must be disposed on a cushion, spread out with the thumb uppermost, higher than all the fingers, and the little finger downmost, while the patient sits cross-legged upon the floor. The cushion should be on a level with him so that he does not suffer discomfort. Then let an attendant extend the arm from below, either by hand or by means of a band, while another attendant extends it from above similarly. Then the doctor may straighten the bone so as to restore it to the best possible shape.	0.85033727
And if the fracture has pieces, then place each one in its place, and if any are dislocated that pierce the flesh, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut above it and remove it, as we said before.	If there be any splinters in the fracture he must do his utmost to restore each splinter to its place. If a detached splinter appears there and is piercing the skin and you have no hope of restoring it, cut down upon it and remove it in the manner we have mentioned earlier.	0.7650904
And if the fracture is with a wound, I have spoken about it in the specific chapter; so take the treatment.	If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, we have devoted a separate section to this, so take the treatment of it from there.	0.7590369
And if a hot abscess occurs at the beginning of the restoration, then glue a cloth with a plaster made of rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft; and bind a cloth above subtly, until the hot abscess is soothed. And then remove the plaster, and apply the poultice made of mill powder with egg yolk, then place the splints, and the splint of the fracture should always be stronger, and a little wider than the others; and know that it should have six splints on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone, or in both; and bind more on the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and the cloths on the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and the thread, with which it is bound, should be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we said. And observe the limb and the binding after a few days. And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, like itching that comes to the limb, then you need to moisten the limb with warm water, until the itching is soothed; and let the limb rest, not tightly bound. And then start the binding again, and if the binding is loosened and the bone dislocated, and similar things, then adjust it.	The dressings wound round the fracture should be gentle and soft, not very hard, while the cord for binding is best made of linen of medium thickness as we have prescribed. Some days later, examine the limb and the bandaging and if anything has happened that should be put right, such as pruritus in the limb, the limb should be bathed in warm water until the pruritus has subsided. Let the limb be unbandaged for one night so that he may rest, then put the bandage on again. If the bandaging has become loose and the bone has shifted or anything of that sort, correct it all diligently.	0.75928855
And if you see that nourishment cannot come to the limb, because it is too tight, then you need to loosen it a little, and leave it so for a few days, until nourishment flows there, and then bind it again.	Look also to see if nourishment is being prevented from reaching the part on account of over-bandaging, in which case you will have to loosen it a little and leave it for a few days until nourishment flows to it; then bind it up.	0.7556288
And if none of these things we mentioned happen to the patient, then do not unbind it for twenty days or around that time, then hang the hands to their neck, and the neck should be even, and avoid movement and dislocation, and sleep on their back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and sometimes in twenty days, depending on the composition and complexion of the strengths.	But if none of those things that we have mentioned happens to the patient, it should not be loosened until after about twenty days. Then the patient's hand is to be suspended from his neck, the arm being level, and he should guard carefully against agitated movements, and should sleep on his back. You should know that this fracture of the arm mends in thirty or thirty-two days, and sometimes in twenty-eight, depending on the individual's constitution and the condition of his strength.	0.8931636

chapter-3-subchapter-13.txt
Of the fracture of the hand	On the repair of fractures of the palm and fingers.	0.461559
Know that on the back of the hand and at the joints of the fingers, fractures rarely occur, and most often it is just a dislocation.	Fractures of the metacarpus and of the small bones of the fingers very rarely occur; the only frequent occurrence is contusion.	0.6917567
And when the palm of the hand is fractured or dislocated, the patient should sit cross-legged, and sit upright; then place their hand on a stretched cloth, and the assistant stretches the fractured bones, and the physician sets them evenly, until they are well joined; then apply the poultice and the padding, if no abscess forms, then place a splint according to the size of the area; and wrap it in a linen cloth.	When a fracture or crushing of the palm of the hand occurs the patient should sit cross-legged with a chair of the right height in front of him, on which he should put his outstretched hand. Then an assistant is to extend the broken bones while the doctor straightens them so as to achieve a proper union. Then a plaster and a dressing should be applied, if an effusion do not occur; then a splint over that, measured to the site and wrapped in a soft cloth.	0.8945155
And if the fracture is on the underside around the palm, then make a pad of cloths, and instruct the patient to press it against the fractured palm; then bind it with a long cloth, and the splint should be soft wood as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it as needed.	If the fracture be lower down, near the inner part of the palm of the hand, make a ball of cloth, bid the patient grip on it with the fractured palm of his hand, and then bind it up with a long bandage. The splint should be of leather that is somewhat soft, so as to fit into all the folds of the palm; and bandage it on suitably.	0.8557921
And if the fracture is on the outside, you should place a splint on top and another underneath the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and secure the binding between the fingers.	But if the fracture be on the outside you will have to put one splint above and another beneath the palm of the hand, to keep the hand opened and straight; then put on the bandage, carrying it round the hand and in and out between the fingers.	0.8844259
And if the fracture is at any of the finger joints, if it is the thumb, set it evenly, as needed; and bind it with the palm, and if you wish, place a small straight splint to stabilize the fracture, and prevent movement; and if the fracture is on other fingers, like the index or another, set it evenly, and bind it with the healthy finger next to it; or bind them all together as one, which is better, or place a splint, as on the thumb; and monitor the restoration and the development of a hot abscess, and treat what arises, as I have said.	If it be the thumb, then set it in the proper way and bind it down to the palm of the hand; if you like you can apply a small straight splint to it to keep the fracture straight so that it does not shift. If the break be in any of the other fingers, such as the middle or index or little finger or the ring finger, straighten it out and bind it to the sound finger next to it; or let them all be bound up one to another, which is better; or apply a small straight splint, as we said for the thumb. While you are setting it, and afterwards, look out for an effusion and counteract it with what is required if anything of this sort occur, according to what has been repeatedly prescribed.	0.9135854

chapter-3-subchapter-14.txt
Of the fractured thigh	On setting a fracture of the femur.	0.43680352
The thigh bone is often fractured, and it is easily seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that a bandage is tied above the fracture, and another below. And the patient lies on their back, then each assistant stretches their part evenly; and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.	The femur is often broken, and this is readily discernible, for it will rotate forwards or backwards. It is set by binding a bandage above the fracture and another below, while the patient lies flat on his face. Then each assistant should make an even extension in his own direction, by the bandage. This is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.	0.9077868
And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one of the bandages should be near the groin, and the other below the fracture. And similarly, if it is near the knee, then the bandage should be near the knee, and the extension below; then the physician sets the bone evenly with his two hands, until it is in its natural shape, and then applies the poultice, and binds it, if no hot abscess forms.	But if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, you should tie on a soft bandage of wool or something similar, at the root of the thigh toward the groin, so that extension may be applied above, and another bandage below the fracture. Likewise if the fracture is near the knee the bandage should be near the knee, so that extension may be made downwards. Then the doctor should straighten it out with both hands until he has reduced it to the pattern of the natural form and the bone unites neatly.	0.8305796
And if there is a hot abscess, then let it settle, then return to your work and care; the binding is done in this way. You should wrap over the fracture a hard bandage doubled in two or three, and the excess remains, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the buttock, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, near the knee below, and the ends of the thread come above; then turn the bandage over the leg and the thigh, then place splints over the fracture, and place a splint over the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to make the binding even, then start binding firmly three or four times over the fracture; and the further you go from the fracture, the less you bind; then address the two ends of the thread that you placed between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints above, then go down to the end of the thread, until you reach the foot; and bind it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it so, provided that no abscess or swelling or anything similar occurs.	Then start with three or four turns of a strong bandage in the middle over the site of the fracture, and as you get away from the site of the fracture bind lighter and softer and looser. Then turn to the two ends of the cord which you previously passed between the thigh and the leg, and with the cord bind the adjacent splints above, then carry the ends downward until you end up at the great tendon of the foot and with them bind also the extremities of the splints at the other end so that the bandaging will not shift from its place. Then let the bandaging remain on as long as no pruritus or abscess or effusion or anything of that sort happens to the limb; but if any of these occur loosen it quickly and put right whatever has taken place, in the manner we have often mentioned.	0.89805996
And if it does occur, then unbind it, and adjust what occurs, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that pierce, they should be removed, if possible; and if it is not possible, then the area should be cut, and the pieces extracted; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.	If there be a penetrating fragment of the bone, you must reposition it if you can; but if not then cut down upon it and remove it and treat the wound in the sort of way mentioned previously, until it heals.	0.685135
And sometimes the thigh is fractured so that splints are placed, as in the shoulder and arm; however, with the restoration done this way, the patient does not limp.	This fracture of the thigh is sometimes bandaged without bringing the leg alongside with splints, in the way we spoke of for the humerus and the forearm. But setting after the former manner does not cause the patient any lameness; whereas if the femur is set alone without binding the leg to it the patient will inevitably be lame for always.	0.73530453
And know that the thigh is restored in fifty days, or a little less or a little more, depending on the diversity of complexions.	You must know that the femur knits in fifty days or a little more or less, according to the different constitutions and other circumstances.	0.7325536

chapter-3-subchapter-15.txt
Of the fracture of the kneecap	On setting a fracture of the patella of the knee.	0.5669037
Know that the kneecap rarely fractures, but it often dislocates. And if it fractures, it is usually just a crack or a small hole, and it happens both with and without a wound, and this is easily felt.	You should know that the patella is rarely fractured, but crushing often occurs. If a fracture does happen to it, it will be either a splitting or a shattering which may be simple or compound; and all these can be palpated.	0.81861556
And the restoration is such that what is round is set evenly with your fingers, until it is as closely joined as possible; then apply the poultice, and place a round splint, if needed, and bind it as necessary, then address all the conditions we mentioned in other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar; and apply to each condition what is needed, until it is healed.	Now the way to set is for the separated parts of it to be put right with the fingers, so that they unite and join as far as straightening and gentleness and skill can serve. Then apply the plaster and put upon that a circular splint, if need be, and over that a suitable bandage. Then keep an eye on it for all the conditions described for the other fractures, such as an effusion and the like, meeting whatever arises with what is good for it, until it is healed.	0.84707767

chapter-3-subchapter-16.txt
Of the fracture of the leg	On setting a fracture of the leg.	0.60247123
Know that the leg has two bones, one is rightfully called "mustel," and the other is called "foscile"; and fractures occur just as they do in the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the work is all one.	The leg consists of two bones. One of them is thick and is called 'leg bone' (tibia). The other is slender and is called 'fire-stick' (fibula). Both of these are liable to the same kinds of fracture as occur in the two bones of the forearm, therefore the repair of them will be like that of the arm, and the operation is one and the same.	0.7308568
And if both bones are fractured together, the leg will twist in all directions.	If both bones are broken together, the leg will turn in all directions.	0.94067764
And if the thin bone is fractured, it twists forward.	If the fibula is broken there will be a forward deformity of the leg.	0.62663865
And if the thick bone is fractured, there is great pain, and it is easily seen; and it twists downward. Then administer extension, and set it evenly, and bind the splints evenly; but if the fracture is severe, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and more gentle; and adjust it according to your skill.	If the tibia be broken, and that low down, it will be obvious to you. Employ levelling and extension and binding on of splints similar to that (sc. of the arm). But it will be necessary, if the fracture of the leg be a serious one with much fragmentation, for the extension to be gentler and lighter; and you must employ the utmost gentleness in setting it.	0.80944145

chapter-3-subchapter-17.txt
Of the fracture of the foot bones	On fracture of bones of the foot and of the toes.	0.68534803
Fractures do not occur at the ankle, but sometimes there are fractures in the bones of the foot and rarely in the toes, and it usually results in a break in multiple places.	The heel is never fractured; but the bones of the foot sometimes are. The toes too are rarely fractured; but mostly they get crushed.	0.7366961
And if a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot, and you see the bones overlapping, have the patient place their foot on the ground, as if they were going to walk, then place your foot on theirs, where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their places; then apply the poultice and padding, and place under the arch of the foot a small board with two flat ends, then bind it to the foot properly, after wrapping cloth around it, and other necessary things.	If a fracture occurs to the bones of the foot, and you see the bones riding over one another, let the patient plant his foot flat on the ground as if walking. Then stand and put the sole of your foot on the prominent bones and with your foot put pressure upon them and level them to their proper place. Then apply a bandage and some tow on top, and put under the inner part of the sole of the foot a small board with two flat heads. After you have wrapped them in material and so on, bind them tightly to the sole of the foot.	0.92453796
And after three or four days have passed, unbind the bandage, because you will find the bones are even, whether fractured or dislocated.	When three days or four have passed, loosen the binding and you will find the bones in position; whether they have been fractured or dislocated, the operation is (the same,) as you see.	0.84020543
And if any of the toes are fractured, restore them as we said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint on the fractured toe according to the length of the toe, and it should be a little wider, then place under the foot the board I mentioned, and bind it properly; and if two or three or more toes are fractured, place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrap in a linen cloth, and bind the board under the foot; and stand on the edge of the board outside the arch of the foot, so that it holds well.	If one of the toes be broken, reposition and straighten it in the way that I described for the fingers; then apply to the broken toe a splint of a length corresponding to the toe and a little wider than it. Then under the sole of the foot put the board that I have just described, and bandage it on firmly. If the broken bones number two, three, or more, then apply over each toe a single splint measured to it, wrapped in soft material, and bind the board on the sole and let the flat portion of each of the two heads extend beyond the end of the sole of the foot, so that it may be held firmly.	0.9255004
And you must not forget the other things I said for other fractures, as we mentioned; and address each condition as needed.	And you must not forget to pay attention to all those contingencies that we have mentioned to you in other fractures; meet each contingency with the means proper to it.	0.8452878

chapter-3-subchapter-18.txt
Of the fracture of the wrist bone	On fracture of the female pudenda and of the pubic bone and of the male organ.	0.41642737
And when the wrist bone of a man or woman is fractured, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from one who studies and practices this, and understands my book. For the fracture itself shows in many ways the proper method of restoration: therefore, understand it.	Now when a man or woman has the pubic bone broken you can use for the setting and repair of it the method we gave for a fracture of the hip. The correct practice in these uncommon fractures, which very rarely happen, will be obvious, especially to one who has some experience and understands well this book of mine. For the fracture itself will in most cases indicate the correct way to repair it and bind it up, so use your intelligence.	0.7553242
In the case of a fractured penis, take a goose neck and insert the penis into it; then wrap it with cloths, and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal quickly.	When a man's organ is fractured, take a goose's neck and introduce the penis into it; then let it be wrapped and bandaged and left for about three days until it be healed.	0.81770766

chapter-3-subchapter-19.txt
Of fracture with wound	On the repair of fractures accompanied by wounding.	0.60174936
It is necessary for someone with a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder or similar, that they be bled immediately, as we have previously described.	When a man has a compound fracture, especially when it is a large bone such as the femur or humerus or the like, you should at once venesect him if the conditions are suitable for venesection as set out above.	0.7850481
And if the wound heals, staunch it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the fracture at the same time or that day, if no hot abscess forms.	If there is bleeding from the wound you must hasten to stanch it by sprinkling it with powdered vitriol if you have nothing else at hand. Then begin on the reduction of the fracture the very same day; do not put it off unless an abscess occur.	0.76620734
And if a hot abscess forms, leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, as you could cause a bad condition.	But if an abscess does occur, leave the reduction until the ninth day so that the abscess may subside, and in no circumstances touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will bring evil consequences on him.	0.8548888
And if the fractured bone is visible under the exposed flesh, you must set it carefully with your hands, with slight extension.	If the fractured bone be overriding the skin you must try to reduce it and to straighten it out by hand, gently and with moderate extension.	0.7065841
And if the extension is not sufficient to set it with your hands, use this iron instrument, which is seven or eight fingers long, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and therefore the physician must have three or four of them, according to what is needed for each fracture treatment; and it should be round and a little thick, so it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, and it should be pointed at the front, and thick in the middle, like this:	If reduction and straightening by hand is unsuccessful, then reduce it with this instrument; it is made of iron, seven or eight fingers' breadths long, and wide in proportion to the size of the wound; that is why the doctor should have three or four of them in the sizes he may need for treating every kind of fracture. It should be round and somewhat thick so as not to bend when pressure is put upon it at the time of operating.	0.90252197
And it is called "palainche," for the curved end should be placed on the head of the exposed bone; and press it once, until it returns, and is even with the other. And if the fracture is delicate, and the instrument cannot grip the bone well, you must cut the head of the bone, so that the instrument can grip it.	It is called in Greek bayram, meaning a small lever. You must place the sharp incurved end of it over the end of the protruding bone, and push it firmly with it. When the bone is repositioned and straightened in some measure, try to straighten the ends of the fracture, one to another. If the fractured end be very thin and the instrument does not grip it firmly you will have to cut off that end so as to give purchase for the instrument.	0.7246405
And if you cannot set the bone as we have said, cut it with a suitable instrument, either a chisel or saw, as needed; then smooth what remains in the bone of roughness and small fragments.	If you cannot reduce the bone at all by the means we have described, cut it off with any of the osteotomes we have mentioned that is suitable, or saw it off with one of the saws as best you may. Then strip away any remaining roughness of the bone and fine pieces of shell.	0.74519634
And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that bad conditions may develop, as we have said, and you find pain in the area, do not apply splints; instead wrap around it, instead of splints, with hard cloths, and bind them. And when you see after a day or two that the wound is generating pus, remove what you have applied with wine, and apply a healing ointment, such as tetrafarmacum ointment or similar.	If the wound be severe or of great size and you fear for it some one of the grave accompaniments such as we have described, and the patient feels a disturbing pain at the place, then you should not put on splints; but instead of splints make wrappings of a stiff material and bind them on. If, after one or two days have passed, you see that the wound is beginning to suppurate, remove the dressing with wine that you had put on it, and then apply the pads and ointments with which it is our custom to heal wounds, such as Tetrapharmacon ointment and the like.	0.91691196
And you must unbind the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is fused and healed.	Every evening and morning you will have to loosen the bandaging and carefully examine the wound until it knits and is healed.	0.6690644
And the limb must be positioned in such a way that the pus can drain easily.	You must also place the limb in such a position as to let the pus flow down easily.	0.82420415
And if many days pass, and it cannot fuse but continuously produces pus, know that there are small pieces of bone, which must be removed by probing the wound with a tent, and removing all these loose pieces that cause this pain.	If, after many days, the wound is unhealed and it goes on suppurating, you may know that there are some little fragments of bone there; so you will have to examine the wound with a probe; and those fragments that are loose take and extract; and those that are not loose but nevertheless pierce the limb and cause pain, attempt to cut them out and extract them by whatever means you can.	0.772051
And if a fistula develops in the area, or another type of corruption, you must treat it, as stated in the previous chapter. And when the bone is fractured and exposed on the limb, such as the thigh bone or shoulder bone, and other similar large bones, do not pull it out, as this can often cause death; instead leave it until it rots; it will fall off on its own after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; if not, leave it.	If a defluxion or ulceration or other kind of corruption or putrefaction happen to the wound, you must meet all these occurrences with the proper remedy described before in its place. One thing that is necessary is that you should comply with my words and keep them in mind: when a large bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, such as the femur, the humerus, and the other bones of the long limbs, do not meddle with pulling or extracting it, for this often causes death; but leave it to suppurate. It may come away of itself in twenty or thirty days. Then dress the wound if you find occasion; if not, let be.	0.86830366

chapter-3-subchapter-20.txt
Of the calluses that form on the joint	On the treatment of the callus that remains from a fracture.	0.41969746
Often, after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, a callus forms, and it is an ugly thing to see the shape of the limb; and it may not be able to perform its natural functions.	This callus often occurs after the healing of a fracture, especially one near a joint, and thereby the shape of the limb is spoilt; and sometimes there is limitation of the natural function of the limb.	0.84516144

chapter-3-subchapter-21.txt
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and thin, it happens for many reasons: one is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and nourishment could not reach the limb; or because of too much washing; or because of too much movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, making it weak.	When a fractured bone has been repaired but the limb remains thin and weak, this may be due to many causes: the bandaging being too often loosened and not properly tightened; or excessive binding-up so that nourishment cannot flow to the limb; or excessive fomenting; or excessive and premature movement; or the thinness and weakness of the patient's blood.	0.89961696
And the cure is to make the patient eat well, and make the body plump, so that the blood multiplies in them; and administer baths, and give them joy and happiness; then apply poultices to the limb, so that the poultice draws great nourishment to it, and frequently wash it with warm water, until the nourishment flows to the limb; and it returns to its natural shape.	The treatment of this consists in the nourishing and restoring of his body so there be plenty of blood; and the use of the bath; and cheering the patient and making him happy, and so on. Then apply pitch to the limb so that it may draw much nourishment to itself, or continue the massage to the limb with tepid water, so that nourishment flows in the limb and it returns to its normal shape.	0.86919105

chapter-3-subchapter-22.txt
And sometimes the callus is removed by continuously and long rubbing with moist hands. And administer movement to the limb every hour.	Sometimes also the callosity is resolved by long-continued gentle friction with the hands; and constant movement in every direction should also be applied.	0.7408575
And if the twisting is old and hardened, like a stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut down to the bone, with a light subtle chisel; and put care and effort into the treatment.	But if the deformity be long-standing and fixed and hardened and you are compelled to treat it operatively, you will have to cut down on it from above, and free the junction of the bone, and with fine chisels cut away the redundant callus or bone; be gentle in this, with diligence and care.	0.69302803

chapter-3-subchapter-23.txt
A dislocation occurs when a joint is out of place, causing the limb to be misshapen and the patient to experience great pain and injury.	A dislocation is a displacement of any of the joints from its place, whereby the movement of the joint is hindered, the member is deformed, and the patient is caused violent pain and hurt.	0.76546764
When a dislocation happens to someone, it must be reduced (put back in place) immediately without delay.	When anyone sustains a dislocation he should hasten to have it reduced, not delaying it at all.	0.6834394
If one delays, the area will swell, and then it will be difficult to put back in place; for this reason, it should not be moved when swollen: it often causes spasms and other pains.	For if it is delayed the place will swell up and the reduction will be thereby made difficult. So it should not be delayed, nor moved or extended during the time it is swollen, for that often leads to spasm and excruciating pain.	0.7947173
However, if this happens, make the patient bleed, then leave it until the hot swelling subsides; then bathe the limb with warm water and oil, then gently put it back, and treat each limb as necessary.	Instead, when this occurs, you must hasten to venesect the patient, and then let be until the swelling has subsided a little. Then massage the member with hot water and oil and let it be gently reduced. And treat every member with the things that will be mentioned in their place.	0.83469737
And I have organized the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.	I have disposed the chapters on dislocations in the same order as the foregoing ones on fractures, that is, from the upper part of the body to the lower part.	0.5826735

chapter-3-subchapter-24.txt
It is rare for both mandibles to be dislocated, and their dislocation occurs in two ways: either they are slightly out of place and somewhat loosened; or they are entirely dislocated, hanging towards the chest, and saliva runs from the mouth as it cannot be held, nor can the mouth be closed, and the tongue becomes entangled with speech.	It is rare indeed for the jawbones to be dislocated. Their dislocation may be in one of two ways: either they may shift slightly from their place and be a little relaxed; or they may be completely and utterly dislocated so as to be relaxed down toward the breast so that the patient's saliva runs out and he cannot control it; nor is he able to close his mouth, and he stutters in speaking.	0.9046575
When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its place on its own.	If it be only a slight displacement it will go back in most cases spontaneously without much trouble.	0.6483228
And if it is complete and severe, you must reduce it quickly without delay.	But if the dislocation be complete and total it is necessary to set about the reduction of it at once without any delay.	0.71777576
In such a manner that the assistant holds the patient’s head, and the practitioner places his thumb inside the mouth at the root of the dislocation if it is on both sides; and the other fingers are outside, to align; and command the patient to relax the mandibles and move them in all directions.	This is done thus: an assistant holds the patient's head and the doctor introduces into his mouth the thumb of one hand at the root of the jaw, if it be a dislocation on one side, or both thumbs if it be a bilateral dislocation, with the rest of the fingers outside to keep it straight.	0.7762405
And the practitioner aligns it until it returns to its place.	Then let him bid the patient relax his jaws and allow them to move in any direction; while the doctor sets the dislocation, thrusting the jaw until it return to its proper place.	0.5475703
And if it is difficult to reduce, especially if both mandibles are dislocated together, then bathe them with warm water and oil until they can be gently put back in place; do not delay in reducing, as we have said.	If the reduction be difficult, especially if it be a bilateral dislocation, administer a fomentation with hot water and oil, so that the reduction of both sides may be facilitated. And on no account delay the reduction, as we have said.	0.80345815
And when they are equally reduced, and the patient’s mouth closes well without difficulty, apply cloths soaked in a mixture of rose oil and wax, then bind lightly with soft ties.	When the reduction and straightening have been done and the patient's mouth closes and is not relaxed, then apply to both sides dressings steeped in wax prepared from wax and oil of roses. Then bind it up gently, with a loose bandage.	0.7770604
And let the patient sleep on his back, with his head supported between two cushions, so that it does not move to the right or left, and does not strain to chew, but takes light food until the pains are gone, and the mandibles are healed.	The patient should sleep lying on his back with his head held between two pillows so that he does not move it either to right or to left; nor should he burden himself with chewing but should be on a diet of broth of corn starch until the pain is gone and the jaw is firm; then he may eat whatever he wishes.	0.833946
And then he may eat whatever he wants lightly, and does not strain to open the mouth for eating and drinking until the mandibles are well healed.	Let him use it gently; let him not work his mouth heavily in eating or drinking or yawning until the jaw is firmly knit and healed.	0.631722
And if the two mandibles cannot be set right at once and are not returned to their places, fevers and sudden habitual conditions may arise, and possibly diarrhea, and possibly vomiting of pure bile.	If the reduction of both sides is hard when it is a simultaneous bilateral dislocation, and there is no return to the proper position, then thereby in many cases fevers and perpetual headaches occur; sometimes the patient's belly is loosened and he vomits actual bile.	0.66478455
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of death; and often those who experience it die within eight days.	When you see this you will know that he is doomed; in most cases in which this happens death follows in ten days.	0.79153836

chapter-3-subchapter-25.txt
The collarbone cannot dislocate from the rib internally where it connects to the chest, but it sometimes dislocates externally, and it is easily felt.	The clavicle is never dislocated inwards because of its continuity with the breast-bone; but sometimes it is dislocated outwards, and then it is detected by palpation.	0.72659004
The treatment is for the patient to lie often on his back and extend his arms; then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply a plaster and a bandage, and tighten it.	The replacement is thus: the patient is to lie on his back and stretch out both arms; then with the palm of your hand press heavily upon the place and it will go back. Then apply to it the plaster and pads, and bandage it up.	0.87470865
The end near the shoulder cannot dislocate; if it does sometimes dislocate, then return it to its place, as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage, and tighten it, and command the patient to rest until it is healed.	As to the extremity of the clavicle, which is close to the shoulder and joined to it, it is only rarely dislocated; but if ever it is dislocated you must reduce it and set it straight as we have mentioned, by any convenient means. Then apply the plaster, pads, and bandages, and bid the patient keep quiet and still until it is healed.	0.8116099
And in the same way, the head of the shoulder is reduced when it is out of place.	By this same treatment you may also reduce the head of the humerus when it is displaced.	0.64334893

chapter-3-subchapter-26.txt
Of the dislocation of the shoulder	On the reduction of a dislocation of the humerus.	0.53922695
Know that the shoulder can only dislocate in three ways: one is dislocation downwards towards the armpit; the second is towards the chest; and sometimes upwards, but this happens rarely.	You should know that there are three ways in which the humerus may be dislocated. One is a dislocation down into the axilla, another is a dislocation toward the breast; it may also be dislocated upward, which is rare.	0.8560457
And it does not dislocate backwards through the shoulder, nor internally through the nerves; it often dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, for in these it quickly dislocates; in those who have enough flesh, it dislocates with difficulty and returns with difficulty.	It is not dislocated backward, because of the scapula; nor is it dislocated forward, on account of the tendons. Mostly it is dislocated and displaced down into the axilla, and particularly in those of a spare build; in such it quickly comes out and quickly goes back. But in those of a fleshy build it is the opposite; it comes out with difficulty and goes back with difficulty.	0.85017204
And sometimes, due to impact or fracture, the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and it is thought to be dislocated because of this.	Sometimes a man suffers a blow or a fall, so that the upper arm swells up with an effusion, whence he forms the opinion that there is a dislocation.	0.6813332
Therefore, it is necessary to examine it to be sure; and then begin the treatment.	So you must examine it to make sure of it and then proceed to treat it.	0.8844439
The dislocation is recognized when it is downwards towards the armpit, and by the difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, which will be manifest. And you will find a depression at the head of the shoulder, and below the armpit when touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose or make any movements.	A dislocation down into the axilla may be diagnosed by comparing the sound and the dislocated humerus; for you will find an obvious difference between them; you will find a hollow at the head of the humerus, and in the axilla the head of the humerus may be palpated like an egg, and the patient is unable to lift his hand to his ear, and full movements are restricted.	0.79553235
And also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it manifestly by touch.	Similarly if it is displaced toward the breast or upward you will find it obvious to the touch and not hidden.	0.69408673
And this type of dislocation is not difficult to reduce when it is recent, or if the child is young.	The reduction of this dislocation will be quite simple if it be only recent or the patient be a child.	0.71591234
The method is for the assistant to lift the patient's arm upwards, then place your thumbs under the armpit, and lift the joint forcefully upwards into place; and the assistant lifts the arm, and extends it upwards, then places it below; so it will come back quickly.	To reduce it, his hand should be lifted up by an assistant, then you should put both your thumbs under his axilla and lift the joint up powerfully into its place, while the assistant lifts and stretches his hand upward; then he puts it down and the dislocation will at once go back.	0.8123987
And if it does not come back as we have said after several days, then the patient must be bathed in warm water; and administer soothing and softening baths, such as a decoction of mallow, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and let it be administered.	If it is not reduced by the means we have stated, being a dislocation of many days' standing, the patient should take a hot bath and use relaxing and softening fomentations, such as decoction of marsh mallow root and fenugreek and melilot.	0.8315531
Then let the patient lie on his back, and place a woolen pad under the armpit, neither too soft nor too hard, then the practitioner places his heel on the pad, and virtuously lifts the head of the shoulder, and pulls the patient's hand.	Then the patient should lie on his back and you put under his axilla a ball of wool of moderately hard consistency.	0.6536447
And another assistant holds the patient's head so that it does not move downwards; that shoulder will return immediately, and if you want, reduce it according to this method.	Then the doctor should put his heel on the ball and grasp the patient's hand and draw it downward, while pushing the ball with his foot, and it will straightway be reduced.	0.6057098
And have present a man who is taller than the patient; and let him stand to the side, and place his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air. And another assistant pulls the patient's hand down towards the abdomen. And if the patient is too light, let something heavy be hung with him, and the dislocation will return immediately.	Or, if you prefer, reduce it in this way: get a man taller than the patient to stand on one side and pass his shoulder under the patient's axilla and lift it up until the patient is suspended in mid-air, while another assistant pulls the patient's hand down towards his lower abdomen (if the patient is light it will be necessary to hang a weight from him); then the dislocation will straightway be reduced.	0.7576363
And reduce it also in another manner: which is to drive a long stick into the ground, with the head as round as a pestle, and not too thick nor too thin. Then place it under the patient, but let it have soft cloths on it, and the patient stands along the stick; then extend his hand down strongly from the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly.	It is also reduced by another method: that is, to fix in. the ground a long spar of wood; its head should be of a round shape like the pestle of a mortar, neither massive nor slender; then after a soft pad has been put on the head of the spar it should be placed under the axilla of the patient, who should be standing alongside the spar; then let his hand be drawn downward on one side and his body on the other, powerfully. Then the joint will immediately return to its place.	0.88552475
And if it does not return despite all these methods we have mentioned, then do this treatment: take a stick two arms long and four fingers wide, with a round head to fit deeply under the armpit, in this shape:	If it proves difficult to reduce it by any of the means we have stated, employ this treatment: take a wooden spar some two cubits in length, two fingers thick, and four wide; it should have a round head to facilitate its introduction into the hollow of the axilla; of this shape.	0.7152544
Then wrap soft cloths around the head of the stick, so it does not hurt the patient, then place it under the patient’s armpit; and extend his arm along the stick, and tie the joint onto the stick, and the arm at the hand's head, then place the arm on a rung of a wide ladder, and extend the hand down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return immediately.	Then you bind on the round head soft rags so that the wood will not hurt the patient. Then it is placed under the patient's axilla, and his whole hand and arm are stretched down over the spar, which is to be bound down to the upper arm, the forearm, and the tip of the hand. Then let the arm be placed cross-wise over the rung of a ladder and the hand stretched downward, and let the rest of the body hang down on the other side; then the joint will very quickly go back.	0.88414073
And when it is in place, by whatever method, it is necessary to place an equal wool pad under the armpit, then apply a plaster made of mill dust, incense, and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around, then bandage appropriately under the armpit, and turn the bandage over the plaster, and brace the hand to the neck, and let the hand remain like this.	Once it has gone back properly, in whatever way is possible, there should be put under the axilla a ball of wool of moderate size; then apply the plaster prepared from mill-dust with olibanum and egg-white, all round the shoulder. Then firmly bandage the ball under the axilla and carry the bandaging round over the plaster. Sling his hand from his neck, then let him be left without moving his hand for a week.	0.8008244
And it is necessary for him to eat little, so that the limb is strengthened, for it will heal faster; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.	The patient's diet should be light until the limb gets strong, for that will hasten the cure. After five or seven days it can be unfastened and he can make trial of its movement; if it is firm and not slack then it is healed.	0.79183996
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, it is necessary to apply cauterization at three points, as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.	If the joint is frequently dislocated, on account of a humidity arising in it or some other cause, then use should be made of the cautery with three prongs spoken of earlier, in the book on cauterizations.	0.7666768
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are cut, stretched, or softened; and know that the joint will never be firmly set in place.	If you do all this and loosen the bandaging after a week and the joint is still not firm, and you repeatedly plaster it and bandage it, and it is still loose and comes down and dislocates and you are unable to raise it up, then you may know that the tendons at the head of the humerus are either cut through or stretched or loosened; in which case you may know that the joint will never stay firm in its place.	0.85743695
The dislocation towards the chest, and the nipples, or behind, is caused by an impact, and extending the hands, and it is treated in another way; and treated until it is healed.	As to the dislocation toward the chest and breast, and posteriorly, the reduction of this is done by thrusting and extension with both hands until it goes back. And apply the usual bandaging and treatment until it is healed.	0.7372601
And if after healing stiffness comes to the limb, and delay in movement, let the patient use baths many times, until that stiffness is relieved, and it returns to its original nature.	If, after it has healed, a callosity arises in it, and it is slow in movement, the patient should take frequent hot baths until that callosity is softened and the member returns to its original condition.	0.774817

chapter-3-subchapter-27.txt
Of the dislocation of the elbow	On the treatment of a dislocation of the elbow.	0.6050689
Know that the elbow joint is rarely dislocated, and rarely returns; and it is dislocated in all directions, especially front and back, and the dislocation is not hidden, for it is easily seen and felt; and dislocates in different ways. And when you compare the sick elbow with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is displaced, and he cannot bend his arm or touch his shoulder with it.	The elbow is with difficulty dislocated and with difficulty put back. Now dislocation may be in all directions, and particularly forward and backward. Whatever way it is dislocated it will not be concealed from you, because it is both visible and palpable, and whenever you compare the dislocated elbow with the sound one it is quite openly and plainly manifested; for the elbow joint is hollow and the patient cannot flex the forearm back or touch his shoulder with it.	0.88881266
And it is necessary to reduce it before a hot abscess appears, for if a hot abscess comes, it will be difficult to reduce; and possibly it cannot be completely reduced, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and is more painful, and possibly leads to death.	You must hasten and reduce the dislocation as rapidly as possible before an abscess occur. For if an abscess occur the reduction of it is difficult and maybe it will never be healed; especially when it is a posterior dislocation, for this is the worst and most painful of all the kinds of dislocation, and often it is fatal.	0.81462896
And the treatment is, when it can be reduced, to extend the patient's hand with both your hands; and his arms spread out, and the practitioner's hands around the elbow, above and below, and push the joint with your thumbs together, or at the base of the palm, until it returns to its place.	Now when it is one of those that can be reduced, the way to reduce it is for an assistant to perform a two-handed extension of the patient's hand, the patient's forearm being opened out, while the doctor's hands are above and below the elbow joint and he thrusts the joint with both thumbs together or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.	0.8288828
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and pushes from the base of the palm the elbow that is dislocated.	If it be an anterior dislocation, it may go back if the hand is bent sharply back until it strikes its own shoulder with the root of the palm.	0.6847296
And if it does not return to its place, then apply strong extension; and this is when two assistants extend the arm, and two assistants hold it, so that it does not move during the extension; then twist the arm in all directions, after wrapping it in a long and wide doubled cloth.	If the dislocation does not respond to reduction, apply very strong and powerful extension. For this, let two assistants pull on the arm while two other assistants hold the patient against the extension. Then the arm should be rotated in all directions after the limb has been wrapped in a long folded cloth or a broad wrapper.	0.832137
And when the practitioner has aligned the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly until it returns.	When the doctor begins manipulating the joint he should anoint his hands with oil so as to assist, by its lubrication, the movement of the joint; then he should thrust the joint powerfully until it goes back.	0.7986262
And when it is in place, apply a dry plaster with egg white, and bind it firmly, and hang the arm from the patient's neck, and leave it for a few days, then untie it.	After its reduction he should apply to it a plaster having some styptic and absorbent qualities, with egg-white; and put on a firm bandage and suspend the patient's arm from his neck and leave it for some days.	0.74243486
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not tight, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for a few days, until it is firmly set; then untie it.	Then undo it; and if the joint remains fixed in its place, then untie the bandaging and leave it. If you see that the joint is not thoroughly firm, replace the plaster and bandaging and leave it for a few more days until it is firm; then untie it.	0.94267875
And if he feels stiffness after the joint is reduced, and it moves, then bathe it and rub it gently, and press until it is relieved; or apply a greasy lamb's wool to the joint, leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let him bathe in a bath. And when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then reapply the wool, and then enter the bath; and do this two or three times until it is healed; and if you want, apply warm cow dung mixed with butter, and bind it on; it will return to its proper condition.	If, after the reduction and unbandaging of the joint, it becomes stiff and is difficult to move, soften it in the bath and apply gentle friction and massage until it is softened, or apply to the joint the tail of a fat-tailed sheep; bind it on and leave it on for a day and a night; then remove it and send him to the bath, and when he sweats apply moderate friction to the joint; then replace the tail and again and again, alternating with the bath, until the joint softens. If you prefer, apply to it, and bandage on, fresh cow-dung lightened with butter. Do this a number of times and it will soften and return it to its original state.	0.91715395

chapter-3-subchapter-28.txt
The dislocation of the hand	On the treatment of a dislocation of the wrist.	0.44409692
The joints of the hand dislocate, and their reduction is easier, more than other joints. However, it must be reduced quickly, at the same time it is dislocated, before the area swells or a hot abscess forms.	The carpus of the hand is often dislocated. Unlike other joints, the reduction is easy, but there should be haste to reduce it as soon as it is dislocated, before the place swells or an abscess occur.	0.8400806
And the reduction is done by placing the injured hand on a table, and the assistant extends the hand, and the practitioner aligns it, placing his palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns.	The way of reducing the dislocation is to place the patient's wrist upon a board while an assistant stretches the hand, and the doctor puts the palm of his hand upon the prominence of the joint and applies pressure on it until it goes back.	0.83844495
However, it is necessary to check if it is well placed; then have the patient place the back of his hand on the table for extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and the practitioner places his hand on the prominence of the joint. If it returns immediately, that is good.	But he should examine: if it is a displacement toward the ventral aspect of the hand, the patient should place the back of his hand upon the board for extension and reduction; but if it be a luxation toward the dorsum of the hand, then the inner part of the hand should be laid upon the board so that the doctor's hand may come upon the prominence of the joint itself.	0.81422853
If not, bind it with plasters soothing hot abscesses, and leave it without reapplying.	If it go back at once, good; but if not, bandage it with a plaster that settles swelling and let it be.	0.6694678
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, the joint remains twisted.	Do not revert to it, for it will not tolerate that, and you will not be able to effect its reduction after some days have passed.	0.55539846
And it does not harm the patient except that the hand is weakened, and cannot grasp anything: then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; and there is no other remedy except cauterization near the area, and possibly nothing else will help.	But the joint will retain its deformity; and the patient will in no wise be harmed except if his hand is slackened so that he be unable to grip anything; then you may know that the tendons are either severed or bruised. In this situation there is no method but to strengthen it by cauterization; this sometimes helps but sometimes is of no use at all.	0.77393436
And when the hand is in place, apply the plaster we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then untie it and leave it like that.	When the reduction of the joint is complete, apply to it the plaster we have described, then bandage it and leave it for five days; then loosen it and try out the hand.	0.8066384
And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, bathe it in warm water, and rub it until it is healed.	If movement be hampered and any hardness occur in it, soften it repeatedly with hot water and sweating until it be softened.	0.70690906

chapter-3-subchapter-29.txt
Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.	0.6362108
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in all directions, sometimes on the back of the palm or the front.	The fingers may be dislocated in any direction.	0.5433371
Then extend the finger, and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns, then support the tip of the finger, and hang it towards the side where it is dislocated.	When one of the fingers is dislocated dorsally or ventrally, then extend the finger and thrust the dislocation with your thumb until it goes back. Then bind the head of the phalanx, suspending it in the direction in which it was dislocated, and leave it for two days.	0.68902224
And leave it for two days, then set it properly that day; and at night bind it, as we have said, and unbind it by day, and make it move, and rebind it at night; and do this often until it is stable.	Then unbind it and extend it so that it may straighten out all that day. Then at nightfall bind it in just the same way. Continue to loosen it by day and to exercise it with movement, bandaging it by night. Do this for some days until it is knit.	0.76808023
And do the same if it is dislocated to the front of the hand, and do as you did before until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.	Do the same with it if it is a ventral dislocation, binding it in that direction, and treat it as explained above until it is healed. Do likewise with dislocations in other directions.	0.7145295

chapter-3-subchapter-30.txt
Of the dislocation of the spine of the back	On the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.	0.6500029
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are several dislocations, there is no cure, for death quickly follows the patient.	When any of the vertebrae of the back or the neck are completely dislocated or a number of vertebrae are displaced, there is no treatment in this case for death is hastening toward the patient.	0.8469542
And the signs are that the excretions escape without control, and cannot be held, and often some limbs are paralyzed, either both thighs or both arms or one.	The sign of this is that the injured man passes a motion involuntarily, being unable to hold it back; often too some of his limbs go limp, either both legs or both arms or one of them.	0.7732942
And often the spine moves in four directions; the one that moves backwards is called "kyphosis."	If, as often happens, a single vertebra is displaced, the displacement may be in any of four directions. When there is a displacement backwards it is called 'curvature of the spine'.	0.7070964
The treatment is to see if the kyphosis came from childhood: then there is no cure or complete healing.	As to its treatment: examine it; if the curvature dates from childhood then there is no treatment or cure at all for it.	0.71621656
And the one that comes from falling or impacts or similar causes, the ancients gave methods of treatment with long explanations, but not all are greatly effective.	As for the sort that occurs from a fall or a blow or the like, the Ancients indulged in lengthy dissertations thereon, giving many kinds of treatment, the greater part of which is of no use.	0.6902395
But I have shortened it according to my understanding, and have created instruments in various ways.	But I have abbreviated from it, making a little which will serve in place of their much, consisting in my clarification and exposition of the sense. I have also depicted the instrument differently from their account and their explanation.	0.5963026
I say that in the kyphosis that comes to the chest in front, there is no remedy or healing.	I say then, that in a curvature occurring forward there is no technique or cure for it.	0.7238097
And also the one that comes directly on both sides, and can only be treated if it is specifically on the back, as I say.	And likewise in a curvature laterally. The only curvature that can be treated is that of the dorsal spine exclusively, by the means I now describe.	0.62290657
And it is that the patient is stretched on his stomach on an even surface, with padding underneath so he is not hurt.	The patient should be stretched prone upon a level bench near a wall, and a soft palliasse should be spread under him so that his chest may not be hurt.	0.7071587
Then drive a stick firmly into the ground at the head, and another at the feet, and tie a band under the patient's armpits, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles.	Then wind round the patient's chest and beneath his axillae a soft strong wrapper, and stretch one end of the wrapper to the spar at his head, and tie it to it.	0.72221804
And two assistants pull the bands, one at the head and the other at the feet, through the two sticks.	Then bind other wrappers: over his hips, his knees, and by both tendons of Achilles; then bring the wrappers together and tie them to the other spar at his feet.	0.5215976
And let the sticks be well secured as we have said, and the practitioner places his palms on the spine firmly until it returns.	Then each assistant extends the spar with the tie towards himself; the two spars will not shift from their places in which they are planted, but, as we have said, they are not to be fixed. Meanwhile the doctor is to press hard with both his palms upon the spine until it goes back; or he may place a board upon it and apply pressure to the board with his feet until it goes back.	0.598784
And if it does not return by this method, take a board three arms long, and place it under the wall, and the patient lies on his side, and place the end of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine. And the practitioner places his feet on the other end of the board, and presses well until it returns to its place; and if you want, do it with a hand-operated winch.	But if it does not go back under this treatment then let a board be taken, about three cubits long, and let a place be hollowed out in the wall, which, as we said, should be near the patient, into which you put the end of the board; then place the mid-point of the board upon the hump, and he—the doctor—should place both his feet on the other end and strongly thrust upon the spine until it is forced back into position.	0.8523268
And this is to drive two sticks at the head of the patient, one arm's length apart, and two others towards the feet, and between each stick, above and below, a palm's width apart.	If you wish you may operate by means of a winch turned by hand; thus: you fix in the ground at the head of the patient, at one end of the bench, two wooden spars each one cubit long; and the same at the lower end, at his feet; there should be the distance of a span between the spars (of each pair).	0.748387
And each stick has a hole, where the winch turns, and let the sticks be firmly in the ground so they do not move; and between each two sticks have a rotating stick, where the bands turn, and have on each rotating stick two small sticks a palm's length, to turn the winch.	In each spar there should be a hole in which the shaft may run, and each spar should be firmly fixed in the ground so as not to move at all. Then you introduce a round piece of wood, the shaft on which the rope is wound, into the two openings of the two wooden spars. At one end of each shaft is a hole into which is firmly fixed a piece of wood a span long by which it is wound.	0.8423788
And then tie the band around the armpits to the winch at the head, and the other band to the winch at the feet, and each assistant turns his winch with the band, and the practitioner sets the spine straight as we have said.	Then bind the wrapper that you have bound round his chest to the shaft at the patient's head, and those bound round his legs to the shaft at his feet. Then have an assistant standing at each shaft to turn with his hand the handle by which the shaft is revolved, while the doctor straightens out the curvature in the way we have described.	0.82887435
And when it is straight, apply a drying plaster with egg white, then padding, then a splint of a small board three fingers long, covering the kyphosis area and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a band as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until it is healed.	After the spine has been restored and the place has been straightened it will be necessary for you to apply an absorbent plaster with egg-white, then packing, then over the plaster apply a flat splint about three fingers wide and long enough to cover the site of the curvature and several sound vertebrae on either side. Then let it be bandaged as is needful and let the patient follow a mild diet until he is cured.	0.7755002
And if something arises at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint we have mentioned before; and sometimes a piece of lead is applied.	If after he is healed there still remains some prominence at the site, it will be necessary to employ remedies to relax and soften the parts, together with the use for a long time of the flat splint we described; in this case a leaden plate may be employed.	0.71777785
And sometimes the appearance of a protrusion in the back vertebra of the spine occurs, and it is thought to be a dislocation; but it is the bone that is protruding, therefore one should not presume: it could possibly lead to death.	Sometimes there occurs a prominence at the end of the dorsal vertebrae, from which one may form the opinion that there is a dislocation, whereas it will be a superfluous bone that has become prominent; do not interfere with it by this treatment, for death may result.	0.8324479

chapter-3-subchapter-31.txt
Of the dislocations of the hip	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.	0.45758578
Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder only suffer dislocations, not other injuries like other joints; and the hip joint dislocates in four directions: inwards, outwards, forwards, and backwards; more inwards than elsewhere, and rarely forwards or backwards.	You should know that a complete dislocation alone is sustained by the hip and shoulder joints; they do not sustain the lesser displacements, with concavity, as do the other joints. Now the hip joint is dislocated in four directions, interior, exterior, posterior, and anterior. Most commonly it is dislocated interiorly; and rarely is it dislocated anteriorly or posteriorly.	0.8828939
And the recognition of its dislocation inwards is that when the injured leg is compared with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee appears more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his knee properly. And the area near it is swollen with a hot abscess because the head of the thigh bone comes there.	The indication of an internal dislocation is that when you compare the patient's sound leg with the injured leg it will be longer and the knee will be prominent as compared with that of the sound leg; nor will it be possible for the patient to flex the foot back on the groin; and there will be an obvious swelling near the groin because the head of the femur has moved there.	0.81402695
And the signs of the one whose dislocation is outwards are that these symptoms are opposite to those before.	The sign of the occurrence of an external dislocation: the symptoms will be the exact contrary to these.	0.6792244
And the signs of the one whose dislocation is forwards are that he extends his leg well completely; however, he cannot bend his knee without pain, and if he tries to walk, he cannot move forward, and retains his urine, and the groin swells, and when he walks, he steps on his heel.	The sign of an anterior dislocation is that the patient can stretch his leg out fully but cannot flex it without feeling pain in the knee; and if he tries to walk he will be unable to walk forward; and he has retention of the urine and his groin swells, and in walking he hobbles upon his heel.	0.89942765
And the signs of the one whose dislocation is backwards are that he cannot extend his knee or bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is located below the ribs.	The sign of a posterior dislocation is that he cannot extend the knee, nor can he flex it before flexing the hip; also the leg will be shorter than the other, the groin will be relaxed, and the head of the femur will be evident at the lumbar region.	0.81781363
The reduction of this type of dislocation is to check if the dislocation is old, and if it remains as it is, there is no cure; and it is not necessary to assume otherwise.	As to the reduction of the various forms of this dislocation, you must examine the case and if it be an old dislocation which the patient has suffered from for a long time and the reduction of which has not been contrived and which remains as it was, there is no treatment for it at all, nor should any be attempted.	0.7184437
And in the one whose dislocation is recent, and it is of the four types of dislocation, quickly turn the joint, and extend it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left; possibly it will return, and no other treatment is needed.	But in that case whose dislocation is recent, whichever of the four kinds of dislocation it be, hasten to rotate the joint and extend it internally and externally and move it to the right and the left; for often it will return and no further treatment will be needed.	0.9022056
And if it does not return in this way, it is necessary to prepare a strong assistant, and extend the leg strongly with both hands, or with a band tied above the knee. And another assistant extends his hand above in such a manner that he places his hands under the armpits, then ties a soft band above the thigh; and another holds the end of the band.	But if it does not go back thus, you must have ready a sturdy and powerful assistant to extend the leg from below, either with both his hands or with a wrapper bound upon the leg above the knee; while another assistant pulls from above by putting his hands under the patient's axillae; then you should bind a soft wrapper upon the root of the thigh, with a third assistant to hold the end of the bandage.	0.89609677
And they extend upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains hanging.	Let them all make their extension simultaneously so the patient is lifted up bodily and remains suspended.	0.71944237
This method of extension is common to all four types, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.	This kind of extension is common to all four kinds of dislocation. If the dislocation goes back by the way we have said, good.	0.88281816
If not, it is necessary to treat it according to its type. When the dislocation is inwards, lay the patient on his healthy side, then place the band at the base of the thigh, and the area below the groin, then extend the band upwards towards the groin and the hip bone.	Otherwise, each kind must have the special treatment I shall describe. When it is an internal dislocation then the special reduction is for the patient to lie upon his sound side; then apply a wrapper to the root of the hip in the space between the head of the femur and the part below the groin; then carry the bandage upward from the groin toward the upper part of the body, in the direction of the clavicle.	0.7605268
Then another assistant takes his arms, and embraces the thick part of the injured thigh, and extends it outwards strongly: it will return to its place immediately; and this type of dislocation is easier than the others.	Then another powerful and sturdy assistant is to take hold of his arms while the thick part of the afflicted thigh is clasped and strongly extended outward; then it will return to its place. This kind of treatment is easier than the others for the reduction of this limb.	0.85649806
And if you cannot set it in this way as we have said, it is necessary to tie the patient’s two feet together with a strong soft band around the two heels and around the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two fingers more than the other.	But if you find it refractory and it does not answer to this method of treatment, then the patient's two feet will have to be bound together with a strong soft bandage round his two ankles and his two knees. The distance from each to the next should be four fingers, and the injured leg should be stretched two fingers beyond the other.	0.7791873
Then hang from the head of a stick, and be two arms' length above the ground; then command one assistant to embrace the head of the thigh, and another assistant hanging with the patient, who strongly embraces the thigh, for the joint will return immediately and quickly.	Then tell a powerful servant to clasp the head of the hip and another servant to hang from the patient; and the other servant, the one who is clasping the hip, should thrust powerfully; then the hip will speedily go back.	0.80972314
And when the dislocation is outwards, let the patient lie as we have said for one with kyphosis, and tie a band around the injured leg properly, and around the foot as well.	The special method of reduction in the case of an external dislocation: it will be necessary for the patient to be lying on a bench after the manner described for the one with a curvature of the spine; but wrappers are to be tied only on the injured leg and the chest.	0.5233204
Then place two sticks, one at the head and another at the feet, then drive a stick between the patient's thighs in the middle. And wrap it with moist cloths around, so it does not hurt the patient, then each assistant extends towards him, and the practitioner sets the dislocation with his hand.	Then the two spars are to be set in position, one at his feet and another at his head; and have an additional spar firmly fixed in the middle of the bench and wrapped in soft cloth so as not to injure the patient; this spar is to be between his thighs so that he will not be dragged down during extension. Then each assistant is to pull in his own direction while the doctor sets the hip with his hands.	0.88828826
If it returns, it is good. If not, place it on a table, and press it as we have said for kyphosis, and let the patient lie on his healthy side.	And if it goes back, good. But if not, place the board upon it and put pressure upon it just as we prescribed for curvature, except that the patient will have to lie upon his sound side.	0.78069955
And when the dislocation is forwards, it is necessary to extend the injured leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and the practitioner places his effort on the injured groin, then presses with the other hand, and extends it down towards the knee.	When it is an anterior dislocation, extension will have to be applied forcefully to the patient's leg, on the bench, exactly as described; the doctor should place the palm of his right hand upon the injured groin and then apply pressure with the other hand, directing the pressure so as to make extension downward toward the knee.	0.8269649
And if the dislocation is outwards, it is not necessary to extend the patient downwards, nor to lift him off the ground, rather it is necessary that he be as if the hip were dislocated outwards, as we have said about lying on both hips. And be on his stomach, and the bands extended as we have said before, and press on the joint at the table.	If it is a posterior dislocation the patient must not be raised above the ground and extended downward; rather must he be placed upon something hard, in the manner that we prescribed for an external displacement of the hip: he is to lie prone on the bench with the bands tied as we said before. It will also be necessary to apply pressure with the board to the site to which the joint has been displaced.	0.84350896
And it will be right when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal; then join the thighs, and apply the plaster, and bind with a band, so that the hip does not move.	It will also be necessary to apply pressure with the board to the site to which the joint has been displaced. When the proper reduction of the joint is completed—the signs of reduction will be plain to you; namely, that you extend both the patient's legs, and when you see that both legs are of equal length and the patient can draw up and stretch out the leg without difficulty, then you may know that the limb has gone back as it should—then bring both thighs together, apply the plaster and bind with a sash so that the hip does not move in any direction; and the patient is to keep perfectly quiet for three or four days. Then loosen the bandage and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other.	0.6439034
And rest for three or four days, then untie, and apply the plaster; and if you see that they are equal, then bind it as before, and leave it for three days; then untie, and let him walk gently, until the limb is strengthened.	If you see that they are both the same size you may know that the dislocation is cured and you can allow the patient to walk freely. But if you see any slackening then repeat: replaster and rebandage as you did at first, and leave for another three days. Then unfasten. He should be cautious about walking on it for some days, until it is thoroughly strong, God willing.	0.698658

chapter-3-subchapter-32.txt
Of the dislocation of the knee	On dislocation of the knee.	0.76099944
The knee dislocates in three ways: namely, inwards, outwards, and backwards; and it does not dislocate forwards.	The knee is dislocated in three ways; it is dislocated interiorly and exteriorly and inferiorly, that is, posteriorly. It is never dislocated anteriorly.	0.9077471
And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if it does not attach to his thigh, know that it is dislocated.	The sign of dislocation is to bid the patient flex his leg on his thigh, and if it does not reach the thigh you may know the knee is dislocated.	0.8174242
And the treatment for all is to have the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and place his foot on your feet.	The way of setting all the types of dislocation is to make the patient sit down with both legs extended, if he can, with an assistant sitting behind him to hold him by the middle and incline him slightly backward.	0.6796198
Then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then press the two sides of the knee firmly; and another assistant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he can bend his leg to his thigh easily.	Then do you yourself sit on his thighs with your back to his front, and put his leg between yours; then the palms of your hands should be applied to his knee, and join them together by twining the fingers; then with the palms put strong pressure on both sides of his knee while another assistant extends his foot until the knee goes back to its place. The sign of its return is that the leg can be flexed back easily and without hindrance upon the thigh.	0.88466966
And apply the plaster, and bind the leg to the thigh, and tie them together tightly for three or four days, then untie it; and do not let the patient walk until the limb is strengthened.	Then apply a plaster and flex the leg on to the thigh and bandage them together for three or four days; then loosen them. He should do little walking for some days until it gains strength.	0.8447996
And if the limb is not right, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.	But if you cannot effect reduction by this method, apply powerful extension by bandages as we have described above for the treatment of the hip, until it goes back.	0.676584

chapter-3-subchapter-33.txt
on the dislocation of the heel	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.	0.6117766
The heel is sometimes displaced, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward.	The ankle is sometimes slightly displaced, sometimes fully dislocated, the dislocation being either internal or external.	0.8749353
The sign is that the ankle is swollen and sticks out in the part where it is dislocated:	The sign of its dislocation is that you will see the ankle swollen, and projecting on the side to which it is dislocated.	0.7075219
The repositioning is easy, and it should be gently stretched by hand when it is only displaced.	As to the treatment of its displacement, the reduction of it is easy: if it is gently extended with the hands and straightened, it will go back.	0.5820738
And when it is completely dislocated, you should make the patient sit upright, and a strong assistant should hold the leg above the ankle;	As to treatment when it is dislocated completely, you should make the patient sit upright with a strong and sturdy assistant holding him about the middle from behind.	0.6824647
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and gently push the foot upwards;	Then hold the dorsum of the foot with your right hand, and with the left grasp the foot from below about the heel. Then draw the foot toward you with your right hand, then with the left, twice.	0.82415307
And do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, then repeat the process, as it will return;	If it goes back in one or two attempts thus, and you see the foot is straightened, well and good. If not, repeat the operation and it will go back.	0.73285985
And if it cannot return this way, then lay the patient on their back on the ground, and fix a post firmly in the ground between their thighs, and wrap it with cloths so it does not hurt the patient;	If you find it impossible to reduce it by what we have said, make the patient lie on his back on the ground and firmly fix in the ground between his thighs a stake wrapped in material so as not to hurt him.	0.745361
Then the assistant holds the thigh, and another assistant extends the foot by hand or with a strap tied around the ankle; Then each assistant stretches equally, and the post remains between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when stretching;	Then an assistant should grasp his thigh and another assistant should extend the foot, either manually or with a cord tied round the narrow part of it; the assistants should pull one against another, with the stake upright between the patient's thighs holding him so that his body will not be dragged down with the extension.	0.8639765
Then the practitioner sets the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.	Then the doctor should straighten out the dislocation with both hands, while another assistant holds down the sound leg; then the dislocation will speedily go back.	0.8649918
And when it is set, apply a plaster and cotton on it, and bind it tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and ensure that the nerves behind the ankle are not too constricted;	Then when the dislocation is reduced and the soundness of the reduction is manifested to you, apply a plaster and packing, bandage firmly and bind the foot downwards. You will have to be careful of the tendon above the ankle at the back, not to bandage tightly over it so as to injure it.	0.7619915
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage loosens, tighten it; then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; And if he walks before that time, there is no certainty that it will not dislocate again.	Then leave him for two or three days; and if the binding works loose, tighten it up. Then on the third or fourth day loosen it, but the patient is to abstain from walking for forty days, for if he tries to walk before this lapse of time you cannot be sure that the dislocation will not collapse and corruption set in and thereafter be incurable.	0.92635167
And if a hot abscess occurs, it is necessary to soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.	If an abscess occur you must allay it by the application of such dressings and embrocations as we have already described more than once, until it is gone.	0.5782838

chapter-3-subchapter-34.txt
When the toes are dislocated, they should be gently extended without effort, and it is an easy thing.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes. Any that are dislocated must be straightened by means of gentle extension, without violence; that is not hard but positively easy.	0.6866248
And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back of the foot, you should make the patient sit on a flat surface or a straight table, and place your foot on what is visible of these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it returns;	If the dislocation be in one of the joints of the dorsum of the foot, the patient must set his foot on level ground or upon a board, standing as though walking. Then you must stand and put your foot on what protrudes of those joints, and put strong pressure upon it with your foot until it goes back and you see that it is evened out and there is no prominence at the place.	0.83893895
And when it is set and nothing is visible, place a two-headed board under the sole of the foot, then bind it tightly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let it rest until it is healed.	Then put under the sole of his foot a flat splint with two heads to take the whole foot, and bind it on with a tight and secure bandage for three days; then loosen it; but keep him from walking for a good many days until it binds and you are sure it will not revert, God willing.	0.78366226

chapter-3-subchapter-35.txt
Of wounds and dislocations together	On the kinds of dislocation that accompany a wound or a fracture or both.	0.5059842
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is to be restored, many times the patient dies:	When anything of this kind happens and you attempt treatment and restoration, death is a frequent sequel.	0.49984568
So do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it long, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and cautious, not bold;	Therefore such treatment should be undertaken only by a person that is skilled in the art, has long experience, is dexterous, sympathetic, cautious, and not reckless or over-bold.	0.683596
And use at the beginning things that soothe hot abscesses, and leave the patient in the hands of God if you see no hope of healing; And when you see hope, set the limb back in place immediately, before the hot abscess occurs;	To begin with he should apply only remedies for the allaying of abscesses and then leave the patient to Divine providence, unless, of course, the injury is light enough to give some hope of his escaping death; in which case you should set out to reduce it at once before an abscess arise.	0.6927844
And when the limb is in place, administer things that soothe hot abscesses, and treat the wound as necessary with drying ointments;	If the part goes back as you wish, employ the treatment for allaying abscesses and dress the wound with suitable desiccant ointments.	0.6205282
And if there is a fracture with the dislocation, and small loose bones, remove them, and do as we have said for simple injuries;	If it be a dislocation with a fracture and there occur splintered fragments in the bone, try to remove them, following therein the instructions relating to the simple diseases we have mentioned before in their place.	0.74987036
And avoid acting out of fear, as I have said, for it will help you according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your soul and body. Amen	Use your utmost diligence; keep clear of entering upon a course with a dangerous outcome, as I have enjoined on you before. For this will best ensure the continuance of your prestige and safeguard your good name, God willing.	0.5534661

