Oh, you, very wise sons, I have completed this book that is the end of the science of medicine and its fulfillment, and I have finished it by his explanations and by his declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is drawn from all things, it has perished and been lost, and nothing remains of it except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this comes the error and the foolishness, and the minds are closed and the knowledge is distant.
It seems to me that I can revive it together with the order of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of cauterizing irons and other tools of the work with the explanation and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Because for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended. And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the bones, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of all, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and tendons and the number of joints, and the movement and resting of them, and the origin of their issue.
Because, as Hippocrates says, "not to do something is bad, and with the work it is little. And even in the art of handiwork.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that those who are not familiar with the things mentioned before, if they attempt to do so, may go astray and harm people;
such that I have often wanted many times more of those who deal with this science and if they abandon themselves to their own knowledge and experiment.
For I saw a foolish man who lanced an abscess of scrofula or boil from a woman's breast, and lanced the arteries from the boil; because so much blood issued out that the woman died in her hands.
And I saw another foolish man who treated a stone from a man's gallbladder, and the stone was large; and took along with it a piece of the bladder, and died within three days.
I had already been called for the extraction, and saw the misalignment of the limb and the size of the stone, and if they cut it, it would die.
And another miracle that took place in our care, of the duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breaking had a wound.
And the miracle of ignorance kept the break over the wound with splints for a long time, and did not leave the wound without salt, and thus it ended.
and the command that he not remove it quickly;
and thus it remained until the leg was completely healed and the foot and came to destruction.
I was called to come to him, and hurried to remove the leg; And when I felt it dislocated, it was in pain and did not feel any pain.
But all the ways of the corruption were already confirmed or the member, and could not be healed;
and the corruption did not stop moving through the member until the member was completely lost.
And I saw another method that crushed the abscess and became putrid, and then it inflamed due to its evil nature.
For putridity, when it is free of melancholic humor, does not need much if one only touches it with iron if it is in a place where everything can be completely removed that is corrupted.
And therefore, very dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is to say, where it has been exposed to many positions;
and I will show in each of these books where it has fear and danger.
Because of this, you should keep it a secret so that the foolish people cannot harm you.
If you take your arms in a firm and steady manner, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you come to safety and are healthy.
And leave the spreading diseases of poor health;
And take your arms from what makes you doubt, and be in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galenus says in some of his admonitions: «Do not take on the care of sick people who are not fools.»
I have devised this treatment in three chapters.
The first chapters are of fire cauteries and de-cauteries of medical water, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
And the forms of instruments, and the irons of cauteries, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
The second chapters are of cutting and piercing, and of wounds, and of arrow extractions, and similar things.
And the chapters are ordered and the forms of instruments.
The third chapters are of resetting dislocations and twists, and similar things.
and is ordered to place the upper limbs in their proper places, and to shape the instruments.
As we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell the quality of the aid and the harm of each ingredient.
The quality of aid, and its harm, is the longest and most subtle of speech and secret sciences;
and many wise men spoke about it, and agreed on this.
and I do not know much about it, because I lack the length.
I say that cauterization helps universally in all matters where there is matter, whether the matter: is to know whether it is hot and with matter, or dry and without matter.
In a hot and dry environment, they assembled together and said that fire cauterization is a great help. And the others said the opposite: that fire cauterization does not help diseases that come from heat and dryness. Because the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat, nor by dryness;
and those who said the opposite claimed that fire cauterization helps greatly with hot and dry diseases that come from within men. For when you compare the body of the person and its moisture to the hot fire, you heat the body.
And I agree with this saying. For I have found it once by experience.
And in any case, no one interferes with it except those who have experienced it, and know from long use the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the symptoms and time of healing;
of other constitutions we have no fear at all, even in cold and moist diseases. And all the patients gathered and agreed to the cauterization.
And know, my sons, that cauterization with fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater benefit than cauterization with hot medicine.
For the fever is simple, and comes only to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members unless it is named.
The burning remedies come from one member to another by moving away, and bring diseases of great relief to the affected limb. and perhaps it is the pain.
The fever for its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not cause harm, if there is no excess.
And I have found that you would find by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was above the truth of things;
And because I apologize for the length of the language, as it does not please me only that I give you the secret that is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, child, that they should be done with cauterizations in what manner they should be made, and they will ask for them.
And I say that cauterization is beneficial in all cases, because the harmful substances are removed by the help of cauterization; and indeed it is even necessary for pain that cannot wait until the time when the greatest harm comes to the member.
And never think, dear child, as the foolish ones do; for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return; and it is said thusly;
and it is said thusly; but it is not as they think, for cauterization is but medicine that moves the humors, and dries up the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is more effective than any other medicine due to its swiftness of action and the virtue of its work and its authority.
And it is possible that the disease comes only according to the humor and the constitution of the patient and its power;
and are assembled in it the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if not cauteries administered to him where he has little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries for dense pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return. but this happened little.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the tail of medicine, and this is to see;
but they do not believe little that cauteries are of value after medicine, but rather their understanding is false, and cauteries are the tail of medicine because when we administer methods of cures in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it is valuable.
Therefore, it is important to understand that cauterization is a part of medical treatment, not according to the intention of those who are misled.
The old ones said that the cautery of an instrument of gold is more effective than iron, and they did not say what else but for the quality of gold and the expensiveness of its substance.
And they said that the heads of the cautery do not make pain, but it is not to see because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is to see in some people.
And the cautery of gold is more effective than iron, as they said. And whenever you heat an instrument of gold, you should not be afraid when it is hot because of the color of gold, and it has already cooled.
and if they are heated too much; if they are done by fire; and then they have enough restraint.
Or I have ordered this chapter on the shoulder joints from the feet, because it is easier to find.
This cauterization is valuable against moisture and cold on the head, and it is done for two reasons: because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the joint to the ears, and due to many dreams and tooth pain and throat pain, and indeed for all diseases that come from cold as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the hairs are removed by medical means, changing the shape of the head three or four times, according to the virtues and the age and the custom of the hair, which the patient can bear. and then make the hair of the patient again.
And then let him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on top of yours;
after put the root of your palm above the root of his nose between his two eyes; When you come to me with your two fingers, if they bleed profusely, heat the cauterizing iron called "olivare", of which this is the shape: And place it on the joint, which is marked with ink, and move it back and forth gently in twisting your hand little by little; Then slowly remove your hand, and reward the joint if you see the bone slightly; And if you do not see it, then continue with the cauterizing iron until you see the bone as I have told you.
Then take a little thread, and wrap it softly in cotton, and place it on the joint, and leave it for three hours.
after put this cotton in butter; and leave it on until the wound is healed; after treat the wound with the ointment called "tetra-pharmacon" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges; and for this reason, it helps to heal.
And none of these said that one should burn the cauterizer until a part of the bone is charred, and then remove what has been charred from the bone, and treat it.
And the other says that one should apply the cauterizing iron as gently as possible above, and push it as hard as one can to remove bone as wide as a needle that women put in their hair for the reason that the humors come out easily;
and one should leave the wound open for a long time; after that, one should cure and dress it.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be good in all cases, except in some men where there is a way of fear;
and it seems to me that I should leave it.
because the joints are weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other members;
and even when the joint affected by pain is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is safer and more appropriate for me, and from this I work in the future accordingly.
When in general the head comes with chronic pain that lasts a long time, one should use ointments and pills called "cochie", and cleansing of the head and eyes and plasters. and if they do the fire cauterization that we have mentioned before, it does not help. Take care if the patient is of a strong constitution and is not too cold; then cauterize with that fire cauterization that we have mentioned above. After cauterization on each eyebrow to the bone, as we have mentioned before, and do the cauterization called "vasselz". and is the place where suction cups are used; and lift your hand so you do not press too hard on the bone: the hairs cause greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of it there.
and it is necessary that the cauterizing irons for the horns be more delicate than the one with which one cauterizes the midline of the forehead, and this is the form:
for the fire cauterization When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease is extended to the oil, and the patient is purged by medicines that are changed, and the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases are done, and all this does not help much: Therefore, if it is necessary to cauterize according to two methods, that is to say, by means of medicine or fire.
The cauterization by medicine is such that you press a piece of alum, and remove the scab and reapply it with a small amount of the same thing, and then make the temple or place where the pain is located in a certain way so that you can replace the piece of alum outside the skin;
and when it is replaced, if it holds and restrains well, leave it thus for twelve hours; then remove it and treat afterwards with the piece of garlic, and leave the wound thus for two or three days; Then place a hot poultice on top until the pain subsides.
After the application of ointment until they are healed.
And if you see that some burning remedies that I have written or prescribed are not working, then treat them with other burning remedies.
The fire cauterization is done in this way. Heat the cauterizing iron of such a shape:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clod or it has little burns, and in the middle has a small appearance.
And it is placed on the painful limb, and hold your hand and gently stir the fire until half of the surface is burned.
and gently touch your hand so the artery does not burn, which is nearby, and bleed abundantly of blood.
After put cotton in a sling, and put it on the limb for three days; then put cotton moistened in butter, and then heal the limb of inflammation until it is healthy;
and if you want to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing iron called "cultellare", at all the point, and keep from covering the artery in this wound which is not ancient.
of the wound
When you treat this wound as we have said in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterizing iron before says of medicine and hot iron does not hurt him a little, then it is necessary that you extinguish the cauterizing iron called "cultellare" until it is white;
and if the bone is fractured with a line of half a finger's width, and you take your hand once, and hold the artery so that it does not come near the bone;
and guard the jaw that moves when moved, and the nerves have no regard except for the moving ones and that spasm does not cause harm, and guard against the corruption of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting into it has great fear and immediately to those who do not know, and who are not studied and experienced; and let the work be in moderation.
but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
And if you see that this cauterization is not enough for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it with fire as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you see that the cauterization is not enough, administer the cauterization that we have said or in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cauterizer that has two blades. And this cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from cold
When the ear hurts from cold, and medicines have been applied and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then warm this cautery called "poins", of which is the form:
After pricking all around the ear, wherever the pain is felt on both sides, and move it slightly away from the root of the ear, then you have correctly identified the earwax. and apply X drops around each ear.
then cure the ear until it is healthy.
of the torture of the mouth
This torture should only be treated by cauterization is no more than those that move with the flux, as we have said in the division of diseases.
and do not use cauterization with similar substances that come from sechors and spit of men.
When you treat this resemblance of torture that moves from the stream of waters and of purging of the head and of gargling, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the pain with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little later the temple, and the third in the position of the two lips;
and put the cauteries in the part that opens healthy, and do the cauterization at the top of the ear above a little out of the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as one finger; and leave the fire cautery as long as half of the wound is healed.
This is the shape of the fire cautery.
And this is the shape of the cauterizing iron that we have placed before, but it is a bit more delicate and it is necessary that the knife be a bit larger.
After curing the limb as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the pains do not have fever, then make four cauterizations: Above the two upper horns of the shoulder, and below the chief, and also the one that is called "vasselz" as we have previously said, and behind the fire above the mouth of the stomach;
and treat it as we have said before.
For laziness
For this disease, one should give the patient large and modified brain-shaped pills;
after rubbing the entire shoulder of the patient with the mustard plaster written or used to treat ointments;
and this is the way of the fire cauterization: as I have said.
If he is thus healthy, good. And if he is not, do three fire cauterizations on the neck from above down to the collarbone, and leave space between each cauterization of one large span.
And the treatment is as for the others, and if you have seen it stuck, and the pain is great, do one cauterization in the middle. And if it is a mechanic, two more above the two horns, and the treatment until he is healthy.
And let the cauterizations called "olivare" be as I have already said.
It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and of what we have previously said.
After cleaning the head of the hairs, then perform a fire cauterization on the head and each horn, and behind and three times above the spine of the neck.
And if you have more trouble, and the body is wet and the hairs are in pain, and the disease is far, then perform four cauterizations above the spine of the back. And let it remain until the most favorable time, and release your hand. After the treatment until they are healed, and the cauterizations called "olivare" that we have previously said.
of epilepsy
Those who suffer from epilepsy should not use cauterization except for that which is fleshy, and it is first necessary to modify the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the pains are large and severe with pain medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, modifying the brain often with good meat.
After the child's head is in the middle, and do cauterization according to what we have said before, and cauterize above the vein, and above each horn. And if the pain is outside and severe, do cauterization as I said to those who have paralysis and softening of the neck, above the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be with olive oil according to the way I said.
If the pain is intense, then perform the following delicate cauterization method:
When due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture and fluid is large, then use the following cautery made of parts as we have said for those who have paralysis.
And if due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture is declining towards melancholy, and the course of the bad pain is wet, then give it to drink something by which the brain is cleansed, according to what it is before in the division.
After removing the cause of the pain; after making a well-made bandage, like a circle, and placing it on the head;
and the pains are crossed, and held tightly from all sides;
after applying the liniment, and it is good to use old bearberry ointment; and the heat of the fire is tempered, so that he can bear it if possible; after emptying the circle from inside and placing it on the head, and letting it cool;
and do this to the pain every week once with good management until they are healed.
Where you have seen cauterization with making points all over the cauterizer.
This method of cauterization moistens the brain excessively.
Then place a moistened cotton ball in butter and goose fat.
of the eyes' When the eye comes firstly to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give to the patient a remedy mundifying the head, and keep it from all moisture, and make it sweat or bathe it several times at fasting.
After that, instruct the patient to turn his head, and apply the cauterization on his head, and perform two cauterizations on both temples simultaneously, or if one eye is not present, then one.
And cover all the cauterization with veins and arteries that are outside the cranium, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple.
And watch for bleeding from the wounds, and if you see too much blood flowing, use a towel or cloth as needed.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision, how you will perform it.
Never perform cauterization or heating on the two lower bones.
And we see that it is a superfluous cold, flabby flesh, therefore the cauterization that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, descend upon them. I cauterize the main, and two cauterize above the two temples, and two cauterize or heating outside the two bones. If there is more, then cauterize carefully above the shoulder with a small firebrand.
When you apply the remedies according to what we have said in the chapter, and it does not help, then give him three drinks with bad taste. After the king's head, and the face, and the cauterization or middle of the cauterization with oil. And make two cauterizations with the cauterization called "clavilis" above the two shoulder blades, a little off the neck.
And watch out for the artery that you do not cover.
And this is the form of the cauterization called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cauterization called "olivare". For this reason, this is the shape:
And if you see that this is done, make two cauterizations above the two spikes as long as the spikes are;
and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hairs that do not point the oil Never have it so that the hairs of the eyes are converted to pardons, and they hold the eye, and then make one cautery in two ways: that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Or the fire cauterization commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are even, then put the misaligned part in its proper place; After, above the paper of the eyes, there is a figure that should be as such as the one of the mirror, and it should be the beginning of the sign among the hairs;
Then put soft cotton moistened in egg yolk and mint oil on the eye, then heat the cauterizing iron of which this is the form:
Then cauterize slowly and gently many times, until the healer is at the right place;
and the signs of the health of the work is that you see the paper retreating, and the hairs raised to the height of the oil.
then lightly touch your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put cotton moistened in butter on the burn until the scar is formed. after the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
and if after this the hairs come back, and the paper is softened, then restart the cauterization on the same place, as you did first.
and if the hairs are lacking, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural height, and is even, and does not prick at the base of the oil.
The cauterizing iron of medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a piece of parchment in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
Then take French soap and live chalk, one of each, and grind them together well. And make it into a paste, so that it does not cool, then spread it over the shape you have made like a leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of the eyes. And if the patient holds the evil in only one eye, then you should cover it with a bandage, and do the same for the other. and place a soft cotton cloth under the elbow.
and the patient with the pain should be in a healthy position and place the hand above the medicine, and press and move it gently every time the pain feels burning from the medicine, for it feels burning like fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then take the medicine to your mouth. And when the burning pain has passed, lift the limb from the fire, and reward if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision. and if so, then it is well.
If not, then put the medicine back on the limb or the medicine has not worked, until your actions are equal and your eyes are focused.
Then place a moistened cotton swab on the affected area until the pus is removed, then treat the wound with the ointment called "diaphanis" and other, until it is healed.
And if you have the task to stay within your work, do so with great care, lest you not cut into the wrong parts of the medicine.
And if the paper becomes thin afterwards, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then restart the treatment on the softened area of the paper properly, as you have done before. After the treatment until it is healed.
And this is the form of the foot of the mouse:
And it is known that the eyes of men are different in size and smallness, and according to what you are constrained by.
and is not immediately returned to the proper way to the one who has studied this art.
of the treatment of a fistula by fire cauterization
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize it in this manner.
instruct the patient to put his head on your shoulder. and clean the wound around his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move and does not dislodge his head.
after put moistened cotton on the wound or in juice of parsley over the oil.
after heat the cauterizing iron that is ready.
and it is shaped like a pen of vulture, together with the quill so that it is the cauterizing iron.
if you see that one is appointed to the other, and if you see that it is as if a tent;
but always, this that is sewn is better for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, and in taking the pus, and drying; and if it is closed, then open, and take out the pus;
after put the fire cautery very hot, and hold your hand on the cautery to the part of the knee above the oil, that your hand does not do foolishness; and put the fire cautery in the grease of the oil, and corrupt.
If you come to the beginning of the cauterizing iron at the bone, that would be good. If not, if you must restart the cauterization again, and if you have the skill, leave it for three days;
then put cotton moistened in butter on it, and apply the ointment of the desiccating cure until it is healed, and if forty days have passed and it is not healed, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the rest according to what it would come in its chapter.
And there is a certain method of cauterizing a fistula that no one of the ancients mentioned. For a fistula, and feel the limb; then put in the wound the subtle camomile of which this is the form: and they do with the quantity of a certain amount of mud; and hold your hand or grip firmly, and the hairs do not move, until the mud sets and does not flow to its oil;
and it is necessary to put above the oil on the hair a soft cotton pad in front of or behind:
the mud if the limb of the fistula, and the healthy through marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer purgatives to the nose, and to bring the fistula back to its proper place in the nostril as it should be.
cracked lips Many times there are cracks in the lips that are called "hair", and at the same time in the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing iron in this form:
And put it firmly in those cracks until it comes just to make;
after healing the limb of the cerate until it is healthy.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the tongue or in the bladder, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has become putrid and runs and becomes swollen and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the sections, and it does not improve. Therefore, it is necessary that you have the cauterization according to the size of the fistula; after the puncture or opening of the fistula, and keep your hand until the iron goes to the bottom of the wound and behind the bone;
and do so once or twice, after curing what we have said in the cures, until it is healed.
and if they are treated thusly, it is good; and if not, then you must discover the limb and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
When the teeth are softened by moisture and the roots move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not work, then put the head of the pain in your mouth. After heating the cauterizer of which the form will come later in some manner, you put a sponge on the tooth.
and insert the cauterizer deeply, and hold your hand so that the pain feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth.
After lightly touching your hand and begin the cauterization according to your will;
Then fill the hairs of their mouth with salt water, and let them drink for an hour and then rest.
And in this way, the tooth that was moving is confirmed, and the softened gums are held back, and the moisture is corrupted and dried up.
of the pain of the teeth
When pain from a tooth comes from cold, or if there is cold or swelling, and the medical treatments do not work, then it is necessary to cauterize in two ways: and cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a fresh cow, and the end in an iron or brass spoon; After taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a tent peg, and wetting it with warm water, and placing it on the painful tooth firmly and holding it until it is cooled;
and then do it often enough until its effect reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that wetting the cotton and flax in warm water, and placing it on the aching tooth, and placing hot iron on it until the effect reaches the movement of the tooth.
The fire cauteries are such that you can grasp a piece of iron or brass, and it should be large enough that the effect does not reach the mouth of the wound.
After heating the cautery, from which the form will come after, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizing is cooled.
Do this often, because the pain will be as strong the same day or the next.
And it is necessary that the pain fill its mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cauterizing, and then apply it.
This is the shape of the cauterizing tool:
And make the cauterizing as you wish, and according to what you have.
This is the shape of the cauterizing tool:
of hydroceles When the scrofulous glands are swollen and cold, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the hair burning cautery after this, and have two openings for the fumes to issue out of the other side;
and place the cautery hot on the abscess once, or as often as necessary, until it reaches the center of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and place a soft cotton pad with butter on top until the burn is healed.
After care of the wounds and bandages until they are healed.
When the moisture overcomes the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the pains be relieved first by remedies in solution.
After the cauterization at the root of the throat, and be careful not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn more than necessary but a little.
After the second cauterization at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cauterization which is called "clavicle" because of its shape.
And treat the limb as we have previously mentioned until it is healed.
When all diseases of the gout are caused by cold moisture, and the pains have no fever or swelling, and is an ancient disease, then apply two cautery irons on the affected joint. and the other cautery goes between the breasts.
and let the cautery called "clavicle" be in the form mentioned before.
And if you see, apply the cautery by holding the entire cautery called "point" because of its form in the disease of the ears.
and they should be pricked at the base with a sharp point, or within.
After the treatment of the patient according to what has been said previously, and let the cauteries be applied at three points according to this form:
And because the cauteries are lighter, because you make three times as many.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, the hairs should be pricked above their back and sides. Afterwards, relieve the curved part that is within the tingling with your right hand.
And if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery that has two needles like this:
and cauterize the curved part until it pierces through the side, and then remove the figure of the cautery together with four cauteries.
And for this reason, the cautery is made with the cautery that has three needles, because the figure of cauterization is these four cauteries.
and are the nerves according to the thinness of a tent, and it is the shape of the cauterization that has three nerves:
And never place the cauterizing iron on this one nerve because it has eight cauteries.
After putting the cauterization on, press it with silk; Then rest the patient, and do not move the limbs by stretching too long until it is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, that thing happens quickly, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery clavi, or many of cauteries in pricking.
For the joint is closed, and it is healed by the moisture and is free from the pain.
When in the stomach come cold and much moisture until it reaches its condition, and they multiply the diarrhea to him, and are customary ways of cures and he does not improve, then it is necessary that the pain be supported on his back, and extends his legs and his hands. After that, do three cauterizations with the spoon of the least pain for the quantity of one drop, at all the cauterization clavicle, and two cauterizations before the two ribs until the figure of the cauterizations is at three angles, and has space between them so they are not joined together as they will go through;
and let the cautery be as sharp as possible to penetrate both sides of the wound, and let the shape of the cauterizer be according to this form without jerking:
And if you see that the cauterization is done with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
and the one who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and holding above the stomach at the point according to the quantity that you see of enchantment; then cauterize all the cautery that is called "point".
After the care of the care that we have had before, as long as they are healthy.
When the liver comes from pain and moisture and great swelling, as long as it is removed from its natural condition by excess; and the pain is treated as we have said in the sections, and it does not help him much, so it is necessary that the pain be soaked in its own sweat. and the sign of three burns according to this form and this figure and this quantity above the liver, below the hypochondres, where the neck of the ox comes.
and there should be space between each burn the thickness of a finger. and the burns should be long like the body, and do not press much with your hand at all on the burn.
and it should be turned only as much as half of the courage, and the pain should be straight up its legs.
and if he cannot, then let him lie on his side, and extend his legs, and relieve his arms;
And if you wish, then cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the whole body, for you would make it all stiff; and that it does not become soaked in water, for the wounds are very delicate there, and the salves to see.
When he has an abscess in the liver, and you know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the web: If he is in the carriage, he does not feel the pain much.
And if he is on the bed, he feels the pain strongly.
And when this treatment is done, it is necessary that the pain be above his head;
and then bend the limb where the abscess is, and then heat the cauterizer which is similar to rice, of which this is the form: And cauterize with the cauterizer until the wound is closed, and it comes just to this, until the putrefaction is all gone;
After the treatment according to the treatment of bandages until they are healed.
and it is only suitable for those who have long studied the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases are never corrupted.
Therefore, it can be boldly attempted, and in all ways, it seems to me that it is worth leaving it.
fire cauterization
The ancients said that one should make a fist with the roots of aristolochia and in a similar manner: take a root of aristolochia long, the longest you can find, and it should be dry, and as thick and long as your fingers; and grind it in oil, and take it to the fire, and use the fire cautery between the eyebrow and the neck, and two small cauteries a little bit below where the hair is not;
and two cautery needles between the fifth rib and the sixth, in declining backwards a little. and one cautery needle at the lowest point, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the ribs in front of the cautery that is between the shoulders.
and do not press your hand, but make it open widely as when smelling.
And they said that no one should use a cauterizing instrument like a razor, and they would clean it and put it between the ribs until it comes to the abscess. and the pain would go away, as we have said about the liver abscess.
But in this work, there is fear or the pain kills now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then they resort to three methods of cauterization that are all good.
When there is a certain manner in which you make three or four cautery burns, along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cauterization that we have mentioned before;
and do not press your hand against the entire cautery, and let the hairs be on its back;
and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two needles, as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation;
and lift the skin where the mouse is located, or where the pain from the hairs comes towards the left, and let the elevations that you lift the skin along, according to its length, and the width of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After injecting the second nerve, let it burn until the needle is perceived from the other side, and then remove the cauterizer, and thus enter into four.
And if you see, if cauterized with the entire cauterizer at three nerves.
After treatment when he has had a fever for a long time, and it is worth trying the other remedies mentioned before.
Cauterization is not useful for hydropsy, except in the manner called "ascletyes".
When you treat it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the wound, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and one behind the back above the spine, and one at the worst place; and let the cautery be close to the edge of the wound.
After leaving the cautery in place for a while to cauterize, do not let go of the care for the wound after the cautery. and healing will proceed quickly, and both intentions will be accomplished with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like the one we have shown before. and that for the back should be oval-shaped, as it is shown before.
When the feet are swollen to the one who is hydroptic, and are plain of a yellowish color, it is necessary that you cauterize above the back between the auricular and the annular. And lightly touch the skin with the cauterizing iron, moving towards the direction of return.
And do not enter too deeply, thus avoiding the yellowish parts, and let the cauteries be done according to this form:
After making two incisions on each leg at the tip of the needle-like instrument; And either cauterize the long one behind the knee and the other in front of it, within the leg;
and leave the cauterizations over a longer period to cure what is inside.
After the cure of the other treatments that we have mentioned.
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and in the intestines are blocked, and cannot be cured by any means of treatments; and you see the painful and very skilled patient, if you make great cauterization above the stomach according to what he has spoken before or stomach cauterization, in cauterization circulates. and IV cauterizations around the abdomen subtly to all the delicate cauterization fork, and II cauterizations above the hips.
And if you see the abundance of moisture and the patient suffering from pain, then apply cauterization above the knuckle, and cauterization on each joint, and two small cauterizations below the stomach, for the cure is beneficial when it has good assistance.
of the treatment of worms
When the emorrhoids are at their foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and are large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not improve, if you make cauterizations: Above the spine of the back, which is all before unaccustomedly little by little in triangulating, and with a cauterizing iron of two degrees.
And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then the face is burned with a large cauterizing iron across the stomach, as it is previously described, and the other above the liver, and the other across the entire cauterizing iron. And leave the cauterizing iron long and tense. After treatment, the limb as long as it is healthy.
When you cut the hair, if it scorches the cauterizing iron which seems like a razor, then put it all burned on top of the hair that is being cut. and let your hand remain until the fire cauterizes the vein at its birth, from which the bleeding stops.
Do this once or twice, and if there is much blood, cauterize each as we have said. after the treatment of wounds until they are healed.
and if you cauterize with a large fire brand, it will have greater help.
When the wound cannot be suffered by a surgeon or opened, as we will tell in its place, then a bad disease comes that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When any comes with a fistula, and it is inflamed and discharged putrid and corrupted moisture, then you must provide for the whole of a thin tent, and guard that you cleanse the tent as much as possible.
After sharpening the fire brand like a razor, and inserting it into the fistula according to the amount that enters, and then restart the cauterization until the wound is cleansed and healed, once, or twice, or three times, according to the amount of need.
and watch for the vein that is cut, and large veins.
if the fistula goes to the center of the bladder and intestine, then watch for these areas, and do not perform any other procedures except in the area where it is needed, and think that it is not healed.
after healing the area as long as it is healthy, and if there are any wounds, remove them, and the matter is removed along with the tension, then cleanse that the area is completely healed.
and if the matter is not removed, cleanse that the area is torn, and corrupt the bone at the source. And thus, as one of those that we will say in its place.
When pain from cold comes to the back, and with great heaviness, and does not take the form of a woman, then it is necessary that you do cauterization on both sides of the back with the clavile cautery that we have previously mentioned.
And if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have three cauterizations in a line, and they will be greater help.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and easily affected by cold and moisture, and the hairs retain urine, then do cauterization in the part in front of the bladder, where the hair begins to grow, and on both sides, and let each cauterization be as long as a needle.
and if you have a fever afterward, do the fire cautery on the back, or if you have a fever, do it.
and let the fire cautery be done in the form previously mentioned.
When the wound is cold and moist, and does not leave any room for healing, and the flowers are corrupted and their termination is late; and when they come, they cause great pain: therefore it is necessary to do the fire cautery around the wound, as we have said or the fire cautery of the bladder, and two fire cautery afterward on the back.
and let the fire cautery be done as we have said.
When the thick, viscous moisture descends to the hip of the back, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
and it is found in the lower part of the hip, so it is necessary to cauterize the pain above the hip bone with a cautery similar to a circle, and sign before the bone as it turns, so that the hip is inside the circle.
and if the cautery is such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make three cauteries of large olive oil, and let the cautery be applied as all the others.
and the care as long as they are healthy.
of the pain in the back When pain comes in the side of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the hairs are curled as we have said in the division and the treatment does not help, and the disease is ancient: then it is necessary that you purge the hairs of the large humors from bad-smelling pills or other good-smelling pills similar. After you do the cauterization;
and the manner of the cauterization is as follows in two ways: that is to say, together with hot medicines and fire cauterization.
Fire cauterization is done in many ways, such as:
that you cauterize on the back of the abdomen III triangular cauterizations in this form, and it makes good depth and great, and has between each cauterization a space of the size of a finger, and let the cauterization be oil-based.
Never cauterize in the middle of the abdomen, because it has four in this form:
And if you see, if it is cauterized with the cauterization of the circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the abdomen;
but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the belly, and all the spines are straight.
And this is the manner to do in surgery, when the pain remains in the shoulder and does not reach as far as the thigh or leg.
And if it comes to the thigh and leg, then make two cauteries where the hairs are, and one cautery on the knee four inches above, on the right side a little bit.
and let the cauteries be sharp, and let the spines be straight.
and if the hairs feel that the pain extends to two fingers or near the wrist, then cauterize where it feels the pain three fingers or four at the cauterizing iron called "finger". And if your craft is, then do more of it.
And if the pain is displaced from the groin to the thigh, then perform a cauterization with a cutaneous or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause greater harm and contraction.
I myself have seen many who have done cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they let it burn so much that the leg was completely blackened, and the feet as well, and all the flesh was rotten. After a stomach purge causing death.
And if the pain is in both parts together, do cauterization on one and the other, according to this method.
And the wise say in the cauterization of the loins, in this manner, make such a needle and let it be at the top as large as a small nail or a little less, and let it be inserted between the ribs and let one end insert into the other at a distance equal to the quantity of a new pence.
and they are punctured through two parts, and they are also like needles, and there is one good iron needle.
And this is the shape:
And let them be heated until they are all red and smell like burnt hay, and then place them on the back of the misaligned ribs, and turn them over to the healthy side.
And the cauterization is done once the fire has gone out and left for three days. Then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for ten days. After the healing of the wound until it is healthy.
Albucasis says that we use this cauterization little because of its fearful appearance, and few see those who use it.
And in every way this is the best cauterization, which can suffer, and where it adheres.
The cauterizing instrument of burning medicine is such that you make a tool for insertion into the edge of the door, and it is either of rain or iron at one end, and in the height has II us, and between each quantity of the greatness of one dose; and it is open below and above, and they join together according to this form:
After placing the board of the hipbone on the injured side lying down, and quickly placing your hand on top of the board of the hipbone. Then pour between the two circles of the hot water which is heated by the fire I pot, and let it stand for an hour with slight pressure, and suffer the patient with the heat and burning of the.
For it truly has the effect of a burn;
And when the burn has passed, gently lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip bone gently, and let it rest for three hours, and put on butter until the blackened skin is removed. and let it rest for three days until it is healed;
and this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds as long as they are healthy.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that you have used in the buttocks increased;
and this is the method of the hot iron, and I have written about it in treating the correction of medicine. Take equal parts of lime and quicklime, and grind them together, and put them in a new earthenware pot. or he has one small puncture except that the tip of a razor can pierce through;
or he has one small puncture except that the tip of a razor can pierce through; and put that one in the other, well boiled, and place on alum and chalk and sweet oil until there are two of them above the powders, which you will have well prepared in your hand;
and let it remain until it has descended as much as possible without falling off, then take all of it, and pour it onto charcoal and alkali as before.
And if it is very much, then it should be administered in the form of medicines and cauteries for other members.
Because it does work like that, and if there are other medicines that are well-cauterized in the loins such as this and miel anacardi and charcoal with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galiens tells us of a cure where some people were cured of back pain and sciatica, and the louse much, and said that no other cure was done, and that they were healed once when this cure was done, and it was bathed as it is shown hereafter.
And in a similar manner, you should take fresh and dry licorice root, and grind it well with a little fat, and put on the loins and thighs and legs where the pain is, and tie it;
and he leaves it for three hours and by the amount that the pain does not feel the burning.
Then make the patient enter or take a bath until the heart is slightly warmed, and then make him enter or lie down, and the pain will go away completely and be healed.
And it is advised that no one should use such cauterizing medicines unless after the evacuation of blood.
And Dioscorides says that when the vein of the arm is cauterized with lead from a goat, it helps a lot.
and it should be done in this manner by the cautery. Take the same and crush it with old oil, and put it on the groove that is between the thumb and the other one called the forefinger.
After taking dry lead from a goat, and putting it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and putting it on the cloth, and leaving it until it is soaked.
and repeat this, and do not stop doing it until you think that it is approaching the ribs, and that the pain has ceased.
And this method of cauterization is called "goat's head cauterization".
of the pain is doubled.
When pain comes to the back, or from falling or from impact or from too great evacuation, or from similar expansive cold matter, none of these is worth cauterization, because it is from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary to apply three lines of fetid ointments or similar substances, placed on top of the wound, where the pain is located, using five cauterizing irons or more according to their virtue and quantity that the wound can tolerate.
And it should be made with the cauterizing iron called "spoon".
And if you see, use three or four cauterizing irons according to the middle-claw form of this method.
Frequently, this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have stiffness in their joints when they move, and fear. and you feel a hollowness at the last spinous process of the back and in us, the appearance that comes above the other spinous processes.
When you see this and want to heal it, then cauterize with that fire cautery in this form. If the fire cautery prepares each part of the spine equally.
And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with that fire cautery touching two or three lines, and the points close to each other.
After healing the limb as long as it is healthy according to what we have said, and be sure that you do not apply fire cautery in a place where there is a spasm of the nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When the pain of joints is due to moisture that has spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which is properly called "gout", and when it is caused by cold and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner:
Make the most of cauterizing around the joint, and let the fire cautery be done in this form:
And if there is a place that you can prick on the face of the foot, then let the cauterizing be done with the whole cautery called "needle". And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and often occur, then let it be cauterized above each knee with three or four fire cautery on each part, throughout the fire cautery;
and if you have more skill, then do more, but do not exceed your hand beyond what is necessary for the healing of the wound.
And if the pains descend just above the genitals and in the back, administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in our chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then let it be cauterized around the finger joint with two lines;
If there is no pain, then make small cuts over each joint and over the hair of the hand.
And if the pains come from the elbow or shoulder, then cauterize each part, and apply good management to the injury and pain-relieving medicines.
For if you give good governance and purge the humor, it will be healed by the help of God.
When a fracture occurs in the angle, and the bruises descend to the joints and this is new, then it is necessary that when you see it to treat, that it does not move at all that day. and that he use things that lower the belly, so that the swelling goes down from his stomach.
After the patient sits on their back between your hands, and you command them to color their spine until the bruise is healed, and you massage it at your discretion, and signify the end of the treatment by a sign that resembles half a circle above the chest.
Then heat the cauterizing iron in this form:
until it is white and sweats scented drops. Then massage the bruises on their limbs. And the nurses color their hands so they do not return later.
And work well on the thighs with the misalignment, and put out of the way the cupping and the leech over the thighs, and the other above the worst one that colors their hands.
Then place the cautery above the sign at all your fingers, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then repeat it another time until you come just to the bone. and guard subtly that the boil does not burst while you are doing the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this means the hairs do not die, or other harm.
And if you do not come to the bone with the cauterization, your work is worthless.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to the measure of the eyes, and for large people also large according to their measure;
After three days, care for the burned area until the scab has formed.
After the care of other remedies until it is healed, and grind the hair 40 times on its back until the wound is well scarred.
And it should be covered for a long time, so that the bandages do not stick when he goes to bed.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, give him a well-made bandage, and put it on for another 40 days.
And have good rest, that he works little and avoids too much drinking and eating, and too high heat.
and when he gives this instruction, it is completely healthy.
And I will tell you about the cure after cutting into his chapter.
When wounds come from other bellies and are known to not be growing anymore, and you see that they are not growing, then apply the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let the third part of the care be. After the care according to what we have said.
And none of the old ones have said that it should be cauterized with the fire cautery at three angles according to this form.
1. But the first sign is the shoulder dropping and make a line across the width of the rent, and another below, and keep your hand on all the cauterizing iron.
1. But the first cauteries are lighter and more painless.
1. of ancient pain in any limb 1. When pain comes in any limb, whether to fall or to strike, and this pain lasts long, and the medical cure does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cauterizing iron called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its strength and its position of twists and its pain.
If it is healthy with the first fire cautery, it is good.
If it is not healthy with the first fire cautery, then start again with the other cautery above it, for it is usually the case that it should be moved to the member that is closest, because it is necessary that you make the cauteries until the hairs are healthy.
Cauterization is never used without great help, and simultaneously the disease that comes from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
If you see the cautery, take warning if the disease is at the beginning, and if it has been treated according to what we have said in the division, and do not let it spread or stay, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the body, then you must apply several cauteries above the head: and cautery the head at the back and the other towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and two above the two horns, and one behind the hairline;
and let your hand be so that the cauteries reach the bone, and as long as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the large humors can escape;
and the cautery is applied to the mouse according to what it is supposed to be.
And if the wound is scattered all over; and it is clearly painful, then you must cautiously cauterize with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and the cauterizing agent in the nostril, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one on the great buttock and one on the other side, and two on the shoulders; and two on the hips, and two on the knees, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the grooves of the hands;
and guard against the nerves that are above the lower back, so as not to burn them.
and never perform fire cauterization above the spine, and on the other side of the stomach bone, and on the other side of the liver.
And make sure that the more you perform cauterization, the less help you provide, and move them less.
And make sure that the pain does not feel the same as the healthy ones, because the body is already corrupted.
It should be great and small according to the members and the joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons.
After treating the limb with flour several times with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
When inflammation comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then perform cauterization above the limb according to its size and smallness.
and let the cautery enter slightly into the skin. then apply ointments until they are healed.
And never cauterize with the hand and the foot and the back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if it is broken then it is inflamed.
and do not interfere with anything if they are not knowledgeable about the members and the outlets of the nerves moving the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and the medical knowledge does not help at all, then cauterize with a cautery slightly in front, according to the amount of the skin, until the blister is broken and its color changes.
then the cure of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the colon and blood from the swan, each in equal parts; and let them all be mixed together, and let it be bound with a cloth, and let it be applied to the limb until it is healed.
The treatment of chancre by cauterization
When chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it stop growing, if you cauterize it with a cauterizer that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
And all the wise say that one should make a fire cauterization likewise in the middle of the chancre;
and I do not think it is good, because I believe that it will not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen once;
And the more important thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cauterant called "circle", as we have said in many cauterants.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it lingers or due to the excess that it causes or due to the severity of the illness when they are elderly (that is, too old) and they have little blood, or for lack of tension; and you see it approaching death: therefore, cauterize around with many small cauterants by pricking; after leaving it thus. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it piercing through the entire cauterization, then heat the cauterization from where it is formed:
And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauterizer has pierced through, and let the cauterizer be such that the hairs feel afterwards in a similar manner as the course of the porridge is alleviated.
After the treatment until they are completely healed.
Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing but a piece of member, for it twists the members as if the dry reeds would.
If you see this disease in the limb that can suffer from cautery together with fire, then heat the cautery knives very small and large, according to what is needed for the limb or the disease.
After cautery of all parts until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, that everything that is corrupted be removed.
Then leave it for three days, and apply a poultice of cauterized herbs on the wounds, suffering with oil until the burned skin is removed, and all corruption.
After the treatment of wounds, scars are generated.
And if you see after three days that healthy pus does not arise, it is good;
and if not, then begin the cautery again on what remains of the corrupted parts.
And this method has never been treated with medicine in place of fire cautery;
but all fire cauterization is of greater aid, and I have already told the cure of medicine in the division: take what you have at hand.
of the bones that come to the feet Many times it happens that the feet by deficiency give birth to a disease called "clubfoot" according to our understanding, and it is a great deformity that makes the foot look like a ball.
And the cauteries for this disease are in two ways. That is to say, fire cauterization, and needle cauterization with hot water.
Fire cauterization is such that you heat the cautery as if it were a pen of iron, and it should be made of good iron at the measure that it can pierce the nail of all parts, and that it has thin edges;
then put it all heated above the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the base of the nail; and let it stay thus for three hours until it begins to drip blood; then make an ointment of wild, crushed herbs with oil, and leave the ointment on all night, and the splints will be removed and uprooted from their roots.
Then treat the wound by applying heat until it is healed.
And if they are converted by previous injuries to the flesh, and often in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you reapply the fire cautery of hot iron. and it is in some way: take a needle of iron or steel, or a quill of vulture, and put it on the splint and the wound, that is to say, pore the verucae. And place the nail across so that it holds everything together, then put a little hot iron, and hold firmly with your hand, and press your hand turning it so that the edge of the nail comes to the root of the nail, and find the hot point deeply near the root.
and suffer a little from the burning of the hot point for an hour; then leave it like that, and it will all come out at its roots.
Then do another one, until you have relieved all those who are in the body, then cure the wounds that cause harm to the heart.
When anyone trembles from cold or a quarter-fever or other, it is necessary that you make four cauteries or four on the spine of the back; one cautery between each spine. and with fire or pliers, and over the stomach with cauterizing iron;
if it allows the wound to tremble, and the health will quickly recover from the cold disease.
No time appears when the body is bathed, or pustules appear that come from large corrupted matters.
if it is necessary for the first when they appear that one make cauterization over each head of the pustule: a fine cauterizing iron of willow wood, of which the tip is held in the fire, or of the root of aristolochia long, or with a lens cauterizer.
And never cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and it cannot grow new ones, but is disrupted from the excess from which they come, and are healthy;
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
often there is great bleeding from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the part of the body, or at the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the member, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stop.
and in any case when it has to do with anyone, you must quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press very tightly until the blood stops flowing out of your finger, and no more gushes out;
then apply the branding irons of various sizes, both small and large, until they are all red.
then apply I, whether large or small depending on the wound and where the artery is located, and place the branding iron above that vein where you hold your hand, and keep the branding iron as high as to not leave it uncovered.
And if the first one suddenly breaks while you are lifting it above the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take the other cautery that is in the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after another until the wound is completely covered.
and watch that you do not burn the tendon that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the wound.
and ensure that when the wound is cut from the artery, it cannot be completely covered immediately if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods that we have mentioned. ou by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by strong pulling with a thread, or by medicines placed above that have the power to stop bleeding; and then tied and held in place.
Whoever administers tight bandaging of cloth or other things burning above, or similar things, does not benefit unless not.
And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any remedy present, then they should place their finger index above the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly hold it until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein; and they should not move it, but they should frequently wipe it with cold water until it is very cold and thickened and stopped;
and make inquiries about what concerns him regarding cautery and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cauterization or fiery medicines, and the questions and causes and instruments and forms of cautery.
and I have placed that chapter on the shoulders below the feet, and I will go to this chapter by the same way because it is easier to find what we want.
And therefore when I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; when there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you should not undertake foolishness. For many methods of people come to healing. if they come from such people who have become so with their disease that they die easily due to the falsehood of their disease, and the greatness of their misfortune; and one should fear these.
And among these, there are those who give you sense, and say: wait, I am grainy"; and the disease is stubborn.
You should only consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more careful consideration in your honor than in your desire, and do not open rashly, but wisely of what you are certain, and which you have taken and lost;
and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your ailments for health to be converted;
and it will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of the long term.
Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and truth, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of his hand, indeed.
I have ordered you to write this chapter by examining other chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have previously described from head to foot, so that you may find it more easily.
It is said that this disease often occurs in children at birth, and when the neck of the child is held too tightly;
and it never occurs for no reason that one has not been.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen have died; and therefore it seems to me that it is better to abandon this work in these treatments.
I saw a child who was complaining of sharp pain, and the head was swelling each day until it could not be supported.
and believed it was so much moisture that he died, and this moisture is gathered outside the bone above the symphysis, between the jaw and the bone;
and the work is such that if the moisture is between the jaw and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you should make a wide incision into the head;
and it should be as long as ours, until the moisture drains out.
and now the form of the spotlight:
If the moisture is more extensive, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is outside the bone, and you see the signs of the commissures of the head opened on each part, and the sharp pain when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not return to you: then it is necessary that you make three cuts in the head like this:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture. After straining the cuts with linen and powders, and put wine and oil, and leave it thus for five hours;
then release it, and treat the wound with compresses and counter-irritants, and leave the head strained equally, and give the patient dry meat to eat until the member is comfortable and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you look at the size of the abscess and the gathering of pus;
for it is never there. never behind. never to the side. and never to the other side.
Measure then where the abscess is open and the gathering of pus, and make the cut according to what you have the ability to do.
and be careful not to cover the artery. and bring a little blood, so that the hairs do not die from the drainage of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When it happens to someone with a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or the pupil, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help much, then the cure is to cauterize with what covers the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, when you see them coping, to make the hairs grow back on their heads. After that, he rubs the affected area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then holds the hairs steady against all the cloth. Then look at where the blood flows out, and the veins on both sides are behind the ears, and they are not yet restored.
Then sign the veins with a sharp needle, then cut both sides of one inch, until the vein comes just to the bone, and this should be through the width of the head.
And if you see, press the lint away from the artery and cover it above, cutting as much as it should be through the middle.
And when the vein is cut, the blood spurts continuously outwards.
And if the artery does not open when felt, it is necessary to measure the quantity of space at three digits, then drill into the bone;
and the amount of blood that needs to be let out is six cubic centimeters, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the patient can bear and the replenishment of the artery;
then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone pointed, and if the gauze that was applied does not come out, then strain the wound and bind it, and apply the ointment until it is healed.
Of the head When an ancient headache comes, and the catarrh is sharp, due to the moisture of tears and chills in the temples and old age and similar things, and it is treated with methods of medical cures and nothing seems to help, then we should cauterize the arteries of the temples, as we have said.
And the method of extracting them is such that the hairs of his temples face the bad ones, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is quickly restored only in some men who are too thin;
and if it is restored, hold the neck with some cloths, then rub the limb with some rough cloth, and raise the limb with hot water until the artery opens clearly; then take the spoon of which this is the shape: then gently scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it at the top with pincers, and remove it well from all the bands that are outside of each part;
And if the artery is thin, turn it back to the tip of the needle, then cover that part according to the amount of the two needles. For if it is not covered, it will not heal completely.
And draw out one drop of blood from the sixth vein, just enough to three drops.
And if the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two lengths of a strong silk thread, double thickness, so that no blood comes before the healing of the wound, and no bleeding occurs.
Then cover the excess between the two knots in the same hour, and then, if you see, if the patient is cauterized with the cauterizing iron just to the bone until the needles are covered.
And this is the mortal work, if the pains are not accompanied by fever and he has a hot constitution. For the cautery is used to finish the moistures: Therefore, it is of greater help against moistures.
Or it is necessary for the extraction of arrows that one fills the wound with old cotton and places bandages well made;
And when they are removed, one should apply dry medicines that cause heat and bandages until they are healed.
And if without cutting the artery as much as you work, then one must quickly cover it with a cauterizer, or one fills the wound with vinegar and hold it in one's hand that the uncut part is not soaked. and if you do not have this present, put it on the limb as much as the joint should not be frozen, and raise the limb from high cold water until the joint is constantly, and it should be stretched as it should.
And it should have between the two knives one inch of space, and then when you have stopped the bleeding from both veins, and you melt the hot iron on top until it comes just short of the bone, and cover the vein in two parts; and they are spaced apart between the two shoulders because there is no doubt about this cauterization all in all.
and it is the form of the cauterization:
and what is more fluid and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery cutting from two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to last longer in their heat. When the instruments are too tight, it holds less heat.
of tears when the tears of the eyes are flowing down from the veins that are above the back of the head, and it does not benefit from any medical treatment that is done, and you see the face of the patient become twisted, and feels as if there is a trembling. and they are held and moistened so much that the hairs of the papers are burned, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, if there is a need for this treatment. And they called the ancient "healer of contusions," and you should do this for the patient who has this disease, to let his hairs grow on the front, then make three cuts evenly along the length of the front;
And they called the ancient "healer of contusions," and you should do this for the patient who has this disease, to let his hairs grow on the front, then make three cuts evenly along the length of the front; and either one of the cuts as if two are too low in front, and the others two on the ribs above the papers, and be careful not to incise the arteries that are above the ribs;
and move your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and each wound the quantity of three drops through the joints;
and have prepared a piece of sponge and plenty of cloths to absorb the blood, then boil the syringe full of two parts of this mixture:
from the incision which is made from the temple just above the second incision; and scrape all that is between the two cuts to the entire surface of the face which is above the bone, then make another cut from the same incision towards the other second, and then extract this syringe. If you insert the tool called "cultellaire" into the first cut, it is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and its shape is:
And place the sharp edge of the tool towards the cheek and the blunt side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the other cut.
And cover all the vessels that descend from the head as far as the eyes until the incision is continued as far as the surface of the face, and then make another cut from the same incision towards the other side;
and then strain out the blood evenly, and express the joint for the blood taken.
then place a piece of clean, old cloth in each wound, and apply poultices made of flour mixed with wine, oil, and vinegar, and make sure that abscesses do not form.
and then apply a new bandage to the wound, and apply a large amount of fresh garlic, then use the healing salve with rose oil, and other remedies to treat the wound, until it is healed.
When using the fire cauterizer, you will see the eyes tense and small, and weakened, and the papers burned. and the hairs prick, and when they are shaved, there is great pain in the forehead, and the hairs are discharged. therefore avoid these accidents that those matters and that cautery do not come from many wounds, and the healing that is, if it is this.
And it is that you command the patient to turn his head back, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another one wide at the top of the nose. and begins from the wound on the right temple to the left temple, and the incision just to the bone; and avoid your hand from the nerves of the temples that move at the wound;
and when the bone is exposed, soak up all the blood with a sponge, and then clean between the two lips of the wound and put old cloth, and apply linen; Then place bandages soaked in wine and oil above, and guard against abscess.
When it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until it begins to burn like charcoal, then treat with things that cause sweating, which make one perspire.
In a similar manner: Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of mustard, and make an ointment. And administer it in these wounds to cause sweating throughout.
of ear obstruction
All that which drips into our ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beasts, or arrowheads of stone or similar things like iron. if seeds, such as beans, peas; or things that flow down, such as honey and similar things.
When it enters the ear as a stone or other thing that does not fit well in the ear, it does not grow in the ear, so put the ear to the sun.
If you see the stone, if any drop of purple oil or hemlock oil drips, then moisten extraction. and the patient's condition is made to vomit, and he stops his nose when he vomits, and puts cloth or wool inside the ear. and the ear is held upwards.
Often, this treatment causes.
and if it does not come up, then moisten extraction with delicate tweezers, of which this is the shape:
If they jump as far as possible with pins, it is good.
If not, then apply gentle pressure extraction at the subtle groove of the small double-joint.
And if they do not jump by that, then make a rain cloud and press the top of the cloud onto the ear canal or opening of the ear, and stop the wax inside the ear with soft candle so that it cannot enter with the cloud. Then remove it carefully, as it often comes out like we have said.
And if it does not come out in that manner, then take some gauze and wrap it around the eyes, and put any instrument that is sharp to cut through wax, and put a small amount of cotton inside. Then press the gland above the stone or whatever it is, and drain it.
And if she does not drain from all these things that we have said, then quickly cut open the ear as if it is an abscess, and blood flows, and spasms.
And the manner of the cut is that you first suck out the pus from the ear canal, and then draw out the blood according to the measure of its virtue, then place the pus between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the base of the ear at the grease or where it depends. and let the knife be as sharp as a crescent moon, until you reach the stone, then chip away according to your ability, and suck it vigorously into your mouth.
and the cure until they are healed.
And if it is small and swells up, administer extraction;
and if it cannot be removed, then administer the following subtle remedy according to this form: and administer incision of that grain.
But do not make a mistake when you think the grain is moist due to earwax, until you have made many pieces of it;
then extract it with delicate forceps and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
In the ear therefore that is blocked, it is appropriate to use the blowing of the nose of the condition first, and widen the ear with old cotton. And let it lie flat across the ear itself or where the sharp pain is. If it jumps out due to the sky, it's good.
if not, take many needles according to the length of your thread and thin, and heat them slightly in the fire; and insert the hairs one by one through an opening in his ear, and go up from there. from the other foot, and pierce with another needle above the needle that is in the ear; and do not stop piercing with needle after needle until the sharp one has passed through entirely, and thus it will pass through entirely;
If you see, take a reed, and blow one of the shoulder blades into the ear, and the other hold with fire until the most flexible reed is burnt.
Then make another of the other joints until the sharp edge is all gone, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small, like a mouse and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division.
But if it is of large size, so that one can feel it, then minimize the extraction of pins. And the least thing to remove is what is in the ear.
In extracting worms from the ears, if you are unable to cure as we have described in the division and treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help, then you should look into the ear using sunlight. If there are no worms, then use thin forceps to extract them; if they do not appear, then take the form of the tool that is used for this purpose.
And be narrow below and wide above. And use the most subtle tool in the ear according to the amount of pain caused by the worm, then it is successful for the entire tool. Do this often until all the worms are out.
And if they do not obey to exit, then bend the needle around the neck of the cotton as I have said in the stone.
And if they do not succeed as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the opening of veins, and you will find them where to treat distillations.
And if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear of this instrument, as you see in this form: And it should be made of silver or brass, with small holes below to pour and above to pour out.
And to press within the distillation of the well-made brass instrument for this, and if you see take a razor and wrap it around the tip evenly with cotton. then pour your oil or juice into the ear, and whatever you see in the canal, and the canal should be in the ear.
then press the cotton into the toothbrush and press your hand firmly until the oil is dripped or moved out of the ear. and the smell of the oil inside, and the distillation should be slightly warm when boiling, as it is distilled into the ear. and be careful that it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be very good.
of ear obstruction
No child is born without some ear problems.
and this also happens to some people due to injury of the wound, or a foreign body inside the ear, and this injury comes only once in the ear, if one cannot see it;
and never comes out without breaking the bone, and one sees it well.
Therefore, that which comes in the front, if one cannot see it, is a difficult healing in many positions, and in this, it is necessary that you put the ear with the bad side to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opacification, if the work has this entire span of why it is there:
And let the forceps be applied evenly on both sides, front and back, so that it does not pierce the ear.
If the discharge is from the ear or the ear canal, if you have fine forceps and gently cover it, until the wax is completely removed.
And if the wound is in the front of the ear, take a fine knife and lightly heat it over the fire, then place it on the bone of the ear.
If you feel the discharge that causes the patient to have a grating sensation in the ear, slightly pierce it, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
Then put a tent according to the size of the perforation in the ear, and tie it with an Egyptian knot. Do not do anything until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moor it in sharp rose, and powder with broken glass vitrified.
And if you see the ear swelling, it is advisable to remove the tent and move another tent moored in sharp rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed. Then the healer as long as he is healthy.
And if there is a flow of blood, dip an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the blood flow which are used to treat distillations.
This is the eyelid that comes in papers from the eyes when they are wet and dry, if it is advisable to extend them with forceps and tweezers, and the cover of a sponge from its roots. Then apply the acidic vinegar to the joint.
And if without skin, then cauterize with a thin, pointed needle cauterizer, and the cauterizer after incision is better.
And many times they recur, but nothing remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the gravel Many times come from the eyes things that seem like grains in their form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "grandine", and is an assembly of large moisture above and below. The work is such as follows:
The work is such as follows: If the shoulder moves back and forth, it is a simple matter to know;
Then make the incision wide, then scrape each part lightly, then take it with pincers and bandage.
If you do not cover it with a small piece of paper, it will not hurt the patient.
And if the wound is large, stitch it together and treat it until it is healed.
And if it is small, do not make any force, for the pain will return quickly and cause harm.
And if the large bone is falling downwards into the depth of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and place the large bone in some pinchers, and hold and press it from both sides.
and if the paper is separated by the incision, it does not matter.
and when the large bone is cut, pour some oil of vinegar on it, and cure the limb from which it was removed until the hairs are healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a grease that is injected into the papers above, and it has more effect on children than adults, and hurts their eyes greatly, and they vomit in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears gather in their eyes.
and because they lie on their faces adhered, and sleep on them, and their papers are soaked with moisture that inflames and irritates the skin which opens in the oil. And when you press the limb to its place and feel the bone slipping between them.
And the manner of the work is such that the hairs put their head on your healthy one;
and then take a piece of linen, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains the oil from each part, then put it on him. and press with your two fingers on one side and the other, so that the oil is gathered in the circle.
Then make a cut in the middle of the moisture using a sharp spatula, and it should not be larger than the wound made during the opening of the vein.
And make a cut in the skin until you reach the extraction. And in many positions, extraction comes from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Extract the whole piece with a cloth wrapped around your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out.
And make sure you do not insert it into the cut, that you do not come to the whole spatula just to the oil, that you do not wound it.
And if it does not open at the beginning of the incision, then sharply cut the incision lightly until it opens.
Then extract it as we have said, then gently wipe the cloths in vinegar and water, and place on the limb, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who break the cloth and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then the healer as long as they are healthy.
And if it comes to the abscess that is swollen, then the healer should apply wet compresses until they are healthy.
of hairs of papers When hairs are plucked out other than by nature, and are awakened, they harm the eyes, and bring on diseases such as tears and softening of the papers and cornea, until it is caused by the destruction of the eyes.
And there are four ways of treatment: For the fire cauterization together with fire, or by medicine according to what it is before or in the chapter of cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by caustics, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the dislocated joint in your hand, then turn the paper of oil to your right hand.
If it is turned, it is good. If not, if you prick with a needle at the end of each thread above. And let it be either on the edge of the paper or where the hair grows from these hairs, and pull the thread above the entire paper, and turn to the razor.
then cut in the part outside the paper, outside the hairs, removing all the skin, from the large thigh to the small one.
then extract the thread, and place outside the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then above the paper a figure of an envelope, like the fullness of mercury, and all the while it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you see lifted the paper which is divided into all.
And if to the thread that has business, one covers great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened;
then make a cut across all the skin on the two lines you have marked, and begin from the large thigh down to small. and let one of the cuts near the hairs at the base of the large thigh, then push the knife into one of the two corners of the knee, then scrape the skin off entirely.
then sew the two lips together with a needle and thread of fine silk, and stop the bleeding, and make sure the excess hair is above the stitches on all parts that are sticky, if you see this happening.
and if not, then do not worry about it, then leave the stitches and the thread for three days or four.
Then treat the wound with dry and constricting things, for the paper will revive at the moment of the wound and gather with it, but the sewing is broken (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear. And if in another way:
And if in another way: and you shape the paper into a form that is as like the mold of wax as we have told, at three fingerbreadths thick, according to the form which is here:
then cover the wound with a bandage evenly according to the form that is there:
And if you cannot hold the needles, and the thing is not even, take a needle or a thread that has one strand, and put it into the figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grand larmier, et lou seconde fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les fils igalment.
then evenly lift your hand, and lift all the skin above where you have sewn, as we have told you, then gather the two lips of the wound by sewing, and treat it until it is healed.
and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with plaster and similar soothing ointments.
and never has it happened that the hair of the stone is converted:
if you should use what we have said about incision.
but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is as follows: and you should convert the paper and the fence inside according to what I have said, and then make two wounds by art, and two thin lines as long as the paper and the width of the space is; and take care of the two parts where you hold the threads;
then assemble them subtly above what lies over the paper of the oil, and strain the two wounds from the two parts formed; and he leaves it thus for several days, and the skin that is stretched will die, rot, and putrefy, and will fall off from it.
If it takes too long, then the copper (cauterizing instrument) must be used with force, and cure until it is healed.
And when the wound has been closed, and if paper has been lifted from it, and the hairs will not grow back.
And this is the shape of the two needles that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is such that you grip a thin needle, and pull the silk thread soft and thin; Then gently gather the heads and place them one by one, and let the hair grow a palm's length long.
Then order the other hair in a quick hunt of silk thread briefly, and do not let the heads touch the thread.
Then place the misaligned heads on your clean side.
And let the work be done in the shade so that the work is not spoiled, for it is a delicate and small work, then push the needle through the entire hair at its base pricked, and pierce it into the paper gently until you remove it above the natural hair;
Then shave the hair up to the chest, and cut off the hair in the chest, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then shave your hand until the hair comes out all over the chest, with the natural hair on the paper.
And if the chest is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then shave the chest to the very end, as far as you have ordered, until the chest comes out completely and you can see through the oil.
Then shave the chest and the hair, and close the oil and leave it for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and grows on top.
If the hairs are small, accompany them with long hair from sheep, and elevate it with the one you leave, until they are lengthened and then lift it.
of the purity of the oil When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the "porridge," comes in the oil, there are two ways:
One natural, and the other unnatural.
And it occurs by a wound, or a cut, or cauterization, and similar things.
And the way of the work in it is that you break that seal, and dry the lips of it, and put inside tents of linen, and bind it until it is healed.
And you should only use in its care things that dry and restrict. For if you do this, the disease will become worse than before.
but I work on things that are softening, such as fenugreek. and the strong herbs and seeds of flax be cooked, and the ointment of yarrow dissolved in any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a tent, and this is the cure for this.
And the treasures of your cure are such that you should take care not to spoil it according to its former form.
And these works that we have said are not other than to prevent this disease from returning according to its former form.
This disease that is dislocated, which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Accidents come from wounds, cuts, burns, and similar things.
And the method of the work is such that you grasp a needle with a double thread, and place it in the chair, and make it pierce from the right arm to the left, so that the thread comes out at two points on the chair.
Then the chair is above all the needle, and the cloth is wide enough to cover it. And if the paper shape returns according to what is needed, it is good.
If not, take the razor and place it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two more cuts inside the paper.
and let the two cuts of the two corners of the incision that you have made be such that when they are assembled, that the figure is as it should be, like the shape of a letter that has not been Greek.
then take that char, according to the amount that its cost is away from it, of what is taught on paper, then add the two parts together, and stitch them with a thread of linen.
then take care of what we have said about the medicines that soften and the bandages, until it is healed.
And if the illness comes from a cut or stitching or cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a plain incision away from the hairs of the paper, and according to what is above. then carefully place between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said.
then carefully place between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said. and one should perform the work according to the form of the disease, as it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters compare all possible means to how they can make the figure return to its natural shape.
and the bones themselves, according to what is needed for work and tools in many positions.
When this glue is done by hand in a somewhat manner that the paper above is soaked with the white of oil, and cannot move or do its natural workings, then it is necessary that you bring the point of a razor outside the paper, and tie it on top.
and it is used with pins, until you copy what is hard at the subtle space, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the pain cannot suffer that the space is too sharp or blinds the oil.
and your incision should be lightly scraped off that assembly, so that the paper reverts according to its natural form.
and it is all clean that assembly, and never in the oil acid salty, and lift from acid sweet, and of colloid.
then put between the paper and the oil a linen tent, and put on the oil wool ground in abundance of urine. After the first day, use a cold compress and unclean things until healed.
There are two ways to treat the joint: The first way is when the joint is like a hard, painful spasm, and the other way is not nerve-related but resembles frozen moisture, so that when touched with iron and heated with pincers, it cannot be moved.
Both ways start near the great thigh bone and grow slowly until they cover the entire eye and light, and all movement of the oil.
And the way of the incision is that the hairs put their head in your clean place, then they work the eyes. and gently hold the paper to your hand, then bend the nail with small force, and extend it above; then take a needle, and put horsehair, or sheep's wool, or beef fat, and thread it tightly; and double the tip of the needle a little and insert it into the nail, and push the entire needle through, and tie the nail with a thread and extend it above, and scrape all the hair from the side of the nail that leads to the pearl and silk to the skin just below the arm, then cut the remaining in the root of the arm at every subtle space and with small forces, and leave the natural bend of the arm, so that by the incision, tears do not usually come out;
and never once has the joint remained out of place alone, but rather as we have said. then the skin is all the soft tissue that gives shape to this.
And be careful that the soft tissue does not touch the fascia and tear it, and that the bone is not pierced.
and after the incision pour some ground black pepper into the oil, and a poultice made of linen, and leave it just above the other side. then apply the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
and if the joint is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the joints cannot enter, often this resemblance of a dislocation from medicine.
and they grow as I have described in the section, and if you see them covered, then oil the hair with the bad one, and take the sharp instrument lightly, quickly according to this form: and gently rub the joint above, and if you see that it does not soften and the skin is close, then distill from your mouth into the oil mixture made of litharge and red wax and silk broth, and stifle the oil with the other one;
If nothing is contrary in the oil, as with an abscess, then milk, and cure first the abscess until it is healed, then proceed with the work as before until it is healed.
then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is completely healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh on the arm appears black in the oil due to great harm, then suspend it at the end, and cover a part of it and not all at once, so that tears do not come.
then distill in the oil red chalices which are made of litargire.
Some men are born with no red hair, and cover the prunelle and hold it up on the papers and turn it to the back, and it seems like a baluster rose.
and the work is such that the hairs put their heads in your clean, then work those, and hold all that hair with convenient bends for this, and support it at force.
Then shave the first chapiter, and go through everything shaving to the end, and be careful not to cut the oil in the work.
And it should be the same incision of the span that we have mentioned in the incision of the nail and with small forces to take out the base, as it forms after this chapter shows.
And when the incision is completed and all the chapter is taken out, use oil of sulfur or you distill red wine and similar corrosive medicines, and put it on the oil with a piece of cotton with absinth, so that it is secure against pus.
and if there is nothing delayed, and the swelling does not subside, and you doubt an abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing remedies.
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make certain that the char is set in oil by this means.
But always it is necessary that you apply a weak remedy of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in ironwork;
and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb suffers from that work.
red veins that are covered over the eye, and they harm the view and weaken the eye always.
The first task is therefore to examine the patient's eyes, to see if they are open or closed, and there is no other disease besides this one. Therefore, examine the patient in this manner:
Instruct the patient to place their head in your hand, then gently stretch the joints at all angles according to their wisdom, and let the subtle joints be doubled in this form:
And they should be done twice a day, gradually increasing in intensity according to this form:
Then examine the patient's joints gently, and squeeze the blood out after each time until you can remove them from the eye.
Be careful not to pierce the eye with sharp objects, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not cause any harm to the joints.
And when you have done this, if you distill green and red wine into the oil to corrupt what is remaining underneath.
And if you cannot collect all the wine in that hour, then make a poultice on the oil of things to ease the pain of the eyes, and let it sit for some time until the pain is eased and it is ensured that there is no abscess, then restart according to this method as long as it is not healed;
and this is the form of the force:
The master named "Aristarchus" made a fistula:
When you cure it with fire and medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then apply the same thing that you did above the abscess, where it should die, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then the instrument of all that is in this form;
and is called "sharp chisel", and it is made of iron into the form of a chisel, and it is pointed as a lime if it is in this present form:
And place it above the flesh of the bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that that corruption is removed;
and do not do it again, then restore the flesh of healing drying agents.
if the wound is sound, and the flesh has grown, and the body of the bone is sound, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not remove and is not displaced, and no bad accidents come, then it is healed;
If not, there is no other method than to bring the fistula to the point of the nose according to this form: and then you should discover the bone again with iron and medicines, and when it is discovered take the forehead according to this form, and let the patient's iron be at three angles, and the fuse should be thinned down to the top as you see here:
then put it above the bone of the arm, and keep your hand away from the oil for a moment, then turn the whole forehead until it pierces the bone and the patient feels the pain as if it comes from the inside if he keeps his hand on his nose;
and when the bone of medicine is dried, as I have shown you, and when the child grows and hardens the bones, then the matter goes to the knee. It is a lighter matter for the joint.
When the eyes are widely open and not disturbed or drowsy, it is necessary to hold the joint.
Then the healthy one, then apply leeches or a hot iron to draw out the poison, then place on the oil that has been made with acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and strain the oil, and apply the ointment with bandages and cloths;
and the manner of the cloths is such that you grasp cloths that are sufficiently soft, and fold each one into four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that they have need of.
then strain through a cloth made of linen firmly, and restart the suction to draw without harming.
then remove the suctions and let the oil remain strained day and night, and if the joints are dislocated, it is necessary that you strain it greatly.
then remove the joint after the day and night, and if you see the oil return, it is good.
if not if the bandages and the cloths and the linen and the suction devices are not clean until they are healthy.
The breaking of a silk cloth When disruptions come in the woven cloth, then open, and come strong like the grain of resin, and is spreadable to see.
then if you see the cloth covered, the work is such that you put a needle in the root of the part below this above, then put another needle where the double thread of the arm part is. and make it pierce, and let the first needle according to the arrangement.
then copper the joint with a doubled and tied piece of cloth, and strain it well, then remove the needle and put some soft marrow on the wound in plenty.
and leave it until the thread heals with the wound, then care for the oil of things that comfort until the wound is healed.
and never strain the wound by any piece of cloth, until it is healed.
And if they appear greatly, then pierce the thin needle that comes from under the oil, and wick away the moisture and descend on the hairs, and enter immediately.
Then I removed it until it was healthy.
This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is nothing more than a bowel that is gathered in the oil, resembling a sharp downward point, and it is not a sharp point.
And the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on the seat with their back straight, then take the chief between your hands from the two parts, and move it until you see the bowel come out above to your eyes. Then let it be removed, and do not descend and it should be dismantled in the light, and see the things as they were.
And if they do not dislocate, it is sharp, and if they do not descend from the bow, it is not as we have said.
If you place the pain between your hands, then take the thin spatula and make it under the eye, by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the eyelid and the eyebrow, until the bow is released.
And when it is released, distill in the hot, sharp oil mixed with honey, or sharp or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
of the hot oils We have similarities of waters in the division, and what is necessary to pierce. if in work according to health.
You must make the misaligned bone between your crossed hands, outside of the light for the sun, and the sound and stretched very tight.
Then put the paper of oil to your right hand if the eyes are right, or to your left hand if the eyes are left.
Then take in your right hand if the eyes are right, or in your left hand if the eyes are left, the instrument called "almagda".
Then place the tip of the instrument on the crown by the thickness of a ring in the small bone of the elbow, then drive the instrument which is called «almagda» virtuously, and tremble your hand until it pierces through the small bone of the elbow, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing.
And it is appropriate that the measure of the path of almagda be at the forepart of the measure of the space that is from the prunella to the end of the nostril. And this is the crown of the oil.
If you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the canvas cloth, then place the instrument next to it where the sharp is, then express it out one after another.
if he is now sharp-sighted, then he sees the hairs in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After a short rest, and if the pain increases again, use the second method. Place the forceps with the instrument, and when it is securely gripped and does not move, gently rotate your hand back and forth.
Then apply a little force with the string gem, and let it go inside the vein. Then put in its place the oil steeped or ground with rose oil and an abundance of honey, and bind it with clean oil.
We, and those who are of our time, put on it with an abundance of honey.
And if the arrowhead cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you use the tool called "alberit", of which this is the form:
And then only pierce the connective tissue, and do not go too far in front, but make the cut gently, then use the forceps as we have said.
And at the completion of the work, compare the patient's sleep with the darkness that occurs, in which he sleeps on his back in the darkened room.
and it is necessary to avoid all movements, and take light foods, and not move the head to the right or left, and it should be tied according to its position just after the injury.
then the reset it in this very dark house, and examine its view, and let see some things, and then put the chain just after the seventh day.
and it is necessary that you do this in the early hours of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you raise the head, because the sharp pain quickly.
if abscesses come, then you reset the oil before the seventh day, and it is necessary to raise the head which alleviates the abscess.
And when it is calm, remove the bandage and place it on its face again to cover any opening, and let it stay in that dark house.
Then slowly leave the house and turn into your own home;
and let no one interfere in this case. Some came to us who were from the Yrach, who told us that in their country people used to do something called "almagda perciet," which is like the aigue, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I read about it in the books of the ancients; And by chance, this is a new thing.
And these are the similar forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see them as such;
and they are purely rain. And they are the heads of those from this same subtlety, and the others in three angles awake.
Never born or born different charcoals, of which there are some that seem like scorpions at the bottom of the feet;
and if there are such and he has enhanced char of dark color, and if he has charcoal of good color. In that case of these charcoals which is good, and not enhanced, it is appropriate to make the pain between your hands against the sun;
In that case of these charcoals which is good, and not enhanced, it is appropriate to make the pain between your hands against the sun; and clean his nostrils, and pour water into those holes, and remove them; so that you can hold it with a fine, sharp needle until you know that the arrow is completely out.
And if there is nothing that can be removed with a fine, delicate instrument, then open it with all the sharp tools until nothing remains. and if you do not see, or an abscess forms, then treat it as it should be;
and if they are malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize it until the wound is clean and all the arrows are removed, then pour in salt water or vinegar. If the neck is injured, and moisture comes into the palace, cut it open to see if it is healthy;
and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, see if there is a fracture in the bone above, because the instruments do not come out to cut:
therefore it is necessary that you bring a thin wire, and hold it with your hands, and put space between each nut as needed or less; and put the bad teeth of the wire into the neck at a low angle, and pull it out until it comes out through the neck inside the mouth;
and often do so to children at schools, and it is an easy thing for those who wish to do it.
Then hold the head that comes from the neck in one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth in the other hand, and alternate between them as we have done before.
Do this until you clean that cloth, then draw the child's tongue out, soak the blood, and remove the thread in an Egyptian manner, and put it back in the same way as before.
Do this three times or more, until the incisions have eaten away all that remains of the cloth.
Then place or remove a splint as needed for several days until they are healed, and if they need to use medicines, then do so.
This is the shape of the instrument used to purge the head, where one distills the oils and medicines that are placed inside.
And it should be of silver or tin, shaped like an open lamp, such as a cane, and use it in the same way.
And if you see, then make a closed cane, and the instrument is used to purge the head.
And it should have a handle at the top to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
for the nose
Frequently, a disease is born at the head of the neck, which is called "telul", and grows and becomes large over time, becoming such that it is difficult to see.
And for this reason, you should cover it at the beginning, and apply the entire bone, then place the heat or burning medicine on the limb.
And if it is delayed in covering until it becomes large, then take heed whether it is hard, of poor color, and without sensation:
if you do not touch it with iron because these are buried abscesses, for when it is covered, great harm comes to the pain.
and if it is an abscess, touch it gently, not with hot water, and you will see how you can cover it all, if you remove the pain and the cover without fear, and cure the limb of things that are tight and restrictive.
that remedies for continuing come in one of these cartilages, and is of little use, because in some people.
Then it is necessary to look at the wound if it is fresh with all its blood; and then apply the two lips to a seam, then cure it until it is healed.
and if the lips are already scarred on one side and the other, then it is necessary to scrape all the parts of their edge until they heal, then assemble the two lips to a seam, and hold it, and powder with powder of dragon's blood, and broken incense. Put powders on top of the wound, using a strong or other adhesive plaster, and leave it until it heals through it, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the stitching is such that you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
To some people there are within the lips abscesses that are hard and large, like grains, and smaller and larger;
therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each one, and take with forceps and cover in each part;
then fill the wound after the incision of broken glass, until the wound is clean.
and then apply a bandage to the wound, and treat the wound with dry things until it is healed.
Often teeth grow above the gums, which the ancients called "albulus".
if it is necessary that you support it with pincers, and cover its root, and let the blood or pus out.
then apply glass powder broken, or other astringent and desiccating powders;
and if that tooth returns after the incision, and often happens, then cover it again, and cauterize. if it does not return even after the cauterization;
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scars that are ugly and sharp; and sometimes they are the black and yellow and green teeth, until the corruption comes to the gum, and are the stinking teeth.
if it is necessary that you make the pain between your hands, and its roots are in your holy one, and extract the teeth or the scars that appear, until nothing remains. and thus make of the black and green, and yellow and other stains, until they are removed;
and if it has taken out what is at the first layer, it is good; if not, start again from the second layer and the third, until you have removed everything.
and clean the teeth of various forms of instruments to remove, according to what the operation demonstrates, because the razor that is removed from between the teeth has other shapes than the one that is removed from between the teeth. and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
When you are treating a tooth for pain, do not delay in pulling it as soon as possible, for one should not do this to everyone. for it is a very high substance, so there is no excuse for not pulling it.
Therefore, when the tooth is painful and must be pulled, then you should be certain of the tooth breaking. Often the pain of the misaligned joint is relieved, and one should ensure that it is a holy tooth, and pull out the good tooth. and one should not leave it until the pain is relieved, as long as the evil remains, for we have already done this to these sinners.
And when you are certain of the tooth that is hurting, it is necessary that you cauterize around the tooth on all sides. with a strong burning agent to protect the gum from all parts.
Then move the joint to its proper place or use thin needles at the first point and then another, until it is properly dislocated, then firmly secure the needles. And if the painful joint is in your knee, keep it still so it does not move.
After straightening the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump back into place, take any of these instruments and gently tap on each part lightly, and then shake as you did first.
And if the joint is dense and swollen, then it is necessary to fill it with cloths where the pus is. And if the thin needles are delicately held, so they do not break when being pulled out.
And it is necessary to carefully observe around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And be careful not to break it and leave a part behind, and re-insert it with more pain from the root than before.
And be careful that you do not act in such a way as the ignorant scribes, who by their haste and boldness break everything at once, and never correct what we have told.
but bring forth everything once by the cunning of this great disease for the roots that they delay, or for the chariot that they break, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is drawn, wash the mouth with wine or with oil and salt.
and if blood flows and it often does, use the mouth with broken glass wine.
If it does not improve, then cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments that one uses to move the first teeth should be long and pointed, and have large handles, so they do not bend when you pull out the tooth.
And these are the forms: And they should be thick-bodied so they do not bend when you pull, and they should be made of well-made iron, and they should be sharp to hold.
from the root of the tooth When the root remains in the tooth, it is necessary to place cotton moilliet on the tooth or II, until the tooth is softened, then break the forceps called "algefri," which are used to extract the tooth.
And they should be made inside like a lime and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these needles, then it is necessary that you dig around the root of the whole chariot, and put the tool called «althali», that is, a spoon, of which this is the form:
And if it is also large and thick so that it does not break, and if its root jumps upwards, it is good.
If not, with all the instruments, of which the forms come afterwards:
And if it helps, then use this tool that has two prongs, of which this is the form: and other tools that are before in the range of the teeth, and of this tool that seems like large needles, of which this is the form:
And this instrument is except that it cannot break, and sharp that many of the instruments of density are; and also other instruments, which are not counted as one.
and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their work and the disease shows, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach the instrument for the diversity of the others and it has not broken the cart or the other bones, or it does not harm, if one seeks the instruments that one needs, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, of which this is the form:
And let them be large and well-gripping to hold the bone, that it not slip, but let him hold and remove.
Then restore the limb to its proper position, and if there is rotting in the bone, and it is small, then cut off all this tool.
When the tooth appears not in line with its natural position, and its shape is ugly, and especially in young women, then it is necessary to remove the tooth if it is not in the right place, and cannot be straightened or filed.
Then cut off the root. and if it is stuck with the tooth, take this tool that has this shape, and it is similar to a small beak, and it should be made of iron, sharp on one side and smooth on the other.
And the copper coin gently and slowly for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be lamed, then the lame part of a spoon like this is used:
and it is also like the bill of the bird from which we make arrows;
and in the bill of the tooth gently and slowly move it back and forth, so that it does not move until it breaks;
then the flat end of it has no razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, then you must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt the speech.
When the teeth in front are knocked out, whether by impact or falling, and the pain cannot be relieved by pressing on the gums to prevent them from chattering, and you treat them with restrictive medicines, it is not effective.
if they need to be restricted with a gold thread, for the silver thread becomes green and rotten, but the gold never changes.
and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth.
and if you see that the teeth are becoming loose, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the missing tooth between the other teeth, as many as there are, until you feel confident that the healthy tooth on the other side is secure. then reapply the bandage to the part where you began, and gently and carefully insert your hand, until it does not move.
and let your finger be at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Then cut the thread into small pieces and use them to assemble, and put them between the healthy tooth and the tongue, so it does not bleed.
Then leave it so tight as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the thread breaks, then tie it with another thread.
If it stays and serves in this way throughout its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the appearance of the crowning of the two healthy teeth, and the two missing ones, as you see.
And when the tooth is knocked out, if it is put back into its place, bit by bit, as we have said;
and does not interfere with it if it is not wise and painful, and never made the shape of a bone tooth of a goose, and put it back into its place where the defect is, and hold it as we have said, and wait and serve thus for a long time.
Never are these joints which come from the tongue or nature, that one should not thus make; or by accident of a wound sewn.
and the works are such that you work the mouth of the misaligned, and have his head in your safe, and relieve the tongue;
Then cut the nerve of the arm, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if it is hard or not, and it is a sudden injury, then boil the herb and cut it lengthwise.
And be careful that the wound is not too deep, for the artery that is exposed;
And when you have done, lift the limb of vinegar and oil, or of cold water, then put out the tongue a tent of linen;
and the taint the pain every night, that the limbs not stick together.
And if blood comes out, put glass powder on the wound; and if the bleeding does not stop, cauterize it with slow-burning fire, which is good for this. then use other treatments until it is healed.
and if you see that the wound is of black or dark color and hard, and the patient does not feel pain, do not touch it, because it is a chancre.
and if it is inclined to suppuration and there is moisture, then pour the liquid from a thin syringe on both sides and deliver it. and if it does not move in your work, place a piece of broken glass on top as long as it is soaked, then return to your work until you remove all the pus.
then lift the limb from the left and right, and treat other wounds until it is healed.
of throat abscesses No one ever comes from within the throat, which are called "godath", and they are properly called the two mandibles, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then be careful:
if it is an abscess hard and small in size and of yellowish color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with a little iron, as it may cause the flow of blood; but let it be until it is soft, and then you will be able to part it, or it would break by itself;
and if it is of white color and the root is thin, then you should prepare the instrument to cover, but first check if the abscesses are calm and at rest.
Then place the pain in front of the sun, and its head should be straight, and the work the mouth and the prince between his hands, and press the tongue away from all the instrument, because it is the shape;
and let it be of silver or thin tin like some knives:
if you press the tongue with this instrument, and see the abscess, take the needle and poke it into the amber, and trace it upward as much as you can;
and take nothing with it from the threads, then cover the instrument with a cloth, of which this is the shape, which seems like a forceps; and all the prongs are bent, and one part is on the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or tin:
And if you do not have this instrument present, if you have coping with pliers, of which is the form: and let it be called "trenchan" on one side, and "name" on the other:
And when you have pulled out one of the splinters, pull out the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the sharp pain with hot, sharp, and cold water, and if there is blood coming out, gargle with hot water, or use pounded green pomegranates, or mint leaves, and similar things, until the mouth is no longer stained. Then cure it until it is healed.
And never do any other abscesses come out of the throat besides the two splinters, so pull them out in the same way as the two splinters must be pulled out.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was located within her throat, specifically a small abscess.
And she had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the condition that was choking her, and she could not eat or drink, and died if she remained like this for a day or two.
And the abscess was so large that it had been filled with two handfuls of pus through the two nostrils.
I therefore acted quickly, and pierced one of the sides, then removed the pus, and a large portion of blood.
then I pierced the other side through the throat, and the work of the mouth and pressed her tongue.
After I had finished this work, I collected the remains in these abscesses, and took out a part of it, and did not finish until a small amount of blood was drawn. And thus the woman's throat was cut, and she began to drink vinegar and then wine, and did not stop cutting into this abscess by long stretches.
And the abscesses returned to their place, and filled the skin that I had emptied, until it became very large.
Therefore I advised her and cauterized it inside her throat. Thus she did not grow without.
And I leave these parts, and know only that God will do with them after me.
of the eye
When referring to the eye, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular".
And if it is swollen and round, it is called "uve".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help much, and you see that the chauffer's abscess is calmed, and it is thin, then you should apply a poultice.
And the one that is round and not long; and it is bloody or purple or black in color, then you should avoid the incision of the li. For there is great danger in the pain.
Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its color and length, you should place the painful part in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned before. Then cut the wound in the uvula, and remove it, and wrap it with the second or third instrument that I have mentioned in the incision of the two mandibles.
And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit;
because if you cover more, it will cause great pain to the voice and speech;
And after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the second mandible, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the pain is not alleviated by copper, then you should use an engine for cauterization of the sensitive pain.
And the manner of the cauterization is sharp and hot. And if the hairs put their head in your healthy hand, then press the tongue against the instrument we have said or in the chapter of cautery, and cut with a sharp, hot knife, so that it is not too thick or too clear. And use the movement of this instrument, which has this shape:
And have at the head a hair or olive oil, as with the movements of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine over the eye.
and the hairs lie flat on his chest, so that his saliva and muscle secretions from his mouth flow into the medicine inside, so it does not drip down his throat and into his belly.
Then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it against the eye for a quarter of an hour, until you see that it is softened and the bitterness of the medicine is eased.
And if you see it, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cloth in the medicine, and blow the instrument into the cloth until the cloth is soaked with it.
And do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry and scab after four or five days.
And if you are skilled in the art of restarting the cauterization, then restart it, and after the cauterization, apply a poultice of bread and butter around the eye, and clean what is around the medicine.
And be sure to use a sharp, cold knife, and treat with gargles until they are healed.
This treatment is safer than incision, than cauterization;
If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take camphor, hyssop, origanum, rue, chamomile, and veronica, and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them in a pot, and add oil, and boil;
and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and inside the pot there should be an instrument shaped like this: And it should be of silver or tin, and one end of the instrument should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the urethra through the ureter, until the urethra is dead.
After that, it is often repeated until the urethra dries, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the onset of the abscess, because many things happen. and do not make steam except at the decline of the abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, take a knife and place it within the head, so that the mouth does not have too much heat. for the knife does not cause much vapor to burden the mouth, and this is a good cure together with safety.
often it is asserted at the neck of bones or thorns of fish, or nothing.
therefore you should take what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing.
and what you cannot see and is hidden in the neck, you should make vomit the evil immediately after the meat is cooked in the stomach. By chance, if the object is inserted through vomiting;
or the hairs swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and it sticks to the sponge thread, and then swallows it; and when she comes to the belly, it will stick, and then pull out forcefully;
and if she does not come out forcefully as we have said, take the instrument of plunger according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more lightly enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that the whole does not come in, nor push the bone inside;
and move it so that the hairs push the instrument, because it is often or the thing is there; if the push goes down, or it pulls the instrument equally throughout, as long as it is full.
of the throat opening
Never use the saliva, as I have said in the division, by the care of medicines; and when it does not profit you, then look at the throat of the hairs to the sun, then that you press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you.
And if you see the sinew, trace it with a small needle or thin needles that are worthy of the eye.
And if the eye does not hold, take a hair from the beard, and boil it in the patient's throat, then boil or move the hair with the iron, and do this often. And if the wounds bleed all day.
then take full I of sharp cold water, and work the mouth, and pour it in the direction to swallow, and move it to your hand often. and if soon as he feels the cold, he spits.
And if he does not spit as we have said, then fumigate the bad breath with sulfur, with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the onion.
do it many times, for it will not last long.
And the way of the fumigation is that you hold I pot where he has charcoal visible, and let it be covered with a linen cloth in the middle, and in that pierced is the sought instrument.
then you should use your fumigation, and the pain puts the head of the snake in their mouth, and closes their mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes to the nose.
and the nose will now drip, and if it does not drip, then repeat the fumigation many times;
and the patient suffers thirst, and eats salty and bitter things, and does not drink anything acidic;
then the patient will have the strength to be healed by this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the nose, so is, when it can be seen, resembles a crooked hook to enter into the throat; And it resembles the beak of care, and there is sharpness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot wear out.
There are many forms of abscesses, according to what memory comes after one and another in this book, and they vary in puncture and cut.
And it is in two ways that one is in its own form, and because it holds moisture.
And the second method is for the arms or when they are at the sides.
For the main abscesses are different from those that come from the foundation, and the abscesses of the shoulder joint are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if there are abscesses that one should not puncture, until the belly is complete according to its fulfillment.
and if there are such as must be pierced when they are ripe, and do not die immediately upon completion, like abscesses that are beyond joints.
For when abscesses come beyond joints, and it is left until it is surrounded by, perhaps because the ligament and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
When the abscess is beyond the main member, and if you delay piercing until it dies, it will harm the main member.
or it is beyond the foundation, if you pierce when it has died;
and it should not be pierced until the abscess is ripe for digestion, except that which is beyond the foundation, so that it does not putrefy and remain inside, and there comes a fistula. and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary to lance the pus from the abscess according to its completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and swelling, and the decrease in debility and easing of the main symptom of the abscess, and the other signs;
And it is necessary to make the incision higher or more dependent on the limb of the abscess, and where it opens most widely;
and whether the incision is long or short, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no pus. In these cases, according to the affected member.
And when an abscess is in the limb, it is best to leave the puncture until it is confirmed that digestion has been completed, as we have said.
If you were to pierce it before heaven, then the blood would flow out of it, and it would be stained with much filth. And perhaps they harden the lips and the deeply pierced ones of him.
And if any abscess that is punctured along the wide course of the blood vessel, according to what the limb has need of.
And it is necessary that you apply small abscesses, small incisions. And in large abscesses, large incisions, and many cuts according to the resemblance of the greatness of the abscess.
And if such abscesses or it is necessary to cover and bandage them. When it has become as soft as a cloth, and is softened, then you should do as they do with bandages.
and if there are some that are cut into three angles, and if there are some that are treated as if they were the back of a mirror, such as abscesses.
and if there are some where a round cut is made, and other cuts and shapes that cover.
Those who do not have a head, such as superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce them clearly.
And when the abscess is large, and it has much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part. Then stun the abscess just after the other day, then draw out nothing else. Do this frequently with great force until the bow is completely broken.
Even if the pain is of weak virtue, such as a woman carrying, or small children, or old decrepit people. For the experienced never tremble once with the outflow of the pus, because perhaps the wounds might die, and you would not perish.
Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if you dry the wound, and look to see if the abscess wound is small; and if it is a boil, then soothe with linen or old cotton; and if it is large abscesses, and there is much pus, then it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that they come against each other;
and if you have cut into an abscess a part of the skin, and you have sewn it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or sawdust from a linen cloth to prevent moisture.
then the bone, and the ointment until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding in your work, apply sharp cold and wet cloths, and clean the wound, and place it on the affected area for many times.
and if the bleeding persists, and is not improved with government and care, and the powders I have mentioned in this book are of no use, and if it is very painful, then you should place bandages and moistened cloths soaked in wine and oil on it.
If it is in this state, and the limb is swollen, then it is necessary to apply fomentations of hot and cold cloths, or of wine and oil, as we have said.
Then drain the abscess, dry it, and treat it as necessary, until it is healed.
And one must know universally about the treatment of abscesses:
as I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and see the chapter.
When small abscesses come from the head, and are of various kinds, like the lentils of a girl, and many such there are.
There are some and such as have moisture like chickens;
And for those who are tough and have hard skin, there is no doubt if the artery does not move against it.
And the work of the cutting is such that you try all the instrument called "entromissoire", from which the form comes after, what thing it contains.
If it contains moisture, then let it dry out from above the long one.
And when the moisture is drained, scrape off anything that contains that moisture, for it will return if you leave anything.
Then soak cotton in Egyptian oil, if present. If not, use vinegar and honey, and apply to the wound, and leave it for the next day. And continue to do this until it is gone.
And then restart the cotton, as before, the next day, and the third, until you are sure it will not remain for the night.
Then cure the wound of inflammation at this convenient time, until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds much pus, then apply the poultice in this form, long and wide. And you should pour your urine, and the skin from all parts, and put all your care to draw out the cloth where it lies.
And if the artery makes it against you, do as I told you afterwards.
And also make an incision if it is pierced, and cut and cure as I have told you.
And if the incision is made over a pierced abscess and wet, it is lighter, for it is of little blood. And if any of these abscesses or wounds or they have no moisture, and of these were the abscess or wound that I copied or from an old woman;
and found the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone, and could not break it. and if one had made any, they would have made just as much pain as from a stone.
In other abscesses coming or in the head, because those who come from the head and the roots of the ears, if the opening is always at the most dependent part of the head, to let out the pus;
and treat them as appropriate.
often have abscesses at the neck, and dislodge the testicles, and pierce, and sometimes come from other parts or the chest, and are very large, and are inflamed together.
And each boil is properly within its own side, like the abscess of the head, as we have said; and similar cases of these scrofulous swellings are many.
and similar cases of these scrofulous swellings are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are some evil ones that do not wish to obey health.
in that case which you see of good disposition at the touchstone, and resembling the color of the body, and motionless from every part and not attached to any nerve, blood vessel, or conduit, and not deeply penetrating;
if it is necessary to remove it from above, and scrape every part, and place the two lips of the wound together as soon as possible, if you have the skill, as we have said in abscesses of the head.
and pull it out little by little, and be sure that you do not remove the nerve or the vein, and that it is not deeply embedded, which the hands cannot escape, and do not expose too soon, before you cover what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you stop, put vinegar or some powders that coagulate blood into the wound, and hold the wound. and let it stay until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound is softened, and then begin to treat it.
And when the wound is cleansed, return to your work, until you complete it.
Then ask yourself if there are any small pustules remaining, and cut them out and remove them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the pustule, it is not recommended that you cut out that pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop through, without causing harm.
then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian oil, then apply the treatment.
And if you remove the entire abscess, it is necessary to gather the two lips of the wound and hold them together, as there is no need for excess due to the size of the abscess. it is necessary to apply a covering to the root of it, and draw out the pus, and hold it as we have said.
it is necessary to apply a covering to the root of it, and draw out the pus, and hold it as we have said. Those abscesses that hold excessive pus should be punctured where it is most likely to bleed out;
and puncture it in such a way as the one previously mentioned, below, then apply bandages with oil and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains from the corruption; and when the wound is well bandaged, apply the treatment with healing charcoal until it is healed.
The ancients spoke and said of the throat cutter; but I have never seen such a thing in our land, and it is their written word.
For those who have tonsillitis, the part of the neck called "epiglottis" must be avoided. and one cannot help with this, because all the veins and the source of the pain are in those who have abscesses deep in the mouth, or in the neck or in the armpits.
When the disease is in the mouth, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it outside of three or four small incisions across, between the two circles or by the amount of the incision of the throat, not in the cartilage.
And those people are suitable for the section of the epiglottis because there is no cartilage, and the gag is long and thin.
And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary to extend the skin of the neck all around, then cut the windpipe until it reaches the carotid artery. and avoid the veins of blood, if you see anything, then cover the wound as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the jugular vein that flows out through the neck which is broken, and by the lack of voice.
leave the wound open with a piece.
And when the hour has passed for which we doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound carefully, and stitch all around the cartilage.
then administer medicines that cause vomiting until they are clean.
Albucasis says that we should not do this unless the throat is completely stiffened, and the limbs are judged to be dead, and the defect is lost. Therefore, cover the epiglottis because the hairs cannot be held, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death.
Therefore, the ancients ordered to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to stitch the wound and heal, as long as it is healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw a young lady take a knife, and stab herself in her throat, and cut part of the throat veins.
I was called to cure her, and found her as if she were dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the arrow that had come out of it, and although she had not coughed blood or vomited, the blood flowed from the wound.
I hurried, and sewed the wound, and cured it until she was healed;
and there was nothing left of the young lady but that she could speak, and she returned to her normal state.
Therefore I know that in the region of the epiglottis there is no need to be afraid.
This is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large swelling in the color of a grape, and it is very common in women.
And it occurs in two ways: natural and accidental.
or natural, which has no cause.
And the accidental one occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to a gouty swelling, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from our blood vessel. And there is fear, and it does not require to be opened except in the small one that is in the neck, and it should be tested and searched in all the internal parts. If you have the knowledge to treat it as I do not, and cannot at all times, then the copper, as we copper the others, and take it out completely, if there is none. And search well soon, and treat it as it should be, until it is healed perfectly.
Many ways of us are, which I will say all the similarities;
And now it is necessary that I tell all the difference that is between us and others.
I say that others are cold and feverish, until the blisters are passed, and is accompanied by the purging; Then rest the fever and the heat.
Without the noise, there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains its own pus, which is according to the color of the blood, and begins like a small pimple, and becomes large;
and are according to two appearances, either dry or moist, and many colors as I have said in the section.
When you come to treat an unknown case, it is necessary to first examine and test the instrument called "entromissoire", according to its form as described in the following chapter.
And the manner of inquiring about abscesses from us is that you grasp or more moist skin than you pierce in the abscess, and turn your fingers slowly and slowly, until you know that the instrument has perforated the center, then it is according to the size of the abscess;
Then, extract the mortise, and take care not to break it.
If the moisture-filled wound is red, as it has been described in the other abscesses;
and if the mortise does not come out moisture afterwards, then scrape it to make it greasy, then cut it in a cross shape, and take out the splinters with pincers, and lightly scrape off all parts and keep the shirt where you took it from so that you can remove it clean with the new one.
and if you cannot remove it clean, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
If nothing stays in place, it returns to us many times;
and if it stays for a short time and does not cause harm, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, keep it clean, and use remedies to treat other injuries until it is healed.
and if it is large, then cut out the two lips of the wound and treat what remains with charcoal.
and if it is bleeding heavily and you cannot stop it, then apply the juice of broken glass to the wound and leave it for two or three hours until the bleeding stops, and rest the blood clot. then return to the copper vessel that is left there.
See the shapes of the instruments used for opening veins, and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small.
and there are three parts that are called "lancet", and one that is called "bleeder", and there are three ways: large, medium, and small, to puncture the abscesses of the fistula;
and they are also like the needles that are used to make the spoons, and are of yellow gold, or of iron, or of silver, and cost as much as those that are already yellow, and are more easily broken than black ones for puncturing the sinuses of the fistula;
and there are three ways: great, medium, and small, according to the amount of the width of the wounds.
The shapes of needles are very similar, such as you see here:
and if there are needles that have two barbs in three ways also.
and if there are needles that have three barbs, and are also in three ways.
and if there are needles that have two barbs, and needles of one barb only, and are also in three ways.
all of these are necessary in their use.
The heads of these are sharp, and of such there are some that cut only from one side, from which we skin the flesh, because we do not cut the vein or the nerve.
And of these intruders are the awls placed in palms, so that the pain does not persist at the opening of the abscesses.
There are three ways: Great, small, and medium, as you see;
And we use only one from the limbs, such as legs, arms, breasts, and hips, and similar limbs.
and never use any other small instrument, resembling the scraping of abscesses, in this form, to draw out blood. and it is never put back in place that it should be aligned with veins, and arteries, and once again returns according to this great form:
Never inflate the breasts of some men when they begin to rot, as long as they seem like breasts of a woman.
and prolong the inflated and swollen ones, and who want to heal them, if it is necessary according to this form of this line from b to g: then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with healing ointment, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and heal it until it is healed.
and if the jaw is dislocated downwards, and is stuck due to its size, like in women, then make an incision into two ribs above, by making similar cuts. because one holds the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g. then scrape the skin that is between the two jaws, and remove the fat, and follow what we have said about sewing and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, until it is healthy.
If it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the hairs do not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in a corrosive ointment. Let it remain until the remaining part and the fat are healed, then treat it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come from the heels are ways of hard scabs or if they have cracks, and there are some that contain moisture.
Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b to the line g: And when the whole of the pus in the abscess is drained, apply old cotton to the wound and leave it on the other side, then remove all the cotton, and treat with a poultice suitable for this until it is healed.
And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, then treat them as we have said about incising scrofula, and if the wound remains open, then cauterize it as we have said before.
When the artery is cut, and the flesh above it is sound, then often there are abscesses, and just as often there is blood in the vein and abscess.
And if one knows how to do it, then one should treat the abscess by making an incision along its length. and when you feel the pain, if you feel it tightly.
and when it is for the vein, then remove the apparent parts.
It is foolish to cover this abscess, and immediately when it is out of the ears and eyes and mouth and many other parts, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to apply the iron cure, and the one at the top should also be applied, and in the one that is of inflating the artery by cutting from above the skin long.
then work the incision as small, and then separate the artery from the threads, until it is revealed.
Then, remove the arrow from one side, and pierce it through to the other side, and stretch the artery with a double thread of flax, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then, do not prick the limb that is between the two loops of an introducer until the pus that is inside comes out, and remove the abscess.
Then, apply the remedy as I have instructed, until the wound heals. Then, treat the inflammation that comes from this, until it is healed.
If the abscess is in the belly of the vein, it is necessary that you dip your hand in what you can of the abscess from all the skin, then draw out the needle outside the limb that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and if there is a double filament, so that you pull it from the other side. Then tie the abscess as I have told you, or with one of two parts of the thread.
And if you doubt that the thread will not hold, then put another needle all along the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four loops.
then cut out the abscess until the excess is removed, then cut away the excess tissue and leave what is connected.
then place a soft cloth moistened with wine and oil on top, then treat with bandages and ointments until healed.
Just as abscesses come in the artery and the vein, abscesses also come to the nerves when they are injured, or from too much work, and similar things.
And there are often more remedies and instructions in all cases where there are joints, and this is the great abscess, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and it is in many positions causing pain.
and when it is pressed, the pain is great, and it is not in front of the flesh, but outside the wound.
and moves well from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor out of place, and the one that is in joints does not need to be covered by iron: by chance I may have contraction; and those who are at the neck or face, make the skin to the sputum.
and those who are at the neck or face, make the skin to the sputum. If the abscess is small, then with needles, and the copper in its root;
and if it is large, then suspend it at the tip, and scrape, then remove the bone, and stitch the wound to the seam, and the cure until it is healed.
No times have occurred in the belly and no other place, and it is a disease that is called "funge" by the similarity of its appearance, and it is to the subtle roots, and the large joints;
and there are small and very large ones;
and I saw the man who had two in his belly that were more like "funges" than any other thing, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had small roots, and were broken, and it flowed with moisture.
I took them and found in one eighteen ounces heavy, and in the other six ounces, and the workings in the incision are such that you look if the hairs are moist, and the color of the stone is white and moist and of subtle roots; if the copper is wide at the tip, and they are in your presence with the fire cauterization.
if the copper is wide at the tip, and they are in your presence with the fire cauterization. For in cutting, there are often too large spurts of blood, and if you do not have it, then hurry to get the cauterizer.
and if you see the pain spreading and fearful of the incision with the knife, then take a well-made thread, and tie the wound as we have said, and leave it for two days.
and then tighten the bandage, and do not stop stretching the thread of cloth until it covers the wound, and cut through it with work.
If the roots are large, then apply the cauterizing iron directly to the abdomen, but you should also cover half of it, then cauterize so it does not reappear.
Then treat the wound, and guard that you do not cover the throul which is of a yellowish color and poor sensation and of milky appearance.
For these infected abscesses, I will come to treat them with leeches later.
When the patient is feverish If the appearance of the boude comes from cauterizing a wound or cutting into a syphilitic ulcer, and it is above the abdomen and in some of the bruises, as it has in other wounds, or of blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of moisture;
And if it is by the rupture of the pus and by the outflow of the bile, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the blood, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various sources. And if it is for the issue of the intestine, then it is most diverse, and when one presses it to its two sides, it returns, and perhaps it is torn, and enlarges greatly at the entrance of the bath and by much work.
And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, do not force it much.
And if it is by blood, it is open by these signs the abscesses are large and hard, and it is full of a quantity. And if it is by windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you look whether its appearance is from the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
And if it is by windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you look whether its appearance is from the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. If it is necessary to leave the care. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if its appearance is for the intestine or the mucous, then you must command the patient to dye his linen, and be fully extended, then sign around the belly; then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the limb that you have signed all over, then extend half of the abscess above all the large joint; then tie it around with a strong thread or a firm silk cord, and let the joint be loose;
then operate on half of the abscess extended over the joint, and let your knife indicate, and the intestine; If you have the truth of the joint, then dislocate it, and push the intestine to the side of the abdomen;
and if you have the truth of the bone, then take it from the joint, and cut off the excess;
and if the artery or vein opposes you, then go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads, and push the two needles around what you have done in order to pierce it.
then puncture the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the wound open until it can close, and cut off the dead flesh by itself. when you cover it with a cloth when it is thin and raw, then treat it according to what is needed, and drain the abscess as we have said.
when you cover it with a cloth when it is thin and raw, then treat it according to what is needed, and drain the abscess as we have said. and extract the arrow or the moisture that you have removed, then treat the limb according to what is needed, and soak the limb.
For the fire cauterization, instruct We have said in the division the similarities of chancre, and how one must treat it with medicines, and how one must avoid the treatment of iron.
and let us say the chancre is ingrown in the marsh, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancient ones said that when chancres are in a place where it can be removed as chancre which is in the mammary glands, and in the chest, and similar places, and everything should be removed when it is at the beginning.
I have never seen anyone healed of one before me.
And the workings, when it is in place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purify once the evil of black bile;
then make it heal if it has obvious accumulation, then remove the evil from the good limb to do the work;
then pour out your bile or pus, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything.
and let the blood clot completely, and clean the wound well with your hand or something else, and if the blood clots against the incision of the artery or vein, if it is not stopped by cauterization, it will cause harm. then use other treatments until it is healed.
de l’estomac We have mentioned in the division, similar to hydrops, and how the assembly of the sharp is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment given by medicines, and that which is cured by iron.
And one should not touch iron in these two similarities: That is to say, tympanites and hypochondriac pain, for it is a deadly thing.
Therefore, when you treat this resemblance of dropsy which is called "eclises" of medicine, and the cure does not work, look if the pains are weak, or if he has another disease than dropsy, as most cases and similar things. If not, do not touch iron, for there is doubt.
And if you see the pain of great virtue, and he has no other disease than dropsy alone, and he is not too young or too old, then thus proceed: Hold the painful area straight above your hands, and the ministrants press the abdomen by bringing the sharp instrument to the lowest part of the belly, then take the spinous process according to this form: And be slicing of two parts. at a point, and ensure that no part is too thin so that it can come close to the intestine when inserted, and it cannot be broken;
then look if the hernia is pushed towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you cut them off at the base of the three fingers directly above the wrist; and if the hernia is due to the disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the base of the three fingers;
If it is due to the muscle, then it should be set to the right, and it should not be moved only by the hairs growing over the wound where the excess does not run to the weak limb.
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and beat it, and lift your hand to the entire space between the skin and the flesh as if you are scraping in the quantity of an egg or around.
Then pierce the flesh until the space between the skin and the flesh reaches the desired length, and this is the width of the needle, then remove it, and beat this instrument with which this form is made: And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and is made of light iron or copper, and has a small hole in its center. and on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other;
and it is cut like a feather, and its shape is like the incision that the scribe makes when carving the pen:
at the top of it is the quill, so that when the instrument comes to the tip, then place the instrument above the quill;
empty the half or third part, for if you empty it more than it should be at that hour, by chance it may cause the patient to die from the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he loses consciousness, or he approaches death;
but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue mean, and its hairs.
then take the tool and hold the sharp edge, and it is held now for the one who is supposed to pierce the part that is above the eyelid, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner;
then restart the tool the other day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and take a small amount of the sharp edge;
do this every day, and guard against following too much until it does not delay but only a little sharp edge.
And if you doubt the pain, and you leave it too long without proper care, then the wound of burial or sand heals, and by much sweat or bathing and in the sun, and it becomes infected with drinking; and the treatment of desiccative medicines until it is healed, and cauterize above the stomach and above the liver and above the spleen after the extraction of the arrow, as I have said before.
No child is born without a wart in the penis, or the wart is small, or it is not in its place.
If it is necessary to pierce at all times with a very thin needle according to this form:
then put or puncture a thin needle through the bottom, and tie it and leave it for three days or four and when he wants to make urine, if it is removed, and make urine, and then put it back;
And by chance, it does not cover well, because the urine that comes out does not keep it closed.
If the one who is pricked is small, it is treated with a thin thread of the bottom, as we have said, and it will expand.
Those who do not have the perineum in their joint are disabled, because no one is born with the perineum at the top of the thigh, so they cannot urinate before their thigh rises. And they cannot urinate because the matter cannot come out through the urethra, and it is a very bad disease.
And the manner of the work is such that the hairs grow on top of their back, and the thigh bone and the hip are like the belly of a pen, so that the perineum is in the middle, as it should be.
and guard against the evacuation of blood which often occurs, and if it does, if the cloth that stops the bleeding is used, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the pustules of the knife often come these worms in the tail, and it is an ugly appearance of a maggot;
and there are both harmful and not harmful ones;
if it is necessary that you remove them with fine tweezers, and pick up and clean all of them, then put on a piece of Egyptian gauze; then the treatment of the wound continues until it is healed.
And if the wound is malignant, with a putrid color and foul smell, then you must cauterize it with fire.
When you have coped with it, and if the dislocation is in the socket and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must first break the dislocation that is inside. and when it is broken, if the part outside is healed.
For when you heal it together, if the part of the bone is not secure, and there is blackness and corruption in its socket and where it was connected.
then you must remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply the plaster of honey and flour made from the shells of large pumpkins and vetch, then heal with other treatments until it is healed.
And if blood flows, then treat the lunar cauterization according to this form:
The cautery helps with two positions together: namely, at the extraction of arrows, and in decay;
and if the patient is corrupt and retreats, it is necessary that you beat or conduct the stick a cane of mud, and urinate on the painful parts;
and when the skin has erupted at the head of the stick which have been those who were not circumcised, or it has for wound or abscess, then it is necessary that you scorch it with the instrument of the beard, until the pus is removed, and deliver the patient from all parts of the stick;
and if it is a bad thing to divide the vein, then you must burn it at the spot with no part of the spoon and the hair;
then dry thoroughly between two, and put on a thin layer of linen cloth wet with cold water, that it does not blister.
Circumcision is not different from other wounds in continuity; all the same when we do this work of our intent, and properly in children, it is a matter that we should do the best work, and the lightest to save.
I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and wise men who did circumcision in the middle, and with force, and all at once;
if there were two curtains, because there is two, and by chance if one covers the other above and delays the other below. or it recovers covered, and the pain is double, and to the wound that is from the tip of the member is not sure.
and to the wound of the finger by chance the iron escapes and ruins the work, and many times they are born so that they do not have a need for wound treatment and I have seen it.
Of the wound healing that is done with force to all the member of the thread, I found the best of the experiment, for the forces cut equally as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in all the soft parts; but that the thread is well stretched around the skin;
And the way of the first work is that you make the child think that you are only tying the thread around the stick as much as possible, and then throw it in all ways that you can.
Then place the child straight between your hands, and hide the forces between your hands or away from your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.
Then blow your hand on the stick and gently, and pull it up as high as the child's stick is long. Then wipe it well of the dirt that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it away from one side to the other.
Then wipe it well of the dirt that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it away from one side to the other. and the second line is to be done by the second hand with the pouch and the correct index, and between the two lines, then lift the head carefully and take the tip of the staff; then let the blood flow slowly and slowly, for that is the most dangerous; and put powder on and on the powder a glue made from the unsalted fat of a well-cooked hare, tempered with rose vinegar, boiled in rose oil and fresh, and let it stay overnight, and the other cure until it is healed.
The form of forces for the mummification is this:
The two shoulders are tense and thin, and the shoulders are also as great as the hand equally:
The error of the mundification is that the knife is not cutting into the incision;
Therefore, you must extend it to your angle, as well as when the legs make an abscess;
and the coping equally, and if you cannot hold it at your angle, then hold it with nails, and then the coping.
And if they pass three hours, and what is outside the rod is swollen, then let it remain until the abscess is completely healed, and scrape lightly;
If you move the cup as you can, and avoid the part of the staff, it will not harm you.
Therefore, cure the limb of things that cause pain from powder, as we have said or treated for powders, and if you use too much care, it will not harm.
Therefore, cure the limb as we have said, until it is healthy.
The retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or frozen blood, or a bowel, or a charred, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not released, and you see that retention is due to a stone that is lodged in the urethra, then it is necessary that the painful parts be lifted over the knees. and the feet should be placed on the back, and extend the belly from the upper part of the back, and restrain the painful parts as much as possible. and then the belly is pressed against the expression of the stone from above, so that the urine is released and;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the painful parts are greatly painful, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", of which this is the form:
and let it be of fine silver wire, as like a quill of an eagle. and let the needle be of a long and half-palm, and fine at the head.
And the manner of the issue of the urine is that you take a double thread, and tie the head to the tip of the cotton or wool, and pull the head of the thread through the tube.
and fold the excess of the wool and pull it to the head of the tube, then oil the tube with oil or butter and egg white, and place the patient on a chair, and the arose the bladder and the oil-soaked cloth and oil of olive and vinegar.
Then lightly insert the syringe into the bone, until it reaches the root of the bone, then double the bone over against the wound.
Then push the syringe forward towards the bladder, and feel the hairs coming out of the empty space, and this is only done in this order if the guide or it goes is twisted.
Then stretch the thread along the entire thread slowly and slowly, and the urine follows the thread, then remove it forcefully, and correct the urine.
And restart the syringe until the bladder is empty and the hairs are aligned.
When blisters or blood come into the bladder, and putrefaction is assembled, and you see distillation of water and medicines, then use all the tool called «clepsedre», and it is the form:
It is closed, and if it has three holes: On one side, and on the other, as you see;
And the joint is cut by the doctor's knife in such a way that it does not damage the bone too much, so that the moisture can be drawn out and put back as necessary.
And when you see your medicines going into the bladder, put the head of the catheter in the moisture, and draw it out through the opening that is there.
If you draw out the moisture with the catheter, then push the catheter strongly back in. If the moisture enters again, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it.
And this is the form of the subtle catheter with which one catheterizes the bladder:
And it is of silver or of copper, and it is the highest of the catheters;
And it is thinner at the top where the catheter enters;
Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you saw catheterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a double thread of wool, and heat the moisture above the fire;
Then put the tip of the catheter in the hole, then hold your hand over the bladder all around the moisture, until the pain feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
and if you do not have a catheter, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle with it, and pierce it roundly around; then stuff the thread strongly into these holes, then assemble the circle as one would assemble a shield, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it with the instrument;
and do as you have done with the catheter, of pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the catheter.
of the stone
We have said in the previous section the ways of arrows and extraction together with medicines;
and I have said the difference between the arrow embedded in the flesh and all the signs, and in what arrow one should make an incision; and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the sharp urine spray from the bladder is like a sharp blow to its subtlety.
and there is a sharp pain in the penis, and it often hurts, and then it becomes inflamed. and with many of these sprays, the base.
and is light in the healing of children up to the age of four, and is very painful in old men, and is constantly present, among those who are between young and old.
And the treatment of those with large stones is lighter than that of those with small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is first necessary to cleanse the wound with cloth, to draw out all the matter that is in the intestines. For it never clogs when seeking the stone.
Then take the dislocation by the feet, and stand and move it towards the outside, so that the stone descends to the edge of the bladder, and never once rise up from the hip.
Then let it sit between your hands and prepare it, with its hands away from its thighs, so that the bladder is completely descending down.
Then grasp and touch inside.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut above the stone.
And if she does not break at the touch of the soft touch, then gently press your index finger of your right hand, if the pain is sharp, or your middle finger, if the pain is dull; and press at its base, and cut into the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, if the pain is in the groin, then apply the anointing oil to the affected area;
then press above your finger, and cut at the place where you saw it cut.
And command the minister to press the anus with his hand, and command him to stretch the testicles to his right hand, and with his left hand remove the skin that is outside the testicles in the part where the incision is made;
Then apply the splint, covering it with a cloth: And make an incision between the thighs and the groin, not in the middle but on the right side of the naval:
And the incision should be straight above the stone, and the two ends should be at the thigh or groin, and the width of the cut should be wide on the outside and narrow in the middle, according to the size of the stone, not too wide:
If the pressure is too great where it is at the groin, it may jump out of place:
And check if there are any stones or edges and margins: if it is grasped to pull out;
and if there is a smooth, rounded part, like a bone, and its exit is light.
In such cases where it has angles and edges, make the cut larger;
and if it does not jump out, then you must force it with pincers that are like a lime at the head to pull the stone so it does not escape; or you can push it out with a subtle hooked instrument from the head.
and if you cannot engage it thus, then enlarge the small hole, and if there is no skin, then strain it with vinegar.
If there are more than one arrow, first remove the largest one from the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterward if there are many.
If it is very large, then it should be cut, and a larger wound made. For two things happen to the dislocated joint: or it dies, or the urine comes out through the wound because the joint cannot hold together.
but all effort must be made to pull it out or remove it with pliers, until you pull it out in pieces.
And when you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, bind it, and place a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and vinegar and cold rosewater, to alleviate the inflammation. Then resolve the misalignment over its shoulder, and do not dislocate the joint further by pulling it too hard.
And when you reset it, the limb should rise well with oil and vinegar, then apply a healing ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
And if pus comes into the wound and corrosions, and clots of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by the urine, which is known to be withheld without causing a sensation when urinating. Therefore, remove the pus from the wound, and extract that blood clot, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and cause damage.
Then lift the wound of the sharp and the silk and the silk thread, and assist in all ways that you can, until it is healed.
And it is necessary that all the wounds that you treat, that you tie the two thighs together, and gather the remedies above the limb.
And if the stone is small, and it is guided by a catheter, and tied up, and the urine cannot come out; if the cure that I have said before, that you cut many times, is excused from this treatment. I have experienced this before.
Take a piece of iron according to this form and be at three angles tied with a thread:
Then take a thread and tie it around the catheter outside the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
then gently push the thread into the catheter until it reaches the stone; and then turn the chisel to your hand on the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side.
if soon comes the urine, then press your hand above the part that remains of the stone that is inside the shaft. If it is already broken, and it springs forth with the urine, and is sharp against the hairs;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie the thread below the stone and the other above, then make the shaft in the place between the two threads, then pull it out, and remove the thread, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound; and the care as long as they are healthy.
of the stone of women
Few have seen a needle inserted into women, and if it ever happens, then the care is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-trained who would willingly expose herself to such shame, especially when she is chaste.
And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-trained in this art of hands;
and the fourth reason is that if the woman's needle is larger than the man's, because it should be made with a deeper cut, and there is great fear. And if necessary, one must send for a skilled midwife, and apply the truthful herb, and if you do not know how to do this, then it is not advisable to try to perform the procedure yourself;
and if a woman presents with a sharp pain in her life, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and she commands that she do what you command of the examination of the stone; and look very closely if the woman is virgin:
and look very closely if the woman is virgin: then it is necessary to put her hand or base and search for the stone;
and if she finds it, then hold her hand away from her base, and recommend that she put her hand or with the pain, and press her right hand firmly on the anus.
if she finds it, then it is necessary to move it from great to great from the entrance of the anus until it reaches the root of the thigh;
Then cut across the stone in the root of the thigh, against the middle of the knee, where it is muscle-filled and feels like a stone in that part. And do not move the joint above or below the stone, and let the wound heal at first small.
And do not move the joint above or below the stone, and let the wound heal at first small. Then push the stone out of the wound, if you feel the stone so sharp that the stone can be removed, and note that many methods of stones are:
It is to know, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those that have edges.
if you recognize the similarities to know the outcome.
And if it does not come out, then put the broken glass in the wound, and let it stay there an hour until the stone is softened.
then return to your work, until the stone is fully removed, and have the instruments I mentioned in the extraction of the stone for you to help in your work.
and if it bleeds again, and it is from the artery that has been cut, then put powder on the wound and bandage it with tents and binders, and do not restart, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, unless by chance it might kill the patient. then treat the wound.
When the heat of the blood is calmed, and the wound healed, then return to your work, until the stone is formed.
Ramming with water is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white clay, which is not the same as the juice of herbs that contain the urine.
and is called "syfac", and never properly in the web of the eyelid, if one cares that it is not the other eyelid. and it is the thin skin between the white "syfac" that we have said.
and it does not have a specific name. And the generation of this branch is due to weakness that comes from within, and it is spread out that matter.
And never if it comes from percussion on the eyelids, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a changing color from yellow to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and there are more.
and these are the signs to know this assembly, because if it is the white "syfac" that we have said, then the abscesses are there, and they are long like the shape of an eyelid, and do not open the eyelids, because it has moisture all around.
If he has moisture in his own cloth, then the abscesses are treated with a part of the egg, and for this reason, it is thought to be another egg.
and if his moisture is between the skin of the fingers and the white nail, he feels it well.
therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all the introducing parts, because it was previously formed. According to what comes afterwards, judge what is inside.
And when we cure them with iron, it is necessary that the hairs be cleaned according to some power and the replenishment of his body.
then the swine on his back, on something a little high, and put much cloth over him.
then lift up his right arm, and command the assistant to lift it on the left side, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the armpit.
then take the spatula and cover the skin of the ribs with the long part up to the knuckle, and make your cut straight across the skin of the ribs towards the white face, and gently scrape the skin according to the power.
then pierce the white face flat with a wide needle, and extract all the sharp points, then put your needles, and press the white face upwards.
and do not touch the face of the bones, but only the skin. remove all or even the very ribs of him, if you do not remove them properly, then it will return to sharp.
and if the bone jumps up at your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the skin.
then sew the two books of the face of the bones to a seam, then treat it as the other wounds until it is healed.
and if you break the bone and it becomes infected with another disease, then it is necessary to tie the veins that are suspended, in doubt of blood clotting.
Then copper the coin to all the suspensory, and extract the eye, and treat it as we have said.
And if it is sharp and gathered in two parts together, they are two branches; If you copper the other part evenly as you did the first, then wipe the blood, and put some soft cloth soaked in rose oil into the wound;
If you copper the other part evenly as you did the first, then wipe the blood, and put some soft cloth soaked in rose oil into the wound; and put some other soft cloth soaked in wine and oil under the two copper pieces, and put on top doubled cloths, and tie it to all the limb that is according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and place them like this charpie according to this appearance, and they are sewn together at the girdle of the breeches, and one of the strings above the buttocks, and the other at the part of the elbow;
and the other two heads above the two angles, and let all the assembly be restrained in the loop of the brace.
and never use this branch of the cautery in the shape of an iron needle, and you must grip the cauterizing needle subtly, and coat the skin with it, and heat it as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the acid is discovered;
if you take the cauterizing needle in this form, and pierce that white sap with one prick, and burn the skin with this subtle cauterizing;
and coat it in all ways that you can, until you extract everything;
and beware that the fire does not touch the eyeball.
and cleanse this work is safer. and avoid the corruption of blood, and keep quiet the works of tailoring.
and if nothing goes against you, or abscess in the groin or corruption of blood or other thing, then cure what goes against you according to what is said before.
And if the pain is not severe, and does not want to wait for this work because of its horror, then alleviate perforation, as I told you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the aqueous humor is low, then place the pain on the raised seat; For the abscess, pierce it in the outermost part, and place the incision along the length of the body;
and make the incisions wide enough that all the sharp pain is relieved;
then place cotton on the limb, and tie it, and let the remaining sharp pain subside, then treat the wound until it is healed;
and if the white cloth does not prevent the sharp pain from escaping through the wound mouth, then you must use a pen or the instrument used to treat hydrophobia, of which the form is as previously mentioned;
and enlarge the wound slightly, and remove that which is sharp so that it returns to its agility after six months or more, and when it is assembled as before, and thus passes through its pains.
There are many fearful conditions in the cutting of this branch, which seems to me that it is better to leave;
and I will tell you the work and similar things of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come from wounds, and immediately after cutting; and it is often the case.
It is to know by excessive sharp and wet, which is spread after cutting, or from impact;
and the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the blood flow; and it does not cause pain, and it is a serious abscess;
and sometimes it is a gray, pussy, and purulent abscess, of yellowish color, and never comes from an artery or a vein swelling;
When it is from an artery, it is known by the appearance of the abscess, which changes when you press on it with your fingers; and it does not require that you touch it.
Those that come from vein swelling are known by their appearance at the touch of your fingers, and can often be cut across this resemblance, and on the others as well; and you must cut the cords that are causing the swelling, then set the bone in place, and the wound is cleaned with a white cloth, and deliver the suspended parts from all parts of the bone.
If the bone is already set with these charms, then you must cut the bone and the cords.
and if it is outside the skin or inside the veins, then you must deliver all of that which is held, and clean it thoroughly.
And if the horn of the char is located behind the shoulder, it is necessary that you cut it all, and extract the eye, as we have said.
And when your surgeries are completed, apply the wound with a linen cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then use other treatments until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a boil, with the softening of the cords, and the pain increases when it moves.
And the treatment of this disease is as difficult and painful as the one before, and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit upright on an elevated seat, then lift the suspensor of the testicles to your fingers, and all the veins that are close to the cord, and clean them with a master's hair, and stretch them properly.
Then cut across the sharp spatula through the middle of the veins, until they are exposed, and then scrape each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
then fish out an needle or he has a double thread, and tie it to the first shoulder where the blood came from, and to the other shoulder. then cut across the middle straight, according to the length of the wound, and remove the corrupted blood.
then treat the wound as with others, using bandages or ointments, so that no one knows what the wound was.
for because of this there is no harm, and if all the people see it, then you must remove the bandages from everyone. if he does not lose his appearance because of the incision of the bandages, and they dry and cannot be helped.
The symptoms of this branch are due to the section that comes out or sphincter, or extension over the abdomen in the part of the angles, because the intestines descend from that break to one of the bones;
and this break is due to too much sphincter, or from extension of it, and these two ways come from many causes:
or from impact, or from jumping, or from shouting, or from lifting heavy weights, and similar things;
and the signs when it is due to too much sphincter, are that it happens slowly and gradually, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the backbone, because the face is close to the intestines.
And the signs are when it comes to the section of the tooth, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and has various appearances of abscesses outside the skin, and it is for the end of the intestine and the heart behind the tooth.
And sometimes the worms are found with the intestines, and they are retained inside, and cause great pain to suffer from the illness, especially when pressed.
And in these cures of iron with fear, because it should be avoided.
And the method of the work is that you command or let the patient bend the intestines with their hand into the wound, if it can be pushed in. then it should be even above his neck, between your hands, and loosen the bowels.
then the wound should be above, and cover all the skin of the bones. then push in between the belly's lips an incision according to what you have skill for opening the wound, and let them be such that the intestines can issue.
then shave the beard that is under the skin of the flesh, until the white beard is exposed from all parts.
then insert your index finger in the roof of the mouth that leads to the flesh, between the white beard that is under the skin of the cheek, and between the second beard, and behind the cheek, and between the second beard.
and then move the cheek outwards from the skin of the flesh, and place the white beard on top of your right hand, and lift the cheek towards the back, and pull all the beard downwards towards the waist. and commands the minister to stretch the arm upward, and release the air that is behind the ligament;
and asks if he has any intestines wrapped or white and hard, and if you find anything, then let it go out of the stomach;
then take a needle or he has thick thread made of many threads, and insert it into the back part of the white and hard thing, which is after the skin of the intestines; then after the belly, then cover the threads that appear from the threads, until there are four threads; then assemble them one above the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the white and hard thing, which we have said is out of the skin of the intestines, with a strong thread of two parts; Then envelop the dislocated shoulder in two parts, so that no part of the clothing that they wear can enter into the wound, as an abscess does not come. And immediately apply the bandage according to the first bandage, with two fingers of that, and after these two bandages leave the sucking wound which is outside the curvature of the bones, the great one of a finger. And then the other according to the round shape that the evil carries;
Then cover in the part that is outside the skin of the bones, as much as possible without correction, and the bone, as we have said before.
then apply a poultice of soft cloth in oil to wounds, and it applies the remedy that we have said. And never cauterize the white swelling that we have said, after incision, due to fear of bleeding. For this has often happened, and let the remedy remain until it heals through it;
and if it takes too long to settle, then apply hot vinegar, and place on what we have said, until it heals.
then treat the wound with other remedies, until it is completely healed.
of hernia carcinoma
In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure by iron.
And the ancients said that it is made in such a way as the branch that is together with the face, in some manner that you bind the veins, after the cut above the belly lightly at the opening;
then copulate with me, and heal the abscess of this which works, until the vessels are clean.
and the cure as we have said, until they are healthy.
No time comes when there is a break or tear, as we have said, and open the veins;
and do not cut any of the intestines as we have said, and if there are any, it is little, and repair them every hour;
and whenever if he remains too long in this point, the wound or the abscess, until the intestines are cut;
and the blood has by the extension of the abscess which is at the tears, as we have said, because they are extended, then softened and inflated the veins and open;
and if it is by cauterization, as we have previously mentioned.
and never cured in this manner: and the hairs are often tied together above their backs between your hands, then the limb of the tear is filled with a large amount of three fingers worth.
then the sinew that is outside the skin that surrounds it, then take the needle and put it on the limb appearing from the sinew;
and press it against the front of the belly, then cut the two limbs appearing from the sinew above the head of the needle, and cut both.
Then extract the head of the arm, and do not cover the mouth or extend the elbow or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the break in the ribs. Then treat it with the treatment of wounds.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you remove the arrows, if you do not defile and heal the wound until it is healed.
The saphenous vein is constrained, and does not appear in the incision, and the cauteries are silent in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the leather of the boots
Many times have the tendons of the joints been softened in some men, because the charms that are inside are softened, and it is to be seen.
And it is a matter, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the pain lie on its back, and the copper which is softened over the natural skin;
Then gather the two lips to one seam, and if you see, cut first the excess of the softened skin at three or four seams firmly.
Then, apply between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healed, and cut off the thread.
forcibly
It is customary in our law to use cauterization, and because I would like not to speak of it in this book;
and it is not necessary for any other way:
one of which is that the patient responds to the cauterization when asked about it, and in this way treat it.
and the other, because we often have to cauterize animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and chickens and others.
I therefore say that this chapter is done in two ways: or by traction, or by cutting.
In the one that we make by traction, we should sit the patient best in high heat, until the ligaments are softened and during. then hold them with your hand, until they are put back and you do not feel them anymore.
Of the sacrament of the belly: You should clean the patient, and press the skin of the ligaments with your right hand, then tie the suspenders, and cover each burn separately, when you have them well scorched.
et leave no poison or subtle poison that is on the vessels;
and this method of castration is more dangerous than that which is done by attraction, because at attraction something from the testicles remains, by which the animal desires sexual intercourse;
then cure the wound until it is healed.
hermaphrodites
Hermofrodite is according to two ways: the first is that between the two testicles open as much as the figure of a woman's nature, or he has hair, and sometimes cutting it allows urination.
And the other way is in women, and has above the clitoris as a penis and two testicles.
And the treatment of males and females is that you cut off all the hairs stuck together, and treat them as other wounds;
In the second manner, for men whose urine springs from their clothing, there is no cure.
Tentingene is a charm placed on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see. And no women have it as big as a hand, and that is the cure.
It is necessary for you to stain the excess of the tentingene on your hand or nails, and wipe it off lightly.
And do not go too far back, for there is no blood coming, then the cure of other cures until it is clean.
and in another chariot that is born from the mouth of the marsh, and it uses, and perhaps it jumps up, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and because of this they call it the ancient "cowdisease". If it is necessary for you to grasp it, as we have said about the protrusion, and care for it until it is healed.
It is indeed difficult to determine the nature of a woman's pregnancy, or when it is small. It is either natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come upon her.
It is either natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come upon her. Or it is by charm, or a subtle or spelled spell, and it is made to happen in the marsh, or in the cost, or outside, or wherever it may be.
and they conceive, and childbirth, and perhaps the flowers to have.
and the knowledge of this is by the gaze of the bait.
If the swelling appears close to the surface, you can apply your fingers or a probe.
If it is very sharp and subtle, and it is close to the two lips, then hurry, and do as follows:
put your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs;
then form the two lips, until the sharp and subtle sphacelus is removed, and it is over the stoppers;
then take linen, and soak it in oil, and put it on the limb, and feed the woman at home every day, so that it does not stick.
And if the thread is hard and sharp, it is necessary that you soak it in the same way as vinegar leaf.
If the limb is made of wood, then it should be suspended by its end and the copper.
And have the staining blood medicines, such as dragon's blood, incense, and an abundance of wine.
Then apply a wide piece of cloth, so that the wound cannot seal.
And then let it be long, and the application be a tent of dry linen.
Then treat with other remedies until they are healed.
And when in the marsh there is a broken bone, cover it according to this method, unless it is an abscess. For an abscess that has formed in the marsh, one should not touch it with fire.
of hemorrhoids Emorroides are openings of veins without a cut as usual, and when the emorroides are old they become thrombi.
And we have said in the previous section the similarities of those, and the signs, and I will say here those that require treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed veins, when they are formed in the marsh, and do not appear until sensed, are only cured by iron.
Those that can be felt at the edge of the marsh, are those that can be cured.
Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then straighten the shoulder with tongs, and the copper at its root, then powder with restraining medicines of blood, such as aloes and sulfur and incense, and similar things;
then close its feet at the door for an hour, then put it in a high cold place;
and if blood comes out, then make it sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of green apples and pears and similar things, and then take flour of wheat, and mix with honey and egg, and make the poultice on its back.
And if he faints, it's good. If not, make him lean back with suction cups on his back and breasts to avoid hitting.
Then take the other one, and soak it in juice of plantain or juice of aloe vera with old wine, and apply to the limb.
And when the abscess is ready, cure the limb with poultice until it is healed.
And the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles the sharp edge of a knife, so it should be covered as I said about the thelul. And then cure until it is healed.
Many types of abscesses come from marshlands, such as chancre and pustular abscess and herpes and esthenia and fistulas and hemorrhoids and chronic abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
It is therefore necessary that I mention in this treatment the abscess that comes in the marsh, which is not one of the abscesses that collect below.
And if you know the work of iron, look at the abscess if it is aggravated and at the beginning of its coming, and if it is accompanied by heat and fever, and if it becomes red, then see if you can see it. Therefore do not rush to pierce it, but let it wait until the pain is eased.
Then let the pain sit on the seat, and have two small seats where he leans, and support it on his back and gather his feet to the sides of the leg.
and let his knees be spread apart, and place his arms outside of his hips, and tie them together with a strong rope.
then push the ball towards the right side of the chest, and introduce the instrument used to operate on the throat of the marsh, from which afterwards comes the form.
and it is necessary that when you see this instrument being introduced, that you first look at the depth of the throat, so that nothing enters further than it should, and that it does not cause pain. and if the instrument is too large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the throat with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt him.
and it is necessary that he puts the trumpet of the instrument above, and stains the instrument.
And when the abscesses are open, and they make it by hand wide, then it is necessary to cover the head, at the spatula level.
And when the wound is drained, it is necessary to put in the wound soft cloths soaked in rose oil or dry green oil.
and put the wound dressing at the back of the marsh, and put above the marsh and above the unclean soft cloth soaked in vinegar or mustard.
then the healer after two hours of resting, until it is healthy.
and never lift the wound and let it heal with a poultice of honey and mead, and then with honey or roots of lily and aristolochia longa being cooked. then apply heat.
And if the wound is closed with stitches, it is necessary to be careful not to use iron, but to treat it as we have said in the section on division.
of childbirth The first step is to know the natural shape of the child and the signs when you see the woman approaching and wanting to smell the armpit:
then quickly remove the baby from its place. then check that this child matches the natural shape, and is not stuck to its head, and the second one with him;
and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press on his abdomen, so that he passes it quickly.
for when he goes to his chest, and the second one is with him, and his marriage is from his excess by good cleaning;
and this that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
for it never comes up to his feet, and comes very quickly through the chest or the shoulders, and the hands, or it comes up through his abdomen, or sometimes, and is converted accidentally on his neck, and by other bad shapes;
if it is necessary to help her in these things, then she must be skilled and subtle, and if she becomes confused and deceived, and I will show you all the shapes how one should help him.
If the infant comes up to its head by natural issue, and the mother cries loudly, and the child's strength is weak, then let the woman sit on a seat, or the women hold it.
And take its natural oil of olive or fenugreek cooked, and then give the child's stomach between its fingers the small spoonful that is its form: and break the second one, and cover its angle as much as the moisture that is correctly out:
and take the woman's stomach as much as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must clutter the woman with fenugreek musk with linseed oil:
then I prepare and sneeze with conditions, and hold my mouth and nose for an hour. if you now strain the child.
And if both hands are dislocated, it is necessary to gently and slowly reset them. and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, and lift her legs up. then lower the chair to the ground, and wipe the woman, so she does not urinate during the lowering.
and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then place the hands on the cushion that was previously placed, and gently reset the child.
from the issue of the child on its feet When the child comes up to its feet, if it is necessary to put it on its back; and then slowly and gently, until it is even;
then take both feet and gently extend them.
If it jumps up suddenly, command it to hold still, and force its mouth open with a condition. If it jumps again, God willing.
And if it does not jump as we have said, turn it slowly and slowly until it is in the natural position. Then it is completely straight.
And if it does not come again as we have, then take muscat leaves of high quality, and oil of wormwood, and melted lead, and grind everything in a mortar; And place the natural form of the woman within and without this ointment, then make it sit in high tea until above the ribs;
and when it is softened outside, make her wear a garland of myrrh, and put it on her, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her vomit and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for she is now sick.
of the child's feet above its knees When the sickness comes in this form, if you put your hands gently and gently; then let her lie on her back, and hang her feet down, and let her lie on the bed; and gently folds his hands back and forth, then places his hands on top of the belly, and removes the cuirass until it is fully exposed. and if he does not feel anything, then he takes his feet and gently moves them, then moves the belly upwards, then pushes with his hands. and gently moves the child. and instructs the woman to hold on until the child is born.
of the child's hand that comes out widely with a hand It is necessary to engineer a way to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then lift the woman and go.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and form her legs together.
Then apply the treatment I have mentioned;
And if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, then study to bring back the hand. And deliver the child according to its natural shape, and make her vomit, and command her to remain quiet until the child is born.
of the child's head on its neck, and has spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother It is necessary that the midwife stain her hand, then turn it slowly and gently;
And when it is even, put the natural muscle treatment of oil and honey on it, as we have said, then command her to move slowly and slowly.
And when you have done this, if the bone is sitting on top of the seat, and you command it to take its place. and make it sneeze. In the same way, for all the others
In the same way, for all the others When it comes to doing this in the same way for the other shoulder, the other shoulder should be coped with your hand, until the moisture is drained.
and if it can be felt above its face and above its neck, then the coping should be done from the back, so that it is not retained, and the bone moves.
Then push the child inside, until you have put it in the right place, and command the woman to take its place once.
of the outlet of the testicles Often they do not grow until the third or fourth time. And this is not a strange thing, and it often happens. These are strange things, and they do not live, unless named.
These are strange things, and they do not live, unless named. I know that they are multiplied and are destroyed by the siphon that gives them life, which is attached to the belly.
And sometimes they come out naturally like some worms, as we have said.
And if they come out painfully, as the cure has said, and if the bail is subtle, and it does what it does quickly and gently. And do as follows for their benefit. of many children
No one is formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, or more than fifteen times, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise man, and it is suitable that the bailiff should see everything, for by chance similar things happen to them. If done according to what is necessary.
of the dead child
When you care for the woman of the child who is dead or pregnant, as I said in the section, and it does not come out, and you are forced to do the work by hand; if it is necessary to cut into her, ensure that she is of sound mind and has no injury or fear of death.
if it is necessary for the woman to be leaning on her back, and her legs raised;
and the midwife applies the herb of II parts, where she is tied to the bed so that she does not undergo childbirth.
then rub the mouth of the woman with warm oils mixed with mustard and fenugreek seeds and sesame oil, then pinch her hands with these oils and mustard.
then press them lightly into the marsh, then let the shoulder reset where it is comfortable, and if the pins are convenient for this, then take care that it does not descend above its head.
if the pins are in its eyes or on its neck or in its mouth or in some palate or behind the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs, and if it descends above its feet, then pin or prick and on even sides.
and it is necessary to dye the pin in its right hand, and place the hook between the fingers of its left hand, and press with its whole hand lightly, and pin in any of these ways that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing.
Then find another bone, or if you have skill, so that the extraction is equal;
And then stretch it equally by moving from one side to the other, to make it come out, and let the teeth of the bone hold, as in this form:
And if a part remains, use one of his two fingers oil, and push it into that part, and pull the other part;
And if it does not come out, put this bone or higher up the limb, and do this until it comes out completely.
If one hand comes before the other and it cannot be brought back by constriction, then you must wrap it around a pole, until it is completely healed. Then the copper wire should be placed in the joint of the foot or at the heel, and thus you must do in the other hand, and to the two feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is difficult to deliver, or if it has an acute angle assembled, then you must push the spatula with sharp edges between your fingers, and make the head and extract the acute angle. or you must break it with the instrument called "almidach", of which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that is after this one.
And thus, even if he himself is of great natural stature.
Then pull the bones apart with pincers, and if he jumps and is held by the forceps, then they are cut as much as possible until the moisture that is out comes out.
And if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces with a knife that you can.
And if it is inflated in the belly or out of the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture runs out.
If the infant is held above its feet, then the traction is light, and the pressure on the marsh is light.
And if it is swollen in the belly or in the groin, then you must extract it by pulling it out through the wrapped cloth with your hand. And making the belly or the ankle, until the moisture that is in it is corrected.
And if the other member is broken and the patient cannot move it, then bring a cup of water to his mouth and let him drink. Then drink one or two, and remove it.
And if the patient's mouth is retracted due to an abscess that has come, then it is not necessary to force, but it is necessary to administer moist and fat things. And the medicines are applied, and the plaster is placed in high molten and moistened.
And if it is above its shoulder, and you can place it even, then alleviate as we have said in the living child.
And if you cannot do it, then tear it by pieces, and leave nothing of the second one.
And when you have done this, alleviate as we have said in abscesses which come into the marsh.
And if blood comes out, then place it in acute restriction, and alleviate other cures.
I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had died, then consulted the other about that one, and he also died. After a long time, some abscesses appeared in the groin, and they swelled up so much that they burst, and then began to cause great pain.
I was called to the patient, and I thought for a long time, and could not stop the bleeding.
I applied strong adhesive bandages, and then some bones were exposed, and after some time others appeared. I was very surprised because the belly does not have any bones.
I thought that it must be the bones of a dead child.
I looked at the wound, and in the meantime, I treated the bones, until the woman was much better. and it is tied with a long piece of cloth around the shoulder, and it is placed in place with a little bandage of the body.
and I have not remembered this chapter except for the reason that, when the masters find an unusual thing, they know how to provide help.
Then comes the form of the pressor, which is used to apply pressure;
and it is applied to the two joints of the elbow. However, the horn should be more subtle than the restraint, and it should be made of metal or wood.
and its mouth should be two inches wide, and the edge of the trees should be long, and one and a half palms. and between the two limbs, there are two joints of this same kind, which are firm in one and the other, half a palm length or a little more.
and these two joints are closed in the mouth of the jaw when turning the two horns.
Another form, of a more subtle and lighter appearance, is made of flat or boxwood, according to the appearance of nails. and it has two joints like these, as you see, half a palm length, and they should be wide.
and when you see the jaw opening with all the instrument, then place the woman on the bed, the feet still and the legs open, then close the two joints together in the jaw, and hold the head of the instrument outside between her teeth. Then use your hand on all the instruments, as you have evenly made the pliers, according to the quantity that you saw open the mouth of the marsh, until the bail does what it wants.
These instruments are all above, and are multiplied in their likenesses; And when the mirrors have them arranged, so much the faster they work, and so much higher they are to men for their quantity.
If you do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, because their necessity is not excusable.
When the second one is held by the childbirth, it is necessary that you command the pain to hold her hair, and then make her spit out the condition, and your hands at the mouth and the nose; And if she jumps for heaven, well then.
If heaven does not, then take the pot, and make a syrup or coverlet, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the throat, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea, and centaury. All these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or boiled over the fire;
then put a cloth or syrup from the pot in the mouth of the throat, and the steam comes out into the throat;
Then make her spit it out, as we have said. If the second joint is broken harshly.
And if she remains after this treatment, and is not better, then command the midwife to moisten her right hand with semolina or musk oil, and then blow into it, and give the second dose. And when she has found it, grasp and extend it gently and straight, so that the husband does not cut during extraction.
But move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull it out. If it comes and dislodges.
And if the husband's mouth is too narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of vomiting and fumigation of herbs.
And if it is not all of what we have said, then remember to not pull.
But it is recommended that what is at the mouth of the marsh, you tie to the belly of the woman, then smear with a healing ointment made from four ingredients. If it will not rot and return, and will come soon.
But if it rots when a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and causes pain. Then you should apply smoking treatments to this:
None of the ancients have experienced fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument used to smoke the woman during retention of flowers and the secondine is as follows:
And it appears like glass, and they place the head under the natural heat, and the others widely over the fire;
and either the fumigations over the coals, and the wart until it is burned, and start another.
Many children are born who have not yet reached the foundation pierced, but it has been stupefied by some subtle syrup: therefore the midwife should pierce that syrup at its proper time, and not pierce it too early with sharp instruments, and cleanse the wound so it does not touch it;
then place on the wound a soft cloth in wine and oil, then the healing ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not reset, put or plug a splint, and let it lie for some time, and be supported as the child wants to go into the rooms.
And never comes this stoppage of pus from a wound or abscess; if it is necessary to drain that pus: if it is treated, as we have said of the swine's dung.
Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodular and thicker than those that come above the foundation, or in the space between two parts, if there is one fistula or more.
And when that nodular one is old, it works and thickens with moisture to become white or subtle blue, and those fistulas are never persistent.
and are known by the fact that there is outflow or vomiting when the pain makes an outflow, and sometimes some verses.
And if there are fistulas that protrude into the bladder, and protrude into half of the penis; and reach into the sacrum, and into the knee.
And thus one knows the fistula passing through the basement, and not passing through: and it is that you pierce your own index or base, and pierce a thin needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if he has tortuosity, if you put a thin layer of pitch, or horsehair, until you feel the pitch or hair at your fingertips;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out with puncture or sweatiness or vinegar, as we have said: so that it does not pierce through; if you hurry to cure it.
And when the fistula is persistent near the bladder or near a urinary tract, if it allows urine to pass, and cannot be cured by medicines.
If it has pierced up to the joint of the elbow, then the pitch comes out to the skin; if there is no tortuosity and the pain is internal, then it is that it is inside, and there is no medicine or treatment by fomentation;
And in these fistulas, there is no cure but labor, and the vanity of those who try to treat them.
In that one which is not very deep and not very ancient, with hope of healing by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the pains are hidden between your hands on its back;
and the patient's legs up to their knees, and its knees bent towards its belly; Then pour water or mud, if there is twisting, until you clean it out.
If the pain is felt around the foundation, then you must insert your finger, as if it has pierced the tent.
and it is discovered or you feel between your teeth whether it is the tongue or the throat, then spit out that it has passed. if not, there is no way to heal it.
It is said that one can heal almost anything, but this rarely happens.
and the aid that is done, if it is to heat the subtle cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as it is said before. and the whole bottle is placed in the fistula, until it reaches the bottom. and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred pieces are burned, which resemble a barb of an arrow.
and then the treatment of broken bones in butter, until that bone is set, then the treatment of burns with heat and sealing.
If he is thus healthy, it is well.
If not, nothing else can be healed.
And if it is not healed between, and does not perforate just at the base, and between the tent and the wound, a thick layer of charcoal or ash, and you see the fistula that leads to the cure underneath the covering. If the cover of the beginning of the fistula, and it is stuck before the tent, and then the cauterization after, until it reaches the top of the tent. and he will be delivered from the tent, and fall.
then one must believe those charms that seem like a quill of a goose, and not remain without them.
And if you cannot straighten it, and cut between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
For the fire cautery brings together two good things: that is to say, the burning of these charms applied, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
then the treatment of tents torn or broken in pieces, until the eyes are filled with blood, and then the charms burned in the eye.
then the treatment of wounds infected with boils, soaked in hard charcoal, and the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if the fistula comes from just above the foundation, and is distant from the body, then press on the top or base, and look for it.
If you feel the tent, and between II is the cloth or the sweat or the charcoal, where it is close to being pierced, there should be no other means than the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it from the bottom up, or if you can, put bandages and treat it as first aid;
and do not remove too quickly from the front, so that you do not cover the foundation which holds the foundation, and it comes out through the way of excretion; then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; If by chance it is healed, or you remove that covering and the wound then it is cut above the foundation, or by tent or by other instrument appointed; then monitor that char which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part before the foundation:
then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part before the foundation: if it is a lighter thing at the misalignment.
And sometimes fistulas are in this manner: and when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is out of the foundation below the skin above, then take a tent perforated at the top in this form: And push the thread into the fistula, and push the probe through the entire thread in the fistula until it reaches the top.
If it is lost on the edge of the foundation beneath, then hold the thread of that which is plugged, so that you can pull your own or the foundation.
and trace the head of the thread, and gather the two ends together, and hold them against each other, and let it lie for one or two days.
and hold it not once, until the thread covers those charges that are between two, and stick.
then treat the wound until it is healed and clean.
If the fistula does not open, try to puncture it in all the ways you can, unless it is too far back. For it does not matter to make the placement cover if it is too far back, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spinous bone that is made into a fistula is very sharp and one-sided; And on the other hand, not, because we do not know how to handle what we should not handle, as you see here.
There are two main methods: Or they are within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in this case, blood clots, and there are one or more, and they are under the foundation and at the base of the foundation.
But those that are underneath have little moisture, and they are cut or a little sharp or a little blood, and they have the color of the blood.
And the treatment of those who have them within the foundation is that you command the patient to urinate in other rooms until the foundation is full and it appears. If you are in a hurry, you can hold it with pliers, or hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots.
And if they cannot hold it with their fingers due to its moisture, take it with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of linen. And hold it with your two hands, then cut it, and powder the wound with any hot powders that are in the cauterization. Or you can cauterize it as it is written in the book of cauterization, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the base cannot be lifted, then cleanse the wound with a sharp and biting clyster to remove what is stuck at the base, so that it can come out openly. When the hairs are pricked at their base, and if they are thick and strong from the root, then the treatment is light.
When the hairs are pricked at their base, and if they are thick and strong from the root, then the treatment is light. And you should hold them with your fingers or pliers, and cut them off, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and do not fear the incision with iron. If it is necessary to stitch the wound in this manner:
If it is necessary to stitch the wound in this manner: Take a thick thread, and wind it around a needle, and then pull the thread from above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread away from the needle, and if it is wide.
and hold the thread firmly, then pull the thread, and extract the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave it for the excess of the blood.
then place above the foundation a cotton bandage soaked in rose oil or wax, and place above the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then let it remain until they heal, and when they are healed, apply ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
dried and withered from the base often found dried and withered in the intestines, and due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help. If it is necessary that you apply the scraping of a spatula or your finger above, which does not allow it to become moist. Then the healer, as much as it should be, as it should be.
And if he cannot cure, then start the scraping stronger than before, until it is clean, and be scorched. Then the healer, as much as it should be clean.
high fever Mice is a small appearance cut in front of the chest, and goes up much into the front.
And never the trace of the frost, and the feeling is like death from shivering, and comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than any other part.
And the healer so that you take a quill of a goose pen, or a pen of vulture very strong, and put that quill on the shivering, until the circle prevents the shivering all around. Then turn your hand all around the wound until you remove everything inside the swelling, and put it in a pot, and extract the swelling from its roots.
And if you see, do this according to the form of a rain or iron dog, and it is subtlely pushed out and pulled up: Do not pierce, to keep the two together, and to press.
And if you see, if you cauterize the swelling, as it is before or in the chapter of cauterization.
Never use a silver paste, or an alloy of lead, or melted tin, or tin filings.
And never use these small and large instruments, according to those which you will bring. Therefore, those who are to be treated in the care of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Therefore, those who are to be treated in the care of children and those who are weak and painful, are small. The shape of this plaster is small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
And if there is a discharge or the belly is tied, as you see, and the wound is inside, pierce.
And say to one of the two sides, "II", and on the other side, "I".
And let the belly or the one who applies the medicines use a bladder of beast or parchment, and pierce all around with small holes, and have between each hole "I" amount of space, then fill these holes with one thread of thread twisted in X or around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat; And when the medicine is inside, if the thread has the instrument in front of a strong thread, then suture;
And it is the form of a circle.
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and grease the head of the suture with oil or a similar substance, then fill it lightly; then the ministers pour water into both of his hands together, until it is completely clear, then remove the cyst, and relieve the pain in his legs by applying a poultice to the affected area, and if the wound allows, let it heal as much as possible. and if he sleeps a whole night through, it is a greater help.
And if you give the clyster in the disease of diarrhea, and the medicine wants to come out quickly, then restart it as long as it is healthy.
And if his hemorrhoids are at the base or in an abscess, then the cyst should be removed as delicately as possible for a child.
and this is the shape of the delicate cyst when the skin is stretched:
We have said in the section on wound care;
we will tell you about the treatment of hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are different according to what they are made of, and according to the limbs or wounds that are made, and from what they are made of.
The things that are done to make wounds are by piercing with a needle, and cutting with a sword or dagger, or lance or staff or siette, or similar things;
or they are done according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that pierces through the neck, or head, or foot, or belly, or liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because its memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes or the bone is not broken, be careful if it is of penetration of an arrow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and is large, and you slightly doubt of abscess: if the wound is recently clean of blood, and the cleaning is on the injured side instead:
and avoid the pain of overeating wine and large meats.
And if he does not want to clean, let him eat soft meat, and not drink wine, and do not change his diet:
And apply to the wound, if pus arises and comes out, cotton moistened in rose oil alone or in vinegar stiptic.
And if there is no pus, apply above the wound, if it is fresh and full of blood, and it does not move due to air, powder, which I will say a little later.
And if the wound has moved, apply some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by sewing, as I will say in wounds of the belly, from sewing.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and can be moved, and does not hold but only at one point, then cover it. Then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hardness in the flesh instead of skin, and command the patient to eat large foods, such as tests and cooked grain, like chicken, and similar things.
And if you suspect bone fracture, and it is not to the bone, then cover the entire wound, and pour boiling water, then heal.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be stanched by medicines, then suture the artery, and if you suspect a fracture, dislocate it with a thread. And if it does not improve, then cauterize.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light. and you put this powder that smells like what the wound has lost.
And the manner of the powder is as follows: take a part of incense; blood of dragon two parts; chalk alive three parts, and the powder finely, and fill the wound, and let it settle and join to all its blood;
and then bind it well, and let it remain without swelling; for one does not use medicine until it is healed.
And one should never use chalk alone when one does not have frankincense or dragon's blood, but that the wound has moved.
And if the wound has moved, immediately in its place, do not put any other of this powder;
but put on some digestive ointments, or flour of barley made of honey and water, until it is healed; then perform other treatments until they are healed.
And if the broken bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then strain it with fine needles.
and I will tell you what to do after the fractures of the main ones.
of the wound of the neck
If the wound comes from the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and the main wound, but if the neck nerves or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerves, there is no other method than to let the care, and not put anything restricting, for it harms nerves and makes them recede. and do not put anything sharp on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is one of the highest members.
but if the medicine is not suitable, such as chalk washed in sharp vinegar, and mixed with rose oil, and the wound cleaned similarly in sharp vinegar, and other stones according to this manner, and moistened with warm water.
And if the wound is large, then bandage it well and treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and have been cut and filled with blood, then pierce or lower the limb.
And if the artery is cut and blood flows out, then open it, clean it, and cauterize as necessary.
And if the arrow from the throat is cut, or the wound is deep, and the vein is kept, by which the meat goes, then cut the arrow above the back of the throat, but do not touch the throat, but put it back according to its natural shape. and then gradually stretch it, and leave it for some time, then treat the wounds until they are healed;
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, if desired; and if there are pieces of bone, remove them all if possible, and those you cannot remove, leave until the wound heals, then disinfect and align the bone;
and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder that I have mentioned. And if he has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have described in his chapter.
If it is a spear or dagger, and the wound is deep, look to see if there is any sign of wind blowing through the wound: There are times when the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep and fresh with all its blood, then in the first hour do not put powder on it or tie it up for the blood that does not coagulate and returns to the heart, and causes pain; but I apply an attractive ointment and tie it twice a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and let the pain sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; if no spasm comes, nor trembling of the heart prevents it. and when you see good positions, cut out the wound. Treat the wounds and other treatments, until they are healed.
And if it cannot heal and work, then cut out the fistula.
if the treatment is as it should be. And if the wound is from a sword or dagger cut, and it is simple, or worse, at the back, then treat what is in front. if it is large, of stitching.
and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and in it has chipped pieces, if it wounds, and the fragments if they are not removed. and if they are not removed, then let the wound fester, and it will align the extractions.
and for other wounds in other members, it is up to judgment as we have said.
belly rupture
The dislocations of the abdomen are large and medium and small.
of the great wound never leaps out the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, by which the intrusion of others.
And the seam is more painful, and it is never worse than the small wound because one must not reset the intestines unless they are put back in their proper place.
Because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, and they must not be reset unless they are put back in their proper place, and because it is better to have the small wound, for one must not twist the intestines back to their proper place as with others.
And there are four ways to treat a hernia of the belly:
The two common seams are in the belly seam, and the seam of other wounds of the body and two other private seams are common to other wounds.
And all ways they are more proper with the seam of the belly, and I will say one by one and explain each.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is protruding, and there is no other thing to remove, it is best to return it by one of the two methods: or by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is inflated by the heat.
And when it is hot, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or some dry cloth only in cold water, or cook in cold, sour and salty water and vinegar, and boil the intestine until it is softened;
And never once has this wine been restricted, and it is believed that it can cause swelling.
And when you see the swelling disappear, if the intestines are dry or high and painful, because by this means the entry is soon achieved.
And if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to remove the splinters.
And the first care is believed that the wound, that we should not cut without great necessity.
And this is the instrument for cutting:
If it is cut within the crown and not without, and see its shape. And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out, if you can put it back according to its natural form in its own place, because this is good.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should place the patient on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head. And if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the head and the foot higher than the other parts, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, then place the injured part higher than the other.
And thus you should manage as I said in large and medium-sized wounds.
For small wounds, apply what you have prepared, then place your hands between them and administer ointments that cover the entire wound and close the lips.
And this is the common method of stitching, and it is that you grip an needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave some space at the edge of the wound, and sew with a needle or if it has good thread. And pierce the two needles through the two pieces of leather, which is outside the leather inside, until you make it pierce from that part, and gather the two needles together four times.
Then, wrap the string of a double-threaded needle around the needle of II parts, then evenly assemble the two pieces of the wound, and then leave one finger's space, and make another stitch.
Then, tie the wound with a thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you know about needles until the entire wound is closed.
And let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, for thin needles cover the entire wound, and too thick ones cannot enter well. Therefore, it is necessary that they be medium-sized.
and it is not advisable to place the needles too far from the back of the horn and the skin, so they do not pierce and open the wound before sewing.
and then cover the wounds of the needles, so they do not pierce the pain at night, and place bandages or cloths on the wounds of the needles to hold them until the wound is sewn.
and this method of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it requires only one or two needles.
The second method of sewing is common, and it is that you gather the two pieces of skin and the two pieces of sinew together with one needle and a strong thread in the middle.
And when you have perceived these four together, then reset the needle at the part where you began, in the manner that one counts the threads.
and put space between each stitch the thickness of a thread.
This stitch heals the man, and I sewed a wound that one had in the abdomen, which was cut by a knife, and was the wound more than one palm of great, and it pierced the intestines well two palms of great, and was the wound in the belly.
I brought back the intestine after it had been there for 24 hours, and the wound was dressed after 15 hours, and I treated it, and it healed.
And the master had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and did not heal it with ointment, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicine. and I placed moss on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or I will tell you the two proper methods of sewing:
take the needle, and the thread from the part behind, inside.
when it has pierced the center correctly, then insert the needle at the head or where you put the thread, and make it pierce from the other side of the part inside.
And the understanding of this sewing is that you should sew as the tailor does with furs, and leave one side of the seam once, and then bring it back from the other side, until the sewing is completely finished.
The second method of sewing, which Galen describes properly, is such that anyone does, who assemble the two parts naturally together and apply one of the main sides of the seam to the other main side, in a similar manner:
Take a needle or the main point of the awl close by, and pierce only that side, and leave the two sides of the seam; then turn the needle, and pierce it through the part in front of this from below, as the two heads of the shoulder.
then pierce the other two through the part in front of this from below, in the two other heads of the shoulder that are on the other side.
and this is the most common method of sewing and it is the deadliest.
If anyone says this word, and no one bears witness, then you should sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each.
and you should put one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corroies.
and when the fracture is in the belly, it is more painful than other abdominal injuries.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
and when you clean the fresh wound of all its pus, and as soon as the doctor has moved it, if you remove the intestine and the cloth:
then put on powdered charcoal, and if the doctor has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present until the wound heals. and bind the cloth, and make sure the sutures are sound, and the muscle: Then treat the wound as you would with others, until they are healed.
And if you do not have medicines, then place this immediately, as soon as it begins to bleed, a soft cloth, and shake it twice a day until it is healed.
For you have no other use of medicine in many positions where the wounds are simple;
And if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the main members, then it is necessary to rub another light oil of mild heat, or in red oil, and place it inside the angles, and remove from the bones;
And if he feels pain or putrefaction in the abdomen, and often occurs, then apply black wine grape clasters, and immediately if the putrefaction comes to the intestines.
And puncture it, and scrape what when it is the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot be healed when it is empty, because of the plants that are in it, and the subtlety of all the body, and its approach to the nature of the nerves.
And if the pus jumps from the wound, then put it back as the intestines, while it is fresh.
And if it is old and becomes green or black, then you must tie the limb that is black, because there are veins and arteries.
Then, cut the tissue that is between the joints, and place the two fingers hanging from the part away from the wound to the side of the injury to align the extraction when the bone shatters, and the wound opens.
of the breaking of a boil
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, if it can be restored to some people, because I have seen that some men were gutted from their belly by a lance.
And the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became a fistula, and in it there was excrement and feces.
I placed medicine according to what I could, and did not stop treating it until it was healed, and the wound closed.
And when I saw him suture, I doubted that the hairs had not harmed his stomach; but there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, and fed and watered;
and they said no experts that when he had a small wound in the intestine, that he should be tied in such a way: take thick threads, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened the mouth, if it puts it above the two lips, so that it holds his mouth open;
and then cover the head, and it holds so that he cannot move, then put the other thread in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed; and bandage the wound.
If the sharp object enters the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, and it can be sutured with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner:
take the tip of this intestinal thread that is very sharp, and then tie it to the tip of this thread with a thin linen thread, then pull the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and bandage the wound;
and this method of suturing is no other than according to the way of faith and hope.
If the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the internal organs, there is no remedy or health, only subtlety.
of fistula or that it is All wounds or abscesses, when they become covered, are universally called "fistula", and specifically when they are cut open and reopened.
And the fistula is along the spine, a hard and white tube, where there is no pain, and it is as sharp as the quill of an owl.
And never in clear bowels, and sometimes thick; And never too thin, and sometimes enough.
And I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no char, it is only due to one of the EIGHT causes: It is to know, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or for its wickedness; or because there is hard carrion inside, and on the lips, that does not let blood rise; or because there is too much pus. or because the bones are broken, and the matter is of bad quality. or because the medicine is not good in the cure. or because the corruption is like a plague. or because the property in the region is late for digestion, and late for health, and expelled by nature. where there are veins or bones
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of remedies in that section.
It is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of fistulas that are made by the work of hands.
It is said that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body. for there are fistulas that come to large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the face, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet. and if it comes to the proper property of the main member, and similar ones.
And all such wounds are of great suffering, and there is only labor and ignorance.
And if there is no such wound that does not come just below the joint that I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you know how to do it, take a tent of tin or iron, if the wound is straight, if it is curved.
And if the wound is twisted, then circle it with a thin tent of linen, for the linen will stick to the twists.
And if the wound is perforated and you cannot well encircle it with tents, then cauterize one of the perforations, for the moisture will pass from one perforation to another, and cleanse it.
then carefully apply your skill, to know if there is bone or tendon, and if it is sharp at the edge, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where he feels it.
and when you know truly where the bone or bone is, and if it is far from the joint, or tendon, or artery, or vein, or any of the limbs that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the fractured pieces and the charred parts that are inside;
and then the cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is well positioned at the right place, then you must cut across, as much as you can, then put soft bandages in medicine water, and squeeze them at the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
and then I apply clean ointment to the wound, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by that, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by a fistula, then extract it.
If the vein or nerves do not harm the principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove as much of the corruption as possible, then apply clean ointment to the wound until it is healed.
and if it is not healed, and remains as before, then you must do the same thing again.
if you are able to reach it and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb.
And if it is thus healthy, that is good. If not, it means that the corruption is too far gone, that you cannot proceed; if there is no other method than to wait for nature.
And if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can remove it with pincers, if it is not removed by the proper instrument, and if there are many bones, then remove them all, do not leave any behind.
And if the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no mistake or fear, then boil and burn the bones, and deliver them.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place on the wound something poisonous, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then they will more easily break.
And if it is large bones, such as a leg or thigh, then separate them as much as possible from the corruption until the entire bone is rotten, then reopen the wound.
And if there is a large part of the corruption, and it comes out in a mass with the bone; then it should be covered all around with the corruption, and then treated until it is sound.
And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
He was a young man around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and was filled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it.
But the doctors over-opened it so much that the abscess was opened, and they drained a lot of matter, and became a fistula, and there was much pain that everyone was groaning from the body's moisture.
and many sought cure within two years, and there was no knowledge in the art of hands, until I was called, and saw her leg and the remedies used to treat it, and what flowed through the pustules with great force. and became red the veins of youth, and had the color yellow.
I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and found that one was coming into contact with the other from all parts of the leg.
I therefore hastened, and cut into one of the pustules until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption was coming from within the bone.
I thought what appeared to me from the rotten bone, and I thought there was no other corruption, except that which I had seen.
and began to heal the wound with medicinal powders by long stitches, and could not hold.
then began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found continuous corruption in the bone, and the marrow, and then removed it, and I could not heal the limb. but I could only place around one palm of the bone, and treat it to all its length, then heal it with medicines. and it became healed and healed quickly, but did not want to begin the work again except for the weakness of the pain, which could not bear, and for the fear of death that I had for him. For the evacuation of blood often caused harm, but he was completely healed, and in the place of the bone grew a hard callus, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction throughout, neither to the other nor to the coming.
If the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this way: Take the bone, and strain it at the top of the bone that opens, and command it to extend upwards; and put another thinner thread of linen below the first thread, and tie it above the wound that is on the bone, and extend the head, so that you can remove the rotten flesh from outside, and uncover the wound above the limb where you want it to be, so that it does not become infected.
and put a bandage or a cloth outside the bone to cover the rotten flesh;
and it should be as visible and feelable as possible to see and feel the corruption, and should be another time.
And if the tooth is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then remove the whole crown;
then put the thin gold, and then fill from one part to the other the corruption, and let the gold be as long as possible near the corruption as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then copper the corrupted joint, and fill the tooth from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other way than to copper;
and if the corruption is in the fingers of the hand, or the finger of the foot, it is very strong that thing, but nevertheless it is necessary to inquire about that corrosion, how it opens. and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but let the vein or the nerve not cause you harm.
and scrape away what the incisor and the threads for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of teeth, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. and therefore it is necessary to arrange each similar work tool.
and show you the tool that you will have to use, according to the knowledge of this art, and by the testimony of the ways of diseases; if you understand the tool that you have according to what it should be used.
The head of the shoulder may become dislocated due to an internal cause, or due to a lack of.
And when you have treated that corrosion with medicines and it does not improve, then you must cut off that limb up to the joint where the corrosion comes from, so that the pain may escape by death, or by the malice, which is greater, due to the lack of the limb;
and the signs are such that the limb becomes black, so that it seems as if it were burned by fire, and then it turns darker, as in the corrosion of one member by another, and it takes hold of the whole body.
if you have a copper vessel, and if it is by the impact of some poisonous animals, such as scorpions and vipers and similar, if the corrosion is at the head of the penis, and the copper, and do not give him any space for the venom to come to his hand.
And if it comes to his hand, if the copper is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach his arm.
If it comes to the arm, then cut at the elbow.
And if it passes the elbow, that is death, and there is no benefit in other than the quantity of its virtue.
And as soon as the corrosion comes or pain: If it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint.
And if it comes to pain, then cut all the pain. And if it goes up to the leg, then cut at the knee joint.
And if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the pain go to death.
And the manner of binding or covering the limb is such that you tie it above and below, and extend some bandages along one side, and other bandages along the other side, and you wet the skin between the two sides to the width of a span, until the bone is exposed;
then cover or bind with cloth, and put a piece of linen on each part, so that the cloth does not touch the healthy limb, and avoids other injury and abscess;
And if there is bleeding when you work, cauterize the limb promptly, or apply some astringent powders;
then return to your medical practice until it is completed, then tie the injured limb with a bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to the man in that case:
a dark spot appeared that seemed like a burn from fire, and that corrosion first appeared on his toe, which spread to the entire foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he immediately covered the foot, and it was healed.
and some time later the corrosion appeared on his other hand, and it came to me, and I put him on things that were reactive after washing the body, but could not stop the corrosion.
and he wants me to examine his hand, and I do not want, unless I have hope of reflecting the matter. and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the ointment was weak.
and he completely lost hope, and returned to his land, and stopped covering his hand, and was healed.
and I have not counted it other than for what is done in such cases, when one has to deal with it.
No time comes abscess in the shoulder, and it lasts so long that it causes great swelling. and then pierce and perforate, and in its mouth the arrow, and let the shoulder remain as it was, like a vessel. and the skin that is above is also as delicate as the cloth you tear, and does not corrode the bone, nor the nerve, and such diseases are called "sinus", and are not called "fistula".
but if it is so long that it reaches the bone from the front, it is called "fistula".
and the skin if it is that you cut that skin all around, and immediately when it is delicate, like a cloth; and does not return to its place for its corruption.
And if you have confirmed that the skin has returned, and the corruption is not yet in the flesh, and the skin is charred, then the treatment of the plaster should be as follows:
Look to see if the breasts are large, and the nipple is of foul smell, then plaster with Egyptian medicine made as follows: Take garlic, oil, and lead, equally, and put to cook in a pot over the fire until the medicine is red and as thick as honey.
and then take according to your need, and make it in sharp and sweet, and in clysterize the belly, and hold the protrusion. and let the medicine stay in for two hours, then expel it by pressing.
do this many times, until the wound is clean and healed.
and never clysterize with ashes of sulfur, when this medicine is not present, and you should squeeze sulfur powder from a vine trunk, and pour sharp water above, then let it flow, and in clysterize, until you see that the wound is clean.
and if they cannot bear the pain, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the sharp of ashes can relieve it, then apply a poultice of honey and flour or if it has a little bit of lead powder. or you poultice with honey and melted wine, where the honey has the property of healing and cleansing, and the wine makes the wound ferment.
and when you have done this, and you have confirmed that the wound is healed, then apply a poultice of what makes charcoal in it, and it is that you grip an emplaustrum definite, and they make with rose oil and in wine.
and you apply the bandage with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken about their properties or treatment of wounds.
and if the hole in the bandage is small, and the pain of the bandage cannot enter, then slightly enlarge it with a needle, and put in an Egyptian tent of ointment or basilicon ointment until it is expanded.
and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave only as much skin or bandage as can enter, and if the pain is above the elbow, then cover or higher up where it is.
And if you cannot cover the string as you see fit, then adjust it in such a way that the bow corresponds to the lowest point where it is, for when the bow is strung, do not let the arrow slip and if you cannot cover the string as you see fit, then adjust it in this manner: that the bow corresponds lightly downwards, and do not leave anything of the bow.
that the bow corresponds lightly downwards, and do not leave anything of the bow. and take remedies to strengthen it, and place them on the wound, and cover it with a piece of linen that covers all the wound. Then apply pressure to the wound in that place, not too wide at first, since it is carefully sewn together with another cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and put it on the wound of the clean cloth to align the wound, and do not remove the large dressing until after many days, once.
And the one who is on the wound of the body, often removes to remove the wound, and treats what comes from the wound, whether it is poison or little or enough, or digested or undigested.
And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been spread in some way and you see the nature that jumps over the wound of the clean cloth, if the breasts are already healed, and approach the healthy ones.
And then dislocate it in the morning, or at noon, and when you have dislocated the wound, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
And if the subtle poisons are cut after long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
For there are people who delay in applying char to their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and they suddenly jump up after many hours, so that the breasts do not remain still;
and if the breasts are delayed in rising, and are distant, then apply moist and drying medicines, such as ointment, because there is a large part of vitrified glass, and this is the last medicine.
Take a definitive grip, and apply with rose oil, and mix it with equal parts of old wine in substance.
Then cook and use it.
And this very thing is cooked and thickened, when a definitive grip is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe, and incense, and grind it, and the powder on the honey when it is over the fire.
And then glue it to the cloth, and place it on the chest, and once in a while administer aristolochia longifolia, and roots of star anise, which is also like flour and hundredweight. And in the case of simple or composite remedies: Grind them, and make powder from them, and put on honey that I have said, and use it.
And if the cure is long, and it is not cured by this cure, then cut away the corruption that is in front of it, and make impression on the bone, or on hard members, or on limbs. If the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that arises outside the joint of the little finger of the hand, or of the foot, or by chance arises in other places.
And when it is removed, and no attention is paid, if it comes back with an abscess, and corrode and pour boiling water as much as it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps it corrodes all of it;
and it comes to the bones, as much as there is painful putrefaction, and the limb is very swollen, and it is a dark red color.
If you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help much, then you must cut away all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is very helpful if the bones are healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail is close to the bone and begins to pierce, and the wound, then it is necessary that you put the cautery out of the nail so it does not pierce the bone, and bring the bottom up, and carefully and gently cover this wound with medicines burning and corrosive to remove everything; then the treatment of wounds until they are healed.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut and remove it, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
And if you see the other decaying, then cut and remove it as was said before, then treat it until it is healed.
And if it is fierce, and bleeding, and the patient feels great pain, then you must first treat it.
Then cut the space between the bones by sawing across, and guard that the cut does not come too close to the bone, for the pain would be too great.
And if it happens, put something on it to soothe.
The pain that arises in the hands of some men by chance is all charred, and by chance it has a tail or where it has bones, and once it has an angle, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or where the birth is in any of the fingers.
Those born without any bone do not move, and those born at the joint of the bone may move.
The size of one who is chubby is lighter, in a way: size it at its root of a wide span.
Those born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure. if you hold it with a cover.
In those who are born or should be at the back, it is necessary that you first cut the rounded part of the bone to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable silk for this, then care for it until it is healed.
The same things that come together in two ways, either by birth or by wounding, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
If it is necessary to cover that which is sore, so that it can return according to its natural forms. Then put between two bandages or cloths, moistened with rose oil, so that they do not stick. between two thin pieces of cloth, as much as the joint should be heard, as it should be.
If one of them comes with their palm, then apply it as it should be.
Vis are veins large and swollen filled with superfluous melancholic fluids, which come from many members of the body.
and more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Then you must administer them purgative of clyster, and then the healthy one from the basilica.
The treatment of iron is according to two methods: one is that it is removed and the black blood is drawn out. and the other method is that the vein is opened and all the blood is drawn out.
The abdomen is thus according to this manner: The first leg is raised high and hot, so that the big toe is not thinned, then strain the leg with the bad side down towards the lower part of the belly;
then open the vein in the belly, in I, II or III, of a wide-bore needle, then release and pull out the black blood to your hand, from one to the other, until as much blood as the bad side can bear is drawn;
then bind it and command that he be fed with foods seasoned with black pepper;
And begin the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are flat, and exposed to the air.
The following is the method for this: Rub the affected leg with oil, if there is much hair, then place it in a bath, and apply hot water to the leg until it becomes red, and swell the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, heat the water at the fire, and then apply it to the vein where it is long, at the base of the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
then scrape the skin at the base of the vein, and remove all parts of it until it appears when touched;
and it appears red and black, and when it enters or skin seems to resemble a white cord.
then press the raw flesh out of the skin, until it is raised from the skin, and then it can be removed with a light touch, then the copper in the other joint for about three days.
then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it to the wound, as you have done, and remove it with a light touch, as you did before.
then remove another size, or if you have skill, then lift it and remove it to the other side of the wound, then cut and remove it from the second size.
then extract it from the abdomen, as much as it can be removed, then cover it.
and if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a large needle into the intestine strongly doubled, and tie it and pull it out, and turn your hand from one side to the other, as much as there is. and be careful that it does not cover, because if it covers, then it cannot be pulled or lifted, and it causes harm to the patient.
and when you have treated it all, then place on the wound of the sore linen soaked in wine and in red oil; and the cure as long as he is healthy.
And if his sight is contracted and twisted and clouded together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must forcefully untwist it, but do not cover it. and treat it as we have previously said.
The form of iron that covers the eye if is curved, and does not cut through, so it does not cover the vein;
and is of large curvature, because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but if it is large as we have said, and this is the form:
This vein is incised in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in land where there is no moisture;
and by chance it arises in another part than the legs, and this has the pus that comes out of the skin, as it comes from inside the flesh and muscles, incise between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are such that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then the limb changes, and the wound begins to protrude, like the root of a plant.
When the wound is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plaster of one and a half to two fingers thick, and the plaster, and leave the plaster on the leg, and every time it is not there, if you wrap it around the plaster, and the plaster.
And if it is too long, cut off a part, wrap it around, and not cover the remaining part at its root until it is completely out. For if you cut it off, it will enter into the wound and cause abscess and putrefaction or sickness in the limb, and it will be very bad.
For this reason, it is necessary to treat it little by little just at the head, and nothing should remain or rot.
And there is never this vein when it is treated from the palm of length, or of X, and some have come to me, from which it issues of X lengths, and when you cut it off, it will burst or puncture, and it will perforate just at the bottom, so that everything will be out.
and clear out the matter that is inside, and administer to the patient medicines in the form of poultices every day, then treat the wounds as with abscesses.
And never rain on this vein, and especially when it opens at the joint of the finger, or the finger, and much pressure comes out, and it suddenly rains;
treat the wound as we have said before.
between the skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "bull disease", because it often affects bulls, and it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body up and down, and is felt well at the alert of member to member, as long as it does not leave the skin where it was;
and is caused by the corruption of some humors, such as worms coming from and wriggling in the intestines and lumbrics and ascarides or worms in the belly.
and its harm is doubted, for when it goes through the body, and climbs to the head, and comes to the oil, by chance it enters, and destroys the oil. This happens often.
When you see it cure and draw, one cannot help but notice when it goes:
Therefore, it is necessary to tie the limb above and below a very tight bandage, then cut it off and draw it out, and if it turns black in the char, you should not touch it, but cauterize it with fire until it dies.
and the greatest harm it does is that it corrupts the oil, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold it firmly away from it, then cover it and remove it.
and it is advisable to use the remedy of applying a solution of medicinal herbs for the bad humors that cause disease, and if it fails to work, try using meat broths for purgation.
of pain coming from the windiness This disease is called in our land "wakirir", and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from member to member;
and I have seen what I will tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered that one of her arms was swollen, and there was a small boil in the vein of the arm.
And soon after, it grew as big as a worm in the shoulder, much faster than anything, just like quick silver when it is cut from lead.
The pain separated from the arm and moved to the shoulder, and then a little later it rotted throughout the body, until it reached the other arm.
Then she told me that she turned around inside the body, as I saw.
I marveled greatly at how she moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease in this way before. Nevertheless, I wanted to move the pain from one arm to the other, but I could not do so, as I saw in the woman.
And I thought it was because the woman had dry skin, and her veins were exposed, and because that whiteness appeared constrained.
And they do not reveal themselves to those who are delicate, and who have moist skin and veins covered.
And when you see how to cure this disease, and the pain feels as we have said, if it opens up as we have described, then tie above and below quickly, and then cover it with a bandage until that whiteness is released from the limb. and cauterize the limb.
and if you do not see it in your eyes, then treat the cause of that whiteness, as with foul-smelling pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
Arrows are various, according to their resemblances and according to the materials they are made of.
The variety of their shapes is such that there are those with large points, small points, curved points, and smoothed points. And of those who have II angles, and of those who have tongues, and of those which have pieces.
And that which pierces into any member however it pierces in the manner: or in the principal member which is hairy, such as the head, neck, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it pierces therefore into any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, is apparent: if it is necessary to extract this arrow, for many die afterwards in various positions. and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely embedded, then remove it, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the skull when the arrow pierces and penetrates the bone, and the syphilitic pus that is above the skull, is when there is scotomy and soda and swelling and confusion, and inflammation and swelling of the tongue, and spasms and mental confusion, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is no force in the nostrils, or in the ears. And perhaps the tongue and voice are affected; and white pus-like matter issues from the wound, and also like bruised meat;
if this sign appears to you, then take care of the patient, and remove the arrow if it is not already out.
The sign of the arrow when it pierces or breaks, is that it is near the right breast, and also feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and perhaps the arrow moves as if it were stuck in something, and also cuts through black blood, and causes coldness and cold sweat, and syncope: Therefore, with doubt, they send them away.
And the sign that the arrow has not been pulled out is that without any pain, bubbles come out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the limb changes color, and the patient breathes high and seeks for the cold air.
And if the arrowhead pierces through the covering of the worst, it is under the small ribs; and causes great pain and breathlessness. and they move all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrowhead pierces the stomach, by chance if something undigested from the meat does not come out of the wound.
And if the arrowhead pierces the abdomen, and nothing comes out through the intestines, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrowhead pierces through the bladder, and the urine spurts out and comes forth, and the patient feels great pain: Therefore, that the wound is mortal.
The other member, such as the hand and neck and throat and shoulder and elbow and back and spine and hip and knee and leg, and similar members, are safe according to many positions. When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of what you were doing differently.
It happened to a man who was shot in the calf at the root of the knee: I tried to remove it, and pulled it out from the other side of the fat of the ear, and was healed without harm.
And if a splinter enters the skin and gets stuck in the oil paper outside the paper, and the splinter is replaced, and it cannot be reached except with the tip towards the top, and it was a large splinter like a Turkish arrow, through all the iron without ears;
the wound was cleansed, and no bad accidents came to him.
And if a splinter enters the throat of a Christian, and the splinter is Arabic-shaped with ears:
I removed the barbs, and carefully extracted it until I got it out, and the Christian was healed.
And I drew a spear from a man, which was stuck in his neck or stomach, and thought he was dying.
Then after thirty days, he did not change his condition; I cut into the spear above, and pulled it out, and removed it, and there was no bad outcome.
And if you want to a man who has a spear sticking out of his back, and the wound was sewn up above;
and the spear remained inside him, and did not change his natural condition, nor did he find any harm in any of his natural works.
And you see another man, who has a spear sticking out of his face, and the wound was sewn up; and prolongs thus without suffering great pain;
and many similar cases.
And a arrow was removed from the man of the king, who had it sticking out of his throat, and was slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded.
I was called for after it had been three days. If the wound is very narrow.
I found it all under a thin tent, and did not feel anything; and he felt sharp pain and pain on his right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I put some warm and soothing ointment on his forehead because the veins were not inflamed; and I saw the bones of the arrow.
and I saw the bones of the arrow. I put the plaster on immediately, and poured it directly onto the wound, and it remained there for a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his nostril.
and he told me. I put the corrosive medicine on the wound immediately, and I tried it, and I felt the tip of the arrow that was lodged in the bone.
then I pushed it into the opening of the wound with that medicine, until the arrow appeared clearly.
and it passed through the ends in about four months, and then I removed the stitches that I had put on the wound, and from one side and the other, and he could not get out.
then he did not cease to subtly and ingeniously devise ways of using tools, until I took them well made, according to the form that it will come at the end of this chapter, so that I can treat and heal the wound.
And the miracle worker judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I healed it anyway, and the wound was closed, and the pain was completely healed.
Or I told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your skill on what I do not say, because the books cannot contain everything;
but the wise masters compare it to a small thing, and because of what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instrument, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not issue from limbs unless by two methods: or by the limb where they enter, or by another part.
and that which exits by the same way it entered is an arrow that has entered through the bowel, and it has never exited.
And if it does not exit, let it remain until the bowel is poisoned and rotten inside, and let it be left to its own issue.
And if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot be removed, let it remain for several days, and move it every day.
And then it jumps out, and if it does not jump out, pierce all around with a thin needle, until the flesh around it is expanded, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is returned to the body but cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the tent. And if you feel it, then remove it with any suitable instrument.
And if you cannot remove it due to the narrowness of the wound, and the deep penetration of the arrow, and there is no bone or sinew or vein, then leave it until the wound becomes large.
and if you find an arrow, and if it has ears attached to it that it holds, then break the shaft where you can, and then break or pull off the ears from the shaft, as much as you can.
and carefully do not break the arrow, so that you can pull it out more firmly.
If you cannot do it once, if the leg is completely inside the thigh, then cut it off, for the extraction has failed. And if bleeding occurs due to this, then follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter.
and guard against the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put in place as you can pull out the arrow without danger, or quickly or slowly, or firmly or loosely.
Put the patient according to the shape it was in when the arrow came out, for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot do so, put it according to what the signs show.
The arrow that comes from another direction, which opens nothing and where the skin is swollen in one place so that it can be seen or felt abnormally:
Then cut above, as long as the barbs can be taken hold of, and then extract it: If it has now sunk in.
And if it is retained in the bone, then round your hand and push it into the bone, until it enters the bone, and expands the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still and then begin extraction again until it comes out.
and if it is of an arrow and it is, if it is shot through;
and if it is poisoned, and you see administer gently, if you administer the instrument chewed, so that the tip of the arrow between the hair of the instrument;
and then bite further, and if the arrow is chewed, if it bites the instrument entering at the point, to alleviate the extraction.
And if the arrow is lodged, it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as it should be.
And if the arrow is poisoned or painful or in the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close, and you can cover over it, if it covers.
and guard yourself from covering the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound, if necessary. and the treatment until it is healed.
The shape of the hooks used to extract arrows resembles an owl's beak, and here is its form:
And there are many ways to do this: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the arrow.
The shape of the needle is also like the beak of a bird, to pierce at the tip of the blood, like this:
There are 31 veins from which one can bleed, including the main ones, which are 16, namely: 2 branches that are after the ears, which are called the "two herbs"; and the 2 arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and the 2 veins that are in the two armpits of the two eyes, which are called "aspirates"; and the vein that is placed in the forehead; and the vein that is at the back of the head; and the two jugular veins that are on the neck; and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "auguste"; and the two veins that are outside the tongue.
The veins that one cuts commonly are V in each arm:
the other is the cervical, and is on the right side, and they call it the "head vein"; and the remedy is called "fasting", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and they call it the laymen "vein of the heart". and the basilic vein is located on the right side, and they call it the laymen "vein of the belly", and it is above the femoral artery, and it is the one that is used to heal, which opens clearly above the groin.
and the subclavian vein is the one that is between the auricular and annular artery, and it has two branches.
and in the leg there are three veins: The first one is dislocated at the left shoulder, and the second one is at the elbow of the right shoulder. And the vein that is called "nesse", which is in the elbow of the other shoulder.
And in the other leg, there are three veins dislocated from those.
The sinus of the veins that are after the ears helps with ancient catarrh and headache.
And the qualities of the sinus, as I said to you, and it is that you reset the head of the pain, and rub the skin where the veins are with a rough cloth. Then compress the hairs on their neck with a bandage until the two veins appear behind the ears in both sides of the head. And if you feel pain on your neck, and if you see the hairs standing up, then stop.
Then take the lancet, and place it outside the vein near the bone, then lift your hand above the vein, and cut through the skin and the vein, and it should go straight through the vein until you see.
Then stop and tie it until it is healed.
I have already mentioned the incision and the cauterization in the first book.
The cure for the second artery that is in two temples, it is to drain the ancient, and soothe, and harden accustomed, and at the courts of the tears ages to those.
And the qualities of the skilled healer are as I say: And it is that the painful one strains his neck, so that both veins appear openly. And he feels the hairs on the other side, and then lifts up the eyelid;
Then lift the finger above the vein on the other side, and prick the lancet outside, and lift the vein up, and cover it, as you have done in the two other veins, and do according to your need.
then release the pain, and put your finger on the wound for an hour, then put on a cloth. and then tie it firmly, and leave it until it is healed.
and we have spoken of them and their treatment and removal, at the beginning of this book.
The healing of the wound on the forehead is just as valuable as the healing of headache diseases and facial old wounds, and migraine, and a rupture.
and the quality is such that the pain twists his neck, until the wound appears. then take the tool called "fosser", which has this shape:
and place the point of it on the vein, and hold it with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you see; then cut away the vein, and tie it until it is secure and no more blood flows out like a wide flame.
However, it should not be too tight; and the knot on the side, because the bone is close, and by chance the string may break when it is thin.
The second vein that is in the two arms helps to those, and at the elbow, and at the wrist, and at the shoulder, and at the diseases of the face;
and the quality of their health is such that the hairs twist their neck in turning from any direction, as before.
then the healthy one, and let the health be through the cross, a little long of the flame a little wide, for there is no harm. And if their flames are thin, perhaps they break;
then make bleeding of the blood, as much as you have skill, and then tie with cotton, and tie it well.
The health of the vein of the neck is good for ague, and for sweating, and for diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that comes in the face, and continuously when it is old.
and the qualities of the pain are such that the hairs tense their neck, then they strain their nostril to your right hand, and take the subtle flame long, and the wick into the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well inquire, and the sinus will now begin to heal.
and do not move too much from there, and treat the blood according to your need, then leave it overnight, because it is quickly restored.
The pain of the two jawbones helps to narrow the alveolar arch, and at the beginning of mastication, and for many diseases, and pustules, and corrosions, and herpes, and eczema;
and the quality of the skin is such that the hairs stray from one side to the other, as we have said.
and whether the masters are above the top of the wound, and the wound is on the seat, then clean the vein with a long incision, slightly wide, then draw out the blood frequently, as much as the matter requires.
then make another incision on the other vein, then release the ligature, and hold the wounds steadily, so that the hairs do not strangle. and let it bleed until morning, so that the wound is healed.
of the health of the liver The health of the liver above helps to cool in the mouth, and prevents tooth decay, and cracks in the lips, and dry throat and inside.
And the quality of the saint is to make the pain sit in front of you, and hold its neck as I have said; then turn the eyelid, and look at the two veins, one on the right eyelid and the other on the left, and they are known by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that there are small black veins around them:
then tie both of them, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then tie the largest one from each part, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method:
of the health of the tongue The cleaning of the veins that are outside the tongue helps after the cleaning of the cephalic, and it is at the narrowing of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth.
And the qualities of a good cleaner are that diseases cease between your hands before the sun, and you stretch out your tongue, and look outside at each side a black vein.
Therefore clean both and do not go too far in front, for outside are the arteries.
The veins of the neck that are cleaned commonly are cleaned in two ways:
when holding onto all the fire with a wide, sharp blade, or like a surgical scalpel, and it is called "anesthesia"; and they are wide and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame is very famous, and is as wide as you see.
And there is skill for opening closed veins that are plainly visible from the outside, and which contain large amounts of blood and are disturbed; and this is the shape of the sharp blade:
And it is more subtlely pointed, and is for cleaning fine veins, where there is fine blood clots.
The basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are outside the neck, and where the collarbone, and where the chest, and where the stomach;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to act wisely, and to separate from the artery which is out of place. And if he cuts the artery, and blood gushes out, then it is necessary to apply pressure, as I have said. and he should not pinch the flame, but cut as an anvil.
And if the bishop does not open clearly, then it is necessary to hold and change another one. or you want any part of him, or you act in place of the vein in the arm. it opens clearly. and the cup to the flame, as we have said.
And if you know the joint of the shoulder, then it is also necessary that you strain the arm, so that you touch the joint until you know the pulse. Then sign the shoulder joint, and then bind the arm, and cup the vein with the flame as before. And watch that you do not puncture the artery when you see the joint swelling, for it is of the artery. Then move away from it.
And if you see it emerge as high as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is from the artery. Hasten then, and place your hand on the length, then press your hand without pause, as many times as it has happened. Tie the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the hairs.
And let it be under fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if it is not healed without pain, and you are not present with the medicine, then prick the artery if it opens, for the head of the vein retreats. Heal the wound.
Take a piece of cloth, and tear it, and take one half and tie it well to the other side.
if they are not stained, it is good; if not, then the cure, as we have said, with powders that stain blood.
and the stains are not too dark in many positions of the small limb of the wound, and the position of the joint of the arm.
The cleansing of the wound in the middle helps that it treats blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the cleaner to go through the tendon that is outside, and if not too much in front, and he finds the tendon, and he inflates and the stain is dark, and perhaps it cannot be cleaned.
and this nerve is often exposed, and if it does not expose itself in any men due to its subtlety, then you must use the instrument of needles. and protect the nerve for your power.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
The needle of the cerebral type helps, as it draws out blood from the head, and helps with those.
and it is best to use a needle in the olive oil or mineral oil lamp, as it is the safest of all veins, because it does not contain any nerves or arteries. However, it is best to ask for the lightest limb, and do not cause any harm if you cannot find it the first time, and then restart. And sometimes the shoulder swells in some people, but it is necessary the first time, but it does not cause any harm.
The quality of health depends on your thought.
The first thing you should know about healing is that healing is only intended for keeping health and preventing diseases from coming.
And the healing is done in one of the three veins that are either cut: That is to say, cephalic, median, and basilar. And one should heal at the beginning of the first ten days, and in autumn and winter after fasting, when the signs of repletion appear.
And one should first cleanse the affected joint or limb after two hours or three days.
The cleansing administered for diseases does not have a determined time, but it is best to do so every hour or at night, in all hours and at all times.
And it is not necessary to cleanse children under the age of fourteen, nor a pregnant woman except for those in their fourth month up to seven months of pregnancy. One should also not sain the elderly who have passed sixty years.
And when anyone wants to cleanse in any way, it is necessary for them to wipe the intestines with a light clyster, if they have too much feces retained, so that the veins do not attract the excess and harmful intestinal contents to the principal limbs.
Neither does one who is too fond of meats, nor one who is indulgent, become healthy, as much as they may be, nor hydropathic.
And if one becomes sick after a bout of colic, vomiting, diarrhea, and frequent pregnancy, childbirth, travel, watching, and fasting, and all the virtue, or by some cause of the arm or body;
Then subtly the humors, if they are not too thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
Then enter or bathe, if nothing prevents, to thin the blood, and to save you from bleeding too much at the third hour, as we have said.
and guard yourself from that day of work, and pain, and luxury, and similar things;
and be tied and joined, and let the healers be higher than those who heal, and let the rub the arm II times or III, then strain the joint above movement, for if it is too loose or tight, it cannot be corrected;
then rub the limb with hands, until the veins swell, and feel for them;
then drip the healer’s flame from a small amount of old oil, then put their finger on the vein where they want to heal, so that the vein does not burst and fail to bleed.
Because there are veins that flee as quickly as strings to the scribe, and if there are some that are plain of thinness, so that when one puts above the flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those; and if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the scribe be aware of these things.
And if it opens the vein the first time, it is good; but if not, then it should try again a little below that joint or above firmly, if the vein is not swollen.
If the joint is swollen, and the hairs sprout, let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm tightly. perchance I will come to abscesses in the future;
do not enter or take a bath, then restart the healing if it pleases.
and if the wound is small, or if you doubt that it will not bleed as much as you saw, then trust in that wound itself directly to the fire.
and work gently, provided that the joint is swollen; for this often happens, when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swelling, do not begin again with the same bandage, and put on a small amount of oil, for it soothes the pain of the wound, and is quiet in this limb like the oil.
And thus administer the bandage of oil in each wound that you bandage, to stop the flow of the blood.
And this same thing is made into a triangle and a bow, when it is put on the limb. If subtly the wound and separate it when it is too thick.
And if there comes some large abscesses, which often happen, immediately when it is not bandaged except at this time or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and put on the limb a soft sponge in boiling water and a little cloth, and hold it an hour.
and it is necessary that you do this after the removal of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place for several days without any discoloration or greenish tint, then it is not necessary to remove it. and if you see, place something of aloe or mire in a juice of calamint, monkshood, or similar.
And often there is an abscess and appearance of the sores of the basilica:
and then place your hand on it, and if you press the limb gently with your hand, if it is that appearance badly. Therefore do not place anything of what we have said, because inadvertently it may cut into the artery.
but apply a dry plaster to strengthen the limb, then use other treatments until it is healed.
And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the wound.
For if it is not black, let it remain out until it becomes red; and if you see it swollen, let it remain out until it becomes thinned. and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is suitable for those who are weak and have skill in extracting arrows, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide;
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and let it heal quickly and often, and it should be treated by cutting across, not by pricking.
This method of healing is safe from the corrosion of blood and the strangulation of nerves, and it is as good as the healing done over a long period of time or a wide area.
And to those who need it for the healing, it is appropriate to give bread made from ground grains mixed with apple juice. If it is hot-blooded, then pour out the blood three or four times and if it is of cold complexion, change the bread to bread made from honey syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a strong-smelling syrup.
And if he faints during the sweat, after much blood loss, it is appropriate to give him a broth of charcoal, and a subtle-smelling syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the chapter or section on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to exercise his arm, and strengthen it again, if necessary, when it is weakened by great injury, that he should strengthen it gradually, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
And if he wants to exercise his arm after the first strengthening, and he has strong pain, then he should strengthen it again seven hours after the first strengthening, or after the ninth hour.
And if he wants to strengthen on the other side, then he should strengthen it again on the second day or the third day.
Because he has much blood inside his body which is already heated, and causes fever; if it is necessary to draw a large quantity, and widen the vein as much as possible; then you must meet all the conditions of health, and put your hand on the pulse when it is healthy, so that the patient does not come into the vein in place of the pulse, and this has often happened when the healers are neglectful;
and you must not draw blood when you see the arm shaking, and make blood come out the second time, and the vein is closed, that you press firmly on. If it is curved, he should extend his arm quickly, for that would be harmful.
but let it rest until it heals the second time. or you do not put the tip of the flame on it until the ice that has been frozen from the vein is softened, and put a drop of oil back in its place, and press it lightly.
And if the swelling is present, let it be and do not hold it tightly until the abscess is calmed down.
And if necessary to draw out blood from the second vein, if the healthy one in the same limb or another arm.
The veins are healthy in place of the main vein because it is composed.
And the way of healing is that the hairs put their hand in hot water until the flesh is red;
then gently tie it, so that the vein appears well, then heal it now from the side, not too narrow or too long;
and let the wounds be wide, and clean well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the hot water, until you have enough;
and if it is still stuck, do not put the hand back in hot water, because it puts more in than out;
and the cleaning of this wound is safer than all other wounds, as there are no arteries or nerves.
The cleaning of the wound of the right hand is worth all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
strain the hand, and apply hot water, until the vein is blown, if one can see it. and if the wound is crooked, and if you cover it with all kinds of things, it will not hurt anything.
and do not move too much in the beginning, because the nerves are all exposed to the flesh, and then put the hand in hot water again, if it is not frozen in the wound, and cannot come out.
And when you have treated the arrow as much as is necessary for you, put oil on the wound and tie it with a thread quickly, and thus do to each one.
The healthy sign of the left hand is valuable for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you on the right side.
The healthy sign of the shoulder is valuable for all diseases that are outside the body, such as marrow diseases, and retention of urine, and disease of the knees, and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its wound is such that the hairs boil in hot water, and rub on the vein until it dies, and tie over the joint of the hair. and if the vein is at the elbow, and from above the wrist they go much with rain.
then the larger or more open rain, or at the elbow, which is better.
And if you heal it above the wrist, then guard against the nerves that are displaced, and heal it as in sewing.
and let the flames be close.
And if it cannot issue from the bone, put the flesh in the hot water, and let the wound well drain.
And if you have to heal it the first time, then start the second above a little, because the bones are salty.
and do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so make the other sewing of the wrist equally.
The vein of the ankle is at the knee of the foot, and its healing is equal to the pain of the back, when it is for an abscess.
And the quality of his health is such that the hairs between or in the bath, and strange above the knee four times in twisting, because otherwise it does not open the vein.
and if it opens, then the healthy one in all ways that you can, and crosswise. It is worthwhile to hold it, for the veins are dry, and it is very replete with hands of men.
It is worthwhile to hold it, for the veins are dry, and it is very replete with hands of men. And if you do not hold it, then the healthy one none of those who open or do two small ones, and towards the small one, and keep away from the nerves.
And make so much correction of the blood that you see, and then release the ligament, and put on cotton and hold it. It is now healed.
Vacuums are made of horn, or of brass, or of glass.
And vacuum is done in two ways: Either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
And this vacuum that is without striking is done in two ways: Either it is at all heat, or without heat.
And the vacuum that is done by striking and drawing blood is made in twelve places on the body, of which one is at the top of the head. And the others are at the neck. and two others in two ribs on the shoulder; and the suction of the face; and the suction of the two shoulders; and the suction on the buttocks; and the suctions in the two arms; and the suctions in the two legs; and the suctions in the two knees;
and the suction does not treat blood, but only the small veins that are scattered in the body, and therefore it does not weaken the person, as one does with the treatment of bloodletting. and it should only be administered when there is no fire or fever, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
And if necessary for illnesses, it is advisable to ventilate, or by custom, to reset every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every season.
for there are some who, when they have business to ventilate, have heavy heads.
and if some have fullness and redness in their face, and head, and neck, and darkness before their eyes.
and some who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit out blood. and if there are some who dream, and see through red and black and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the month of May, we command them to fast for three hours after midday.
The remedy for the pain of the muscles helps with the grieving of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is only suitable after the evacuation of all the blood from the body.
And this ventilation is in the place of the remedy for the headache, and it is only suitable for those who are of cold constitution or who have diarrhea, because that causes great harm.
And therefore it is not suitable for those who are awake or who have cold diseases of the head.
And those who often feel ill, become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the suction cup a little lower due to the doubt of forgetfulness.
The ventilation of the neck is in place of the remedy for the headache and the basilica, and therefore it is suitable for the narrowing of the vein of the pomum, and for all, and for repletion.
And it should not be placed too tightly, for if it is held too firmly, it may cause injury to the intestines or stomach and the abdomen.
The ventilation of the second rib of the spine can cause pain in the neck, and numbness and tingling, and choking, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and is in the place of the health of the basilica.
And it is necessary to command the healer to express his hand when placing it, so that he does not press the artery, and does not cause blood to flow.
The ventilation of the lower jaw can cause illness in the mouth, and corruption of the teeth, and similar diseases that are in the mouth. and it is in the joint of the lower lip.
The winds of the shoulders cause disease that comes from heat and fullness.
The wounds of the ears are as valuable as three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins.
And the patient is instructed not to be too eager in front, for the veins are bare of flesh and can be easily damaged by needles and arteries.
The wound on the back above the hips is as valuable as many diseases, and it should be large and made of iron, so that it can draw well. And if it were too thin, it would break. And I make great wounds.
The bandages of the legs heal openly, for they draw blood from all over the body, and cause ancient pains of rain, and of the marsh, and of the bladder, and remove the flows;
And they are in the place of the second metatarsal bones, and of the second metacarpals, and at all times they weaken the body after long use, and bring on numbness in many positions.
The way to apply the bandage is that you first put it empty and quickly fill it with heat, and place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the red and swollen flesh, and open the pores of the blood.
Then, firmly, and reset the suction cups, and take care in the positioning of the vessels, for there are such that have tarry bile, and clear porous ones. If it is necessary to prick once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and one deep one. And clean lightly.
And if it is not too large, then it is necessary to prick twice. The first time to thin the path of the thick blood.
And if it is not very sharp, then it is necessary to prick the third time.
And when we want to draw out a little blood at a time, then we should only suck once. And if we wish to draw much blood, we recommend frequently.
And if the blood is thick, we recommend using a sharp, pointed knife, and it is suitable for those who have thick skin and are tough, that you use the tips of oil-appetizing and dissolving: if it is in this state, of blue oil, or of almond sweet oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in a feverish state, of celery oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar one.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or balm, or aniseed oil, and the likes.
And if the one who is to be bled has wide and open pores, then one should not put any oil, but rather wash after the venesection of high rosewater, or high cold water, or myrtle water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar thing.
And those who have much moisture, if they rise from ash, or high myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have excessive swelling rise from old wine, or vinegar of sucking, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things;
and do not wait too long to apply a suction device before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two;
and do not sleep immediately after suction, and it is good that they wait until they are ready to be sucked and when they are being sucked.
And watch out for those who are suctioned if they are feverish, and if they are not too weak and inflamed; if it is good that they take cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuces at the outlet, and similar things; and muddy puddles, and hot water from a cauldron, and moist meats.
and muddy puddles, and hot water from a cauldron, and moist meats. And those who have a cold complexion, take honey syrup, and aromatic wine between old and new, and a little broth, and muddy puddles, small birds, and pigeons.
and the day that he will travel, he must drink more than eat.
And it is necessary to give some men triangular or muscat wine before traveling, or after, for the benefit of the main members. And it should be subtly given to the sick, but only those who are strong drink it.
Vacuum cups applied to cause pain are those placed over the liver, and over the mouse, and podagra, and over the belly and the buttocks and the thighs and the back, for these members do not suffer pain from other methods, and no one does this except to draw blood from member to member, as we place them over the breasts when the child is born;
to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place vacuum cups over the belly and the buttocks to soften the member;
and remove the pain when there is an abscess or stone, as by its attractive virtue it may chance to remove the abscess, or dislodge the stone from its place;
And thus, when placed over the liver and the mouse, where there is a suction retained, these suctions are administered empty for sweat alone. And never are administered together with fire, and sometimes plain of hot vinegar, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a way that the suction is filled with hot steam or hot water where he has cooked poisonous herbs to it.
The shape of the vacuum administered by fire is as follows:
And it has two large and half-palm of length, and it is or costed around the middle I small perforation, as to put a needle, and it is of brass, sulfur before so that it does not bleach the painful part when placing it on the limb.
And in the middle of it, use a crooked rod of iron or iron, to put a splint in place, and they should be large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them.
For infants' suction cups are different from old ones, and thin ones are different from fat ones.
And one should put this suction cup on the limb:
with a wax splint or linen, and put it in the suction cup at the end of the iron rod that is in the suction cup, so that it clarifies whether the suction cup is at the bottom of the suction cup that it does not burn the hairs.
Then place it above the member, and you should hold it above the perforation that we have said, so that when one wants to, then the suction can go in and one removes the vacuum.
And take hold of the lineament as before, and repeat it often, if you have skill.
In the suction that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, there is no needle or perforation, and it is not administered until it is full of sharpness, and it is placed above the member alone.
And this is the form:
Nostrils are not administered until in members where one cannot place suctions for their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar ones. and when removing from a horse, such as a donkey or mule, and other similar cases;
and the quality of the user is such that when you thrust through those that are in fresh waters without a net, then take them;
and put them into fresh water until they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies; then wash them with blood and suction, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the gut;
and when they are smooth and cooked, if it is a place where a suction can be put, then put it, for this is very good.
If not, then lift the limb gently, first from above, very well, and then wipe it.
and if it is too sore after the course of the wounds, then moisten the linen cloth in cold water, and place it on, until the wound is cleansed.
and if the wounds multiply, then place on broken glass, or salt, and similar things, until it is cleansed.
or you place on the limb half of crushed beans, and leave them until they dry on the limb, it will stop now.
and if you have more troublesome ones, take other remedies.
And if the remedies do not want to take effect, rub the wound with fresh blood, or you make a needle until it enters the wound, and then place them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will stick.
And when you see that they are stuck, powder on a little aloe and brimstone or ash, and they will now fall off.
This begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Know, foolish boy, that the false miracles of this chapter were never seen in any of the old books, neither were they letters.
and for this reason, knowledge is lacking in our land, for I found none good.
and I know nothing, except for the knowledge gained from ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated it, and by experience, and by the habit of my life.
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that will be brought, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say or preface of this book the sums of the language and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who are experienced find and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or wound comes to any one, it is necessary for you to hasten to clean the injury on both sides, if nothing stops you, such as weakness of body, or children, or old people; When the joint is not very warm or too cold;
and if the joint is not very warm or too cold; and if you drink cold water, such as cold juices, and char of quail and partridge, and do not drink any thick soups, and do not eat too much meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of an abscess or spreading of matter to the limb;
if the hairs regrow as they used to before.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to grind the meat that causes large swelling, or has viscosity, such as cooked wheat, and rice, and tests, and pie, and pancakes of milk, and eggs, and fish, and large wine, and similar things. For the grinding, it is better to do it sooner rather than later.
And know that the bones of old people and the infirm cannot be well healed or joined according to their nature due to the scarcity of flesh, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of small children;
but do not care, reset it over the broken bone and large thick tendons that stretch and join the limb together, as much as it can bear, until it is as strong as before. and do not leave it entirely to its own devices, and because it needs to be nourished with large amounts of food, as we have said.
And the fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, and I will tell you all the ways of fracture in this chapter. For there are fractures that go around, and others in soaking, like the shape of a quill for writing.
For there are fractures that go around, and others in soaking, like the shape of a quill for writing. And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture all in a small cut.
And in every way, it should have its own intention and proper tool in the restoration, according to what memory brings to its mind.
and it is known that the bone is broken because the joint is twisted, and open wide by default, and it is pressed by the hand.
and when there is no twisting in his arm, and the hairs do not cause great pain, if there is no fracture;
but he may still have twisting, or a wound, or a small fracture. It is not necessary that you move it with your hand, but place the remedies that come after this, and then gently hold it now.
And if the fracture that goes in the arm is in two parts, and the two parts are dislocated, now you must put them back evenly, as well as abscesses that come.
and if abscesses come, if he leaves no pus, until the abscesses are calmed.
then put it back in the muscle that you can lightly and safely, and if the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of those where he has pieces.
then the strain, as it should be afterward.
And if the bone is broken into pieces, then strain it with two parts, whether by hand or foot, or at your hand if it is small members, or at two strings, or with one string and at your hand.
and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, then reset all the additions in their places at once with your hands, and guard that by your work no harmful injury or pain comes.
and firmly set the two bones according to the best shapes.
And if it feels good to the hand, if it seems not quite right.
if it is stretched well, and not strained too much, and does not press as those who do so often cause abscesses and contractions in the limb, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is set, well restrain the bad movement that it does not move, neither while awake nor while sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and watch well that the limb is so assured that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not quite set, and it should be put in the best position so that it feels no pain;
and watch well that the limb is so assured that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not quite set, and it should be put in the best position so that it feels no pain; and make sure it is placed correctly, as twisting can occur when it is restored.
and the quality of the broken member depends on what I tell you.
The members broken are different in smallness and in greatness and in form.
For there are small members, such as fingers and toes and similar ones: so it is necessary to wrap them with soft, thin linen cloths. and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg:
so it is necessary to wrap them with a wide, sturdy cloth, because the large limbs encompass the whole member and evenly strain all parts, so that there is no gap.
Then lightly press the joint, three or four times according to the limb, and hold your hand a little on the entire limb, then go above the fracture and hold it less than the fracture;
and gradually soften the limb a little and little, until you grip a large part of the sound limb, then take another limb and turn around directly above the broken limb;
then return to the part beyond the fracture and hold it gently, neither too strongly nor too firmly, as we have said in the first part above;
Then place between the lips of linen or cloths, as long as they are even, then tie all together with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches above, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something soothing on the abscess and that which opens the swelling, and leave it like that for some time.
Then strain above your stitches, and they should be half of a wide strip, or of bark that is properly cut, or of palm fronds, and they should be according to this shape:
but the stake that one puts across the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others.
and it should also be as long as needed for the limb, whether small or large. then pull across the stakes as you did in the first chapter, then tie it evenly with a thread, just like in the first chapter over the fracture. the tighter it is pulled, the less there is.
and it should be that the thread is of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax.
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in some works of fools who make cords from linen that are too thickly twisted, and this is great error, because the band cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should only be that there is less than a finger's breadth between each stake.
And if the hairs are pricked by the thorns after straightening them in their natural position, then soak them in linen or some other clean cloth, so they do not become inflamed.
When the wound is with the bone fractured, and the bones are broken, I will tell you the treatment afterwards.
And do not strain all the broken limbs at once on the first day. For when the members are large, one should not put bandages immediately, but after five days or seven, or more according to your safety from abscess, constantly watching.
and now the manner of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
and you take flour that is kept in the walls of the mill, and knead it with abundant water, and put this mixture, not too clear or too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring fractures to many positions, and especially to women and small children, because it is neither too hard nor too soft.
Another way of applying plasters to heal fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take equal parts of aloe, dandelion, and nail polish, and add 10 grams of Arabic gum and myrrh. myrrh and aloes, 5 grams each; aloe, 8 grams; and grind them into powder, and mix with enough honey; if the patient's complexion is hot, then use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and quickly heals broken bones, and is beneficial to many people.
Another method of splinting that is useful for sprains: Take a piece of cloth and soak it in warm water, then apply it to the affected area. Mix equal parts of honey and aloe, then apply it to the affected area. Apply a cold compress to the affected area. Boil equal parts of armagnac and honey, then grind them well and mix with either vinegar or a lot of egg yolk, and administer it.
Another method of splinting for joints and bones that have been dislocated from their sockets, to relieve pain and promote healing, and to prevent further injury. Take a new piece of cloth, soak it in warm oil, and place it on the affected area.
This plaster does not heal immediately, but it is good for alleviating abscess pain, and properly relieves the pain.
Another method to treat broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and earth partridge leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Another method of healing a broken bone and to ease the remaining pus of an abscess. Take valerian root, chamomile, flowers of violets, and flour of each one in equal parts.
Grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is hot, apply the mixture with wet or dry coriander seed.
Another method of healing more than the first, when an abscess is difficult to restore the member. Take valerian root, linseed, balm, mallow, and willow bark, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each in equal parts. And bruise, and cook with sharp salt, or sweet salt, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put on a broken limb to restore it, except for a mixture of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he said that it should be between two things, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galen said that one should put on a broken limb to restore it, things dry and slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to treat injury and pain: Take the hooves and feathers of birds, or pen-feathers, and sage, and silk equally, and bruise them, and make a poultice and apply it to the wound.
And then remove it after a while, and be careful that the pain is not gone, nor has the bone of its limb become soft. If not, remove it by hand later. And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, feeling of restlessness or swelling, then you hurry, and remove it, and take off the bandage now.
and take light bandage, and wet sponge from the sea, and soak in vinegar, and raise the limb, until the itching stops, and let the pain be relieved. then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moisten with vinegar or rose oil, and tie with a bandage, until you are sure of no abscess.
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain be removed, then start again with the thin bandage, and a little plaster, and do not strain it too much as before. and carefully as they are clean.
And if you see that the abscess is filled with pus and redness and pain and swelling, and you have the skill of plasters and liniments, then restart it as you did before.
And if it does not come to the limb of what we have said within three days or four or five or seven; and never leave it for twenty days, as we see, until the fractured part becomes straight, and approaches the proper position of the bone above;
then the splint is applied more than before, and the flesh increases in size, as I have said before;
and if you see the limb becoming too dry, there can be no healing; then apply a hot, wet cloth every time you remove the splint, and this should be done each day, and release the bandage a little;
For this work, therefore, cuts the broken bones in the limb, and quickly heals what the foolish people do, which twist the limb painfully:
It is evil, and this work is not worthy of praise, and I see no other thing than pain and doing it correctly.
Many kinds of fractures are, and various shapes, and the causes are distinguished;
because it has fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone is broken completely through the bone, which is outside the bone, as it is cut or broken; and for this reason, it is called by this name of fracture "haiture".
Where the spear pierces the bone from above, and is called by this name of fracture "absolute".
and is the wound of these two fractures great or small.
And if there is percussion from above, or cutting or from the neck of the spear, or to fall on the stone, or other similar things.
And if he has a broken bone that approaches the skin, which is outside the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if there is a wound that is set in the bone as thin as a hair, and is the fracture small, and for this reason, it is called by this name of fracture "capillary".
And if the wound that is made by being pierced by an arrow, or by falling, or by a similar thing, and makes the piece of the bone enter below, and is the threads like when they hammer nails into the kitchen ceiling when they hammer above. if between the stones inside.
And they have more in those who have or wet bones, as in children.
And they have all these ways of fracture that small pieces are removed as these. And I will speak about it in its place.
And we know all ways of breaking by pulling on them, and by the inspection of tented parts, and by the rotten flesh that is above.
The appearance of the hairy part is known because when the bone is exposed and rubbed with it, if there is an open black break.
In the treatment of the break, be careful of accidents of evil, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes to issue forth and redden, and other similar things in more dispositions, then it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see any obvious injury, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the fracture comes first to you, and it is in the bone, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day or you will not be able to.
And if it is in the soft tissue, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, provided that the skin over the bone is not rotten, and the injuries that we have mentioned occur.
And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the skin that covers the brain, then you must remove the broken part in this way:
and it is that you hold the head of the painful wound, and reveal under the bone in all ways that you can, and above the shape of the wound as soft as you can, and if blood comes to discover the bone, or abscess, help with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with moist linen cloths in rose oil. and let the wound rest until the abscesses are calm, and be sure of the cessation of bleeding; then begin around the bone to cut, and it is done according to the two methods of surgery:
one method is that you cut at a narrow incision in front, and it is this form:
Then make another cut larger than the first one.
and the second method is that you have many different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and made of iron outward;
and in working lightly, that you do not wound the head.
And if the tooth is very hard and firm, it is necessary that you first drill around it, as long as you have tools with tapers, not before it passes through the bone, and it should have above the point a margin or a circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
and you should have several, so that each one fits in its place of the bone's spine, so that you have tools for all teeth;
and this is the form of the three kinds of drills:
The quality for drilling around the bone is that you place the drill on the bone, and turn it to your right until you feel that the bone is drilled through;
then apply the sharp object on the other side a little later, and so do everything around, then carefully cut the space between the bones that is between the joints, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you remove the bone to your hand, or to any of the tools you have such as forceps, pincers.
and be careful not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and removed the bone, it is advisable to open the space that remains of the bone to all other tools similar to a scalpel, but it is necessary that it be more tenacious and more subtle than the other scalpel.
And if he does not remove any of the small bones or scales, gently remove them with the instruments. Then treat the wound with bandages and ointments that we have mentioned.
And the other method of work is as follows, which the Gauls mention, which is safer; and the loan is very strong, and that is its word. It is first necessary that you remove a part of the bone where the break is open, so that when you have exposed that part, you can place the lens shape of this eyelid, which is why it is shaped like this:
And do not cut a small piece, and it is the party age in two parts, so that the cutters are towards the bone;
then hold a small hammer above, so that you gently cut the bone all around, and be careful of the thread that is outside;
If it is against the bone, then gently, because one can harm it by force, and without fear.
And if the break in the bone does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove those sharpness, and to scrape off the scales with the fine razor that you should have various quantities of, to manage each limb in the most convenient way, according to the work and the shape of the break.
If before large razors, and then more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
In each of the other haircuts and delicate cuts, it is necessary to adjust according to its position.
And this is something that cannot be answered by him who has put his study in this art.
And if the wound is exposed, then it is necessary to apply a piece of linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and rub it with rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another piece of cloth doubled in two or three, and rub it with wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth. and do it more gently than you can, so as not to wound the sciatic nerve, then administer by above and another limb, and do not strain it until it stains the wound only.
and let it stay there for one or two days until the abscess is soothed, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, flour of mastich, frankincense powder, aristolochia, and similar things;
and of these things make a powder, and put on the wound, and administer common medicines without bitterness.
And ensure that the wound is clean, so do not leave any dirt on it, nor allow any pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the brain's surface, it causes great harm.
for when one places a sharp object on the wound, do not pull it out from above. If no accidents occur, as we have said, then it is doubtful without doubt.
And if there is no other remedy available except the one placed on the wound, then it is necessary to apply a piece of cloth soaked in honey, three parts of rose oil, and one part of gauze, and place it on the wound. Then the care of various cures that are suitable, until they are healed.
That sometimes both parts of the jawbone above are broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones.
And that one is cartilaginous and does not break easily, if it does not twist or dislocate, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must bend your little finger or thumb into the jawbone, and put the break inside your index finger, and at the pouch by default, until the jaw regains its natural shape. and do this carefully, and ensure that the hairs do not feel pain from your work.
And if the broken part is in the part above the nail, and cannot reach the finger, then it is necessary that you place it at the top of a small bone.
And if the fracture is of two parts, then make another, and hurry to restore the first one, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the abscesses have subsided, then apply a head bandage of linen cloths to the affected area, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you apply another on the other side, where the fracture is. and they should be thick enough to fill the gaps in the skull.
And no one said how to boil the tents in water, and to kill each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be pounded in the making of an ointment from egg yolk and powdered linseed. Then leave the tent, until the bones are iron and the cartilages hardened.
And never use feathers or goose down in place of tents, and if the patient has a headache, wrap it around, and hold the breaker, and blow the pains through. Or do what you have seen.
And if an abscess comes to the nose while you are working, put a piece of cotton or a cotton swab in rose oil or a drop of iodine.
And if there are no boils, put on plaster made of senna flour, and powdered frankincense, mixed with an ointment from egg yolk, then put on light bandages, and do not bind too tightly.
And if the bone of the nose is broken into small pieces, and it is broken into smaller pieces, then extract them with appropriate tools, then cut off the fracture, and the cure of things in jarring char, and suture, as emplastres and ointments suitable for it.
And if there is no wound in the nose, then the cure of tents, and put on bandages until it is healed.
When the jaw is fractured without an open wound, and the break is not complete but only partially, and it is not broken in two pieces, but rather bent inside, if one knows this clearly.
It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you bite your index finger into the wound; and if the fracture is in the left jaw, then bite your index finger of the right hand, and bite the fracture lightly inside, and press it with the other hand by default, and put even.
And if the break in the jaw is displaced in two pieces, it is necessary that you administer traction of two parts until it is even.
And if movements of the teeth occur, or fracture, then strain them with a gold or silver or silk thread, then place on the broken jawbone, and place over it a double cloth. And place over it a great well-made pad or a piece of evenly cut leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it to the muzzle so you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and give him light food.
And if you see that the shape changes, then release the animal from the trap, and then put it back in place what is changing. And apply plaster on it, with enough flour or semolina of wheat after you have removed the broken jawbone.
and place the lighter plaster on top of it, and if the plasters stick together, do not change the position of the injury, let it remain until it is healed. often heals in three weeks.
And if abscesses come, as we have said many times, apply what we have advised.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, stitch no part of the bone that is broken; so subtly from the bone as to avoid instruments of evil.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it as needed by fire.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is none left, clean the wound if it is wide, and apply uncovenable plasters to that end, to stop bleeding until they are healed.
The shoulder is broken more than once in front and behind, and the fracture is in three ways:
or it is broken and disjointed in two, and there are pieces, and it is the least difficult to restore;
where there has been a break with wound.
And the work if it is regarding the break with wound, that you have two assistants, one of whom feels the force of the broken bone; and the other extends the neck towards the affected part;
then set the break to your two, so that it is as it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
And if you have to extend further, put a round, padded shoulder cushion of cloth or other material, and it should be large according to your need; and hold the shoulder steady, and hold the bone in your hand, so that you can set the fracture properly, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder downwards, because it comes out in front, then it is necessary that the painful parts be gently moved up and down over their place, and place something under the shoulder, a moderately sized earthenware jar, and push up the shoulder until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then apply your fingers to the fracture, and if you feel any movement, it is necessary that you cut through it.
and carefully trim the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined for any reason, then use one of the instruments you have. but do not use this instrument on the shoulder to guard against infection:
and it resembles a spoon, and is not very sharp, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the workman.
And say "Two shoulder blades, one broad and the other narrow, as you see, and like the edge of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
And when you are sure of the abscess, if the wound is large, and if the edge is small, or if you doubt the abscess, use the wound with cloths and tents according to its size.
And if an abscess comes, if it is heated, soak the cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put it on.
The straining of the bone, when it is painful and when it is cut, is that you place above the bone the plaster of the mill powder and some salt, and put light dressings on it, and put a needle outside the wound, if you have the skill; Then take a very large bandage from the palm of your hand in width, then put it double over the wound and the plaster; then take a thin strip of three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage is hanging down; and put the strip across the broken bone, and wrap the bandage over the neck, and unbind the healthy side, and unbind the injured side; and reset each part, and when you see that the bandage is holding the broken bone evenly, and you see clearly that the strip does not move over the broken bone, then rewrap it every day, and when the bandages are loosened, then restrain them;
Let the misaligned limb lie on its back, and place a small pebble under the joint when it is asleep to help lift the dislocation. If the fracture of the humerus is aligned by the alignment of the shoulder, or if you bind the arm to the neck, and the dislocation does not return within 20 days.
Then restart the splint if you see that there is still a need, and hold it in place until it is fully restored.
It is restored within 28 days, and less for some people.
of the shoulder fracture
It rarely happens that the shoulder breaks or is dislocated from its place, and it only occurs when it is touched.
if the shoulder bone according to the figure of the break, and the joint is reset according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
then put on the limb powder from the mill with plenty of egg, and light bandages, and put it on a double cloth. then put on a wide and thin splint, a little larger than the shoulder, and see that the splint does not touch any part of the shoulder, so use the hair of bandages of linen, so that the splint is evenly soaked.
and then restrain it with a strong, tight bandage, so that the dislocated joint does not move from its place, and look at each joint every day.
and whenever it is dislocated again, restrain and straighten it if it is out of its place, and press the painful parts against its side.
and the shoulder is restored in 20 or 25 days.
And when these numbers are completed, if it dislocates again, and be careful, for it is not bones that move lightly.
And if a piece of the bone is sticking out before, and not removed immediately, then cutting it off, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the mallet to relieve an abscess.
of the breaking of the hammer
The bone is never broken in the middle, but this rarely happens. but it often breaks again.
And when it is broken in the middle, it leans to one side, and the patient feels great pain, and there is no relief, and everything, and possibly vomiting blood, and the jaw is open in the broken bone, and the patient feels very ill.
And the restoration is that the misaligned bones are often pushed back into place above their own position, and the shoulder is placed between the shoulder blades, then the shoulders are pressed, and the ribs of the two ribcages are held in your hands, and subtly put back into all the positions you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then put plasters and wet cloths above the broken bone of salt, or another light one, and wrap it in a bandage, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; And turn the joint roundly to the back, and steadily press, and warm every hour the book, and if it dislocates again, press.
And if it is necessary to remove, for corrosion or for pruritus that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, then hurry and remove it, and apply the ointment, and address what has come from methods of treatment.
Then reset the ointment, and press until it is healed.
of rib fractures
Know that the breaker of ribs comes only in the large ones after the back, and at the top inside, and does not break unless because they are brittle. and the smell is not good at the incision.
And the treatment is that you set the fracture as it should be. Then apply the plaster and splint it with a splint, if you know how to do so.
And if the ribs are broken and displaced inward, the pain is very great, and pointed, like that of tears, because the bones pierce the flesh. And there is a lot of blood, and everything is swollen, and there is great pain, and the old ones put great effort into it.
And for those who say it is necessary to administer foods that swell the stomach, to push the broken bone out of place.
We do not make this mistake, unless there is no pus if it has not come. And if it has come, then cleanse it.
And they said none of those who put suction cups on the limb, to draw out evil, and that is similar to reason. However, doubt and because the suction cup does not draw out the excess from the limb due to its weakness.
And they said that no one should cover the limb with linen dipped in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to even out the lung around it, then treat the care of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
And if the pain is great that he cannot bear it due to the bone that does not support it, and there is doubt, then you must cut above the broken rib on the side, and you must place a remedy to protect the wound.
and then you must drill the bone, and gently pull it out, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if abscesses come from the feet, then place moistened linen cloths on red oil, and put on the limb.
et cure while the limb that is necessary for an abscess, and let it lie flat on its side or as it should be, until it is healed.
and also in the spine of the back.
And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you touch them with a needle, they do not feel it.
It is often deadly in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when you press on them, but not when you do not, it means that the joint of the bone is saved, and the pains are healed, if they are treated.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, take notice if the feet are soft, and if the accidents that are in hand are as they should be, and on the back there is a sensation of emptiness and evacuation without volition;
And when placed on their back, they involuntarily expel feces. And when it is laid on its back and it wants to sit up, it cannot. It is deadly: If not treated properly.
And if this accident does not come to it, then the thing is less serious.
And the treatment is to reward if there is an abscess that is very painful, and put oil of rose or chicken grease on it, until it is soothed.
Then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bandage it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that side where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
And if any bone becomes dry, it is necessary to cover it with oil. And then crush the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, at a seam, then apply the healing ointment with charcoal, until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture is called "the key of the knee", then take your fist with your right hand and place it evenly on the other hand to your power, then apply the plaster and the splint, if you have skill.
Then strap it, and if there is a dry bone, then crush it and the bone, and heal the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the ribs in the back
It rarely happens that the ribs of the back are broken, and if it does, it is not due to a slight decrease in the neck. And making it long, and inclining to the side, and coming to the bone, causing pain, swelling, and inflammation where it is broken.
And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over, as high as the fractured part. And saws off what is broken and its shape.
And if the break is only at the head, then put it back in place until it is in its natural shape.
And if the fracture is long, or it inclines inward, then make the patient lie on their back until the healing of this fracture is complete. And when you have set it even, place the ointment on top, then place a splint of wood or cloth, and hold the broken part still so it does not move.
and apply pressure to the sides until the bone is even. And instruct the patient to sleep on their side or on their back.
And if an abscess forms and comes, do not touch it until the abscess is calmed down, and then follow what we have previously said. and then return to the resetting, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident.
of the shoulder dislocation
The assistants are what is between the neck and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of the two methods:
one is that you take a piece of gristle, in this form:
and tie the two ends to the two joints, and let them hang up high, and cut off the evil above the seat;
then pour the broken arm over the stump, until it comes to ease, and has in its midst a piece of wood, then let it hang over any heavy thing or the assistant extends it down;
Then place the broken bones evenly in the hands together, until the broken bone returns as it should.
And the other method is that one should prick the hairs above their temple, and then hold the patient's hand on their collarbone, then command two ministers to have one tug on the part that is above the broken bone at their hands, and the other tug outside of everything, and stretch each one to their part.
And if you see that the extraction is too far, then hold the patient's limb outside of everything, and above the broken bone, and stretch each one of the ministers to their part.
And if the broken bone is near the top of the shoulder, it is necessary to place the middle bone away from the shoulder, and the other towards the back, away from the broken bone;
And similarly, if the broken bone is towards the back, it is necessary to place the middle bone gently, with effort, until the broken bone is even on the shoulder, and on the back;
Then place the break evenly, as it should be, and hold it still, if there are no complications.
And if an abscess comes, do not hold it for less than seven days, and put milk and red oil on it until the abscess is soothed.
then hold it, and the way to hold it is that you put the plaster on the broken part, then bring the arm up with the shoulder joint, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest.
and put the bandage, and hold it with the shoulder joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone does not move.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place a wider and stronger splint on the fracture, and have two inches of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes three fingers on each side.
Then strain against the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter, more strongly and less in pulling them away.
And if you see the position of the splints and the straining, as we have said in the chapter where you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is healed, leave it to be tied after seven days, as we have said.
then examine every three days the joint that itches and does not come to the skin, or the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight. If as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, then wait for three days or more, and let the pain lie on his back, and have his hands on his stomach;
and put a bandage of flax evenly on the dislocation, and examine every hour of the day or night, that the appearance of the limb does not move, or the joints are not softened;
if the pain increases by the power of medicine, and the meat that we have put before, in such a way that the meat is at the first subtle; When he begins to recover, if he is large.
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset in 10 days after all. And then you must apply ointments and medicines to the limb to promote healing.
If its structure is ugly and swollen, it may take 1 month or 2 months to reset.
of the break of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, called the "humerus" and radius, one of which is smaller and is the one that forms the elbow.
And the other is larger and is the one that is outside, next to the small one.
Perhaps the large bone is broken alone, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing.
And when the large bones are broken, the healing is poor, and more painful than when they are broken together.
If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it should be slightly extended and aligned.
And if it is the large bone, then it must be stretched more forcefully;
and extend it over the cushion, and tuck the palm of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the pains cross each other over themselves, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the pains suffer no labor.
then extend the assistants one arm to the part below their hand, or to their elbow, and other assistants to the other above.
And then he puts the mirror evenly, according to its best form.
And if it breaks into pieces, put each in its place, and if there is no way to hold the bone together, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before.
And if with the bleeder, I have spoken of it in the chapter alone; if take care.
And if in the beginning of restoration there are abscesses, then use the cloth of cerate made of red oil and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft; and tie the cloth gently, until the abscesses are soothed.
And then remove the cerate, and put the poultice of flour from the mill with plenty of honey, then put the stars, and let the star of the bleeder stick more outside, and a little wider than the others;
and it should have six or more arms in many positions: whether the breaker is in one of the bones, or in two:
and held above the breaker more than on the other side, and always less in moving away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter: and let the cloths that are above the breaker be soft and moist, and not too hard or sharp:
and let the cloths that are above the breaker be soft and moist, and not too hard or sharp: and let the thread that it is held with be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Reward the member and the limb after some days. And if any evil accident comes to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you must raise the member in hot water, until those itching are appeased:
and allow the limb to remain at ease.
Then restart the restriction, and if the limb is broken and the bones are dislocated, and similar things, then advise.
And if the bruises cannot come to the limb, because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little, and leave it like that for some days, until the bruises have healed, and then restrict.
If none of these things we have said come to pass, then do not delay in seeking help for up to 20 days.
or apply it around, then place his hands on his neck, and make his neck even, and avoid movement and jarring, and sleep on his back;
and that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and constitutions of its virtues.
of the broken hand
Wait until the back of the hand and as we have said before, there are few fractures, and it does not come but many times.
And when the bone of the hand is broken or crushed, it is necessary that the hairs be cut straight and evenly in front of him.
then place his hand on the extended palm, and extend the bones broken by the minister, and put them evenly in their places until they are well joined.
and apply the plaster and bandages, if there are no abscesses, then put an estele according to the amount of the limb; and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the fracture is at the parched ends within the sole of the foot, then make a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to press it against their broken foot. Then strain it with a long cloth, and let the estele of cow's udder be as large as the palm of the hand, and strain it as needed.
And if the fracture is in the forearm, it is necessary to place one splint above and another below the hand, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it completely around the arm, and stitch the ligament between the two.
And if the fracture comes to any of the other fingers, if it is the thumb, then put it evenly, as needed. and the restriction with the plant, and if you see that put a straight small stake to lift the broken part, and it does not move.
and if the broken part is like other joints, such as the index or another, then put it even, and tie it with the healthy joint that is next. or you tie them all together, as much as possible, or you put on a stake, like a splint.
and take care in the restoration and in the positioning of abscesses, and support what comes to it, as I have said.
The jaws of the mouth are often broken, and well seen when it returns in front and behind.
and the restoration is when one joint is placed above the broken part, and the other below. And the bones are set back into place, then each minister attaches their joint to its equal part evenly.
and this is when the break is placed in the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the rib cage, then one of the ribs should be on top of the other, and the other ribs outside the broken part.
And if it is near the hip, and then the joints below the hip are stretched downwards.
then place the bone equally in both hands, as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and bandage, and if there are no complications, it will heal.
And if there is an abscess, let it calm down first, then return to your work and care. The leech is made in this way.
It is necessary to wrap the broken bone in a bandage doubled over two or three times, and leave the excess, then bend the leg until the toes reach the root of the heel, and insert a long thread between the calf and the leg, below the knee joint, and bring the end of the thread to the top.
Then bend over the leg and the calf, then place the bandage on the broken bone, and place a splint on the bone of the leg.
Then place the patient's leg between soft cloths to maintain equal traction, then begin to twist about three or four times over the fractured bone. And as you go higher than the fracture, and lessen the traction.
Then bring the two ends of the rope that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and tie three knots on top, then return to the other end of the rope, until you come over the knee.
And maintain the traction, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then when there is no infection or swelling or any other sign. And if it has happened, then dislocate, and straighten what comes, as we have said many times.
and if there are pieces of bone that can be felt, then try to put them back if possible. and if it cannot be put back, then cut the limb and draw out the bone. and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And never break the ribs in such a way that they are put back, as in the dislocation and shoulder.
Nevertheless, in this restoration made thus, it does not hurt the patient.
And it is said that the bone is restored at different times, according to the variety of constitutions.
It is said that in the way of the gentleman, there is little breakage, but it often weeps.
And if it breaks, it is only a small cut, or a puncture, and it has to all wounds, and without wound, and it feels good.
And the restoration is when one puts back together what was broken to its proper place, as much as it can be assembled when it is put together.
Then apply the poultice, and if you have skill, use a round bandage, and treat it as it should be, then warm all the arrangements that we have said in other broken things, such as abscesses and similar things. And for each accident, put what it needs, until it is healed.
of the broken leg
Be aware that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "non-mustelz", and the other is called "foscile".
And it can break in any direction as it comes to the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all there. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg from all parts returns.
And if the small bones are broken, then it heals in front.
And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly. And it returns disjointed.
Therefore, first relieve the extension, and put it back in place, and tie the tendons equally;
but anyway, it is necessary that the broken part be straight, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is less and lighter. and the herb according to its virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take four strips of cloth that encircle the leg on one side and the other, and be long from the knee to the groin on both sides.
Then wrap the four strips of cloth above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this point it will not allow the leg to bend to the right or left, and thus it is good.
And no one administers the long strip of cloth down the leg, and it is made of flax, and place the leg to prevent movement, and properly made, one puts it in the break or where there is a wound.
And move each leg daily to see if there is an abscess or other accident. if the healer is healthy.
of bone fractures
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but of bone fractures, it never comes and it is rare, and there are no other dispositions except for a slight bruise in some cases.
And if he has broken bones, and you see the bones over each other, if you put your foot on the ground like it wants to walk, then put your foot on his, where the bones are lifted, then press until they return to their place.
Then put the poultice and soak above the foot, and put a small tablespoon of the remedy on the sole of the foot, then strap it to the foot evenly, then wrap bandages around it and other things you know how to do.
And when three or four days have passed, if you relocate the joint, you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
If there are any of the two broken, restore them as we have said about the two fingers; then place the broken one on the length of the other, and make it a bit wider, then place the bone in the hole that I mentioned, and strain it evenly;
and if there are two or three or more broken, place each one on the length of the other, wrapped in a piece of linen, and strain the hole from outside the bone; and make sure it is on the top of the table away from the belly of the bone, so that it heals well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have mentioned. and treat each accident as it should be.
of the fracture of the finger bone
When the jaw of a woman is broken, if the fracture is enlarged, then incline it to the side of the neck, and hold it in place from behind.
Then fill the hollow of the jaw with cotton, and put in as much as you can.
Then raise the woman, and slowly lift her back, and then quickly remove the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the jaw, and the bone returns with the cotton.
When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, return it, and thus do this for seven days or so. If she is healed from the fracture, and if you see, take a catheter of birch, and tie a string to the handle, and fill the entire catheter with urine in its natural state. Then blow into the string until the catheter is empty inside. The natural state will return to the fracture.
Then it should be filled with cotton and left in this way for some days until it is healed.
And when the tooth of the little finger of the hand is broken, or of the woman, if it is reset as we have said in the bone of the shoulder;
and these fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and his use to it, and listens to my book.
For the fracture signifies many positions of the right way of resetting: therefore understand it.
In the finger, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert the finger; then wrap it with cloths, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
of broken with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a broken bone with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the ribs or shoulder or similar, that they be cleansed immediately, so that the cleansings that we have mentioned bear witness.
And if the wound is clean, and if the wound is dressed with vitriol, if you have no other means, then begin to restore the broken bone in the same hour or the next day, before the wound becomes infected.
And if the wound becomes infected, then leave the restoration until the next day, until the infection is calmed, and do not touch it on the following day or the fourth, for you will bring about bad events.
And if the teeth are broken and appear above the gum line, it is necessary that you gently place them in your hands, with slight extension.
And if you are not able to equalize your hands with this extension tool, which is made of iron and has seven or eight inches of length, and the width is according to the amount of the wound. and because it is necessary for the mirror to take three or four, according to how much it has in each fracture treatment.
and it should be round and slightly thick, so that it does not press too much on the member at your work, and it should be thin behind, and thick in the middle in front, thus:
And it is called "palainche", because it should be placed on the top of the head of the visible bone. and the cup is once, as much as it can, evenly placed against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone until the instruments have hold.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then use an appropriate instrument for this purpose, such as a saw or scissors, to your ability;
then cut away what is remaining in the bone of harshness and small scratches.
And when the bone is returned to its place, and the pain is great afterwards, advise that it not remain in its natural position.
If you do this until it is in its place, then wipe off the blood with black vinegar wine, and properly if it was in this state; and do not place anything on the wound except for cerate or other things where there is oil, that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption;
then administer these ointments when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover the dressing all around, according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not pressed with the break.
and many times have done this by the foolish man, and brought the pain or death or corrosion never. and let the astringents be softer and more gentle than other wounds.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt whether a bad accident has not occurred, as we have said, and you relieve pain to the limb, then it does not matter to put on ointments. but around, in place of stones, hard cloths, and bind them.
And when you see after an hour or two that the bleeding has stopped, remove what you have placed on top of everything, and put healing ointment on the wound, such as quadruple antifarmacological ointment and similar.
And it is necessary to clean the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is sound and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limbs be aligned in such a way that the bow can move freely.
And if they continue to exceed, and it cannot be sutured but remains dislocated, there are small pieces of bone, so it is necessary that you tear the wound with a tent, and remove all those unnecessary pieces that cause that pain.
And if a fistula comes to the limb, or another way of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what it says in its chapter before.
And when the bone is broken and open above the member, like the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large members, do not pull it out, for many times it causes death, but let it be until it can be fixed.
perhaps it will fall out by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can.
and if you cannot, leave it.
Many times after the healing of the broken bone, specifically when it is near the joint, and the unpleasant thing is to see the shape of the member. And by chance, cannot do their natural works.
Take then, since it is fresh: If you administer medicines that are styptics, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocollis, acacia, and similar others, in such a way that you take any of these things or all together, and mix them with stypic wine or abundantly with honey or vinegar; and put them on the tooth in a syringe, and hold it tightly, and do not let it out in your hands afterwards;
and put them on the tooth in a syringe, and hold it tightly, and do not let it out in your hands afterwards; and then remove it, and start another one until the swelling is gone;
and you hold steady above a flat piece of stone well made; for the property of stone is that it removes all swelling from above the limbs;
and if its dislocation has already become hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then the cover above, and make the excess apparent; or you cut it with any knife until it is removed, and the care until it is healed.
a weak limb that is after the garrison
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains after the limbs are weak and delicate, for many reasons: because it was tied too tightly, and not tied as it should have been; For because there were too many ligaments, and it could not come to the member's movements. For due to the multitude of swelling. For due to too great movements, not in its hour. For because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the hairs lie down, and make the body tense, until the blood is not multiplied in it. and give it a bath, and give it joy and ease.
Then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts to the great movement, and the swelling often of sharp pain, until the movement corrects the member. And return to its natural shape.
a dislocated limb after healing When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the form of the member is misshapen, nevertheless, it does not lose its original work.
If one does not believe the people who say that one must break the member entirely in two, and many have done this in our land;
and these works are condemned, and great harm comes from them, and perhaps the death of the patient.
Nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be warmed with hot water, or mollifying herbs be boiled, such as valerian, and roots, and meadowsweet, and similar things;
and the physician applies a softening plaster, such as fresh lime, and takes the muscle of the shoulder, and cooks it with goose fat or castor oil, and makes a plaster on top.
and takes figs fat, and grinds them with flax seed, and similar medicines that soothe the pain.
And never is it necessary to apply continuous and prolonged pressure with wet hands on a dislocation. And you should allow movement to the limb every hour.
And if the distortion is awakened and hardened, like stone, and there is a need to remove it with iron, so that it covers the bone, at the incision slightly subtle. and place a bandage and apply pressure in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, it must now be returned to its proper place.
For if it is delayed, the shoulder swells, and if by chance it is reset, it may become stiff.
Therefore, it is not advisable to move the shoulder when it is swollen: many times causing pain and other injuries.
Anyway, when it happens, if the dislocation is corrected, then let it rest until the inflammation is calmed.
Then raise the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and care for each member as it will heal in its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations of the shoulder joint from the elbow to the fingers.
It is rare that the mandibles are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both jaws occurs in two ways: ou they are a little bit hardened from their heads, and softened a little bit; or they are entirely dislocated, and hang downwards, and the saliva from the mouth that it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it often returns to its place in many positions.
And if it is entirely and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay;
and in such a way that the minister wets the head of the painful part, and pushes the finger slightly from one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two fingers should be missing, for it to be even.
and instruct the patient to let the jaws relax, and move them from all sides. And the fingers push evenly until it returns to its place.
And if it is grinding, immediately if they are both lower jaws together, then apply hot and oily cloths, until it is slightly loosened.
do not wait too long to reset it, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed to soften it, then put on moistened cloths made of a red wax and wax, then tie it lightly with soft bands.
and let the dislocated limb rest on its back, and its joints should be between two blankets, so that it does not move to the right or left, nor does it try to move, but take light food, until the pains are removed, and the jaws are closed;
and then feed him what he wants lightly, and does not try to open his mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well closed and healthy.
If the two mandibles cannot be reset to their proper place within an hour and are not converted to their original position, then fevers and sweating become customary, and possibly diarrhea, and possibly vomiting of black bile.
And when you see this, then cut it off, as it is fatal; and many times those who have it die in seven days.
The forceps cannot be used from the side without continuing to the other side and the worst part, and it is not reset once dislocated, and it is well felt.
And for the restoration, it is such that the hairs lie quietly on their backs, and extend their arms; then press the limb firmly to your palm, and it will return;
then place the poultice and bandage, and hold it in place;
and the one who is behind the neck cannot evacuate; if not, and if it ever evacuates, then reset it as we have said;
then place the poultice and bandage, hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is healed.
and thus the dislocated shoulder is returned to its place, when it is separated from its joint.
of shoulder dislocation
There are three ways in which the shoulder is not dislocated:
because one way is that it dislocates to the side of the shoulder blade. and the second is at the back of the shoulder. and sometimes dislocates above, and this happens rarely.
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves.
and it often dislocates to the side of the shoulder blade, especially those who have little fat, because to these it dislocates easily.
To those who have enough courage, he leaps forward, and returns forward.
And sometimes it happens to some men, a blow or a fracture, and the shoulder swells with an abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Therefore, you must first test him until you are certain. Then begin the treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it is pulled down towards the shoulder, and it differs between the injured shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear difference. And you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and desoz from the shoulder to the toucher the top of the shoulder, as if it were an elbow; and cannot move his hand to his nose, nor move from any movement.
And thus, if it is dislocated at the top, it is not hidden, for you can see it clearly in the touch.
And this method of dislocation is only to be used when it is new, or if the joint is injured.
And the method is that the caregiver lightly grasps the injured joint at the top, then places their fingers outside the socket, and forces the joint back into place from above. And the caregiver lightly grasps and extends their hand, then places it outside. If it comes out quickly.
And if it does not come out as we have said earlier, then it is necessary to soak the injured joint in hot, acidic water. and the softening and soothing ointment, such as the decoction of mallow and fenugreek and melilot in vinegar, and it is applied.
then the hairs are shaved over their back, and a cloth strip of equal length is placed under the shoulder, not too thick or too thin, then the patient's foot is placed on the strip, and the shoulder is gently lifted, and the hand of the patient is pulled.
and other assistants shave the head of the patient, so that it does not move down. that shoulder is now whole, and if you see if the reset is done in this way:
and you must make sure to have someone who is bigger than the pain. and should be on the side of the chest, and below the shoulder away from the pain, and lift the shoulder high, so that the pain hangs in the arm. and other assistants pull the hand towards the belly. If the pain is too light, it can move with anything heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And it is also reset in another way:
and it is that you place a long stick in the ground, which the patient should also hold like a staff, and not too heavy or rough. then it should be placed away from the pain, but with soft cloth above, and the pain should be on the long end of the stick.
Then extend your hand to the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then perform this treatment: Take a bandage of two arms in width and four fingers in length, which has the head bent to allow it to enter into the opening behind the shoulder, in this form:
Then tie it above the head with a soft cloth that does not cause pain to the injury, then remove it from behind the shoulder.
Extend the arm above the cloth, and tie the injury with the cloth, and the arm at the top of the hand, then place the arm over one of the blades of a pair of scissors, and extend the hand below, and let the body hang on the other side: The joint is still present now.
And when it is healed in any way, it is necessary to place a soft cloth under the shoulder, then apply the plaster evenly with powder from the mill, with incense and a little honey, over the entire shoulder and around, then remove it from under the shoulder gradually, and return the limb to the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is better that he move little, until the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster.
Then move more after three or four days, and move it. And if it is stiff and not made flexible, it is healed.
And if the joint is strong from moisture that has come, or for another reason, then it is necessary to administer cautery at three points, as it is placed in front or in the chapter of cautery.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot be raised to the shoulder, then cut the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened. And cut that the joint will never again fit in its place.
The dislocation that is behind the shoulder and the buttocks, or behind, is caused by impact and stretching of the hands, and there is another remedy administered.
and it is treated until it is healed.
And if after healing the member becomes stiff and does not move, then use the hairs many times in a bath until that stiffness is relieved and returns to its original state.
of the shoulder dislocation
That the joint that hurts at the point is dislocated and returns.
And it has been dislocated from all parts, and simultaneously in front and behind, and the dislocation is not yet healed, because one can see it well and feel it well. And it dislocates according to each shape. And when you join the dislocated shoulder with its healthy counterpart, ensure the patient can see clearly. For the joint is sore, and it cannot bear the weight of the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary to reset it as soon as the pain comes, because if the pain comes and goes, it would be painful to reset.
And by chance it cannot be reset entirely, especially when it is at the back. It is worse than other dislocations, and causes more great pain, and sometimes it kills the patient.
And the resetting, when it is possible to reset it, is that you extend your hand to both of yours. And its arms are spread, and the hands on both sides of the shoulder, in and out, and push the joint towards its pits, or to the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and holds the root of the palm which is misaligned.
And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong extension.
and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they tie it with two ministers, so that it does not move during extension.
then turn the arm from every part, then that you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth;
and when the patient sees the joint at their hand, if there is any oil to soften the joint, then rub the joint gently until it returns;
and when it is in place, put above the dry plaster with some wool, and let it rest, and put the arm on the back of the bad, and leave it for some time, then remove it.
And if the joint is firmly in its place, let it rest;
and if you see that the joint is not healing well, restart the bandage and the limb, and let it rest thus for some time, until it is firmly placed; then let it rest.
and if it feels gritty after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved; or you put a thick woolen grease on the joint, then let it rest for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter into a bath; And when it moves, rub the joint immediately, then reset the bone, and then give a bath. And thus do it twice or three times until it is healed.
And if you see, then place warm moist flour with butter on top, and strain it.
It will return to its proper position.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is loose, and the return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it should be returned to its place immediately, in the same manner as it is dislocated, provided that the muscles are inflamed or there is an abscess forming.
And when recalling, it is that you place your hand on the affected area, and extend the minister's hand, and the patient's hand is placed evenly, so that he places his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
In any case, you must check if it is properly reset. Then place your hand on the back of his hand on the table for extension and recalling. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's back of their hand on the table, and the other person puts their hand over the appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, it is good. If not, apply soothing counter-irritants and let it rest before starting again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some time, then the joint will remain twisted.
and will not heal without pain until the hand is washed, and nothing can be strained at all. Therefore, if the nerve is cut or the artery:
then there is no other remedy but to cauterize the wound with fire, and perhaps nothing else will help.
And when the hand is in place, put the plaster we have mentioned above it, then tighten and leave it for five days, then remove and leave it like this.
And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no pain, then apply hot water and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the two fingers
Never dislocate both fingers at once, never at the back of the palm or on the wrist.
then the two shoulders, and push the dislocation with your hands until it returns, then support the head of the shoulder, and push it towards the part where it is disjointed.
and let it rest for two days, and then put it back in place.
and bind it with a bandage as we have said, and the dislocation of the day, and the movement, and the binding.
and do this often, until it is straight, and everything else do the same, if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed.
and do the same when it is dislocated on the other side.
back pain from the curvature of the spine
When the curvature of the spine or neck is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, for the patient dies from the pain.
And the signs are such that the dislocation suddenly moves out of place, and it cannot be held, and often soften any limb, or both elbows or the two arms or one.
And often the shoulder moves at an angle of four parts;
which is called "glenohumeral" if it moves to the back.
The cure is that you reward the glenohumeral if it has come from childhood. if there is no cure or healing until now.
And those that come from falling or from blows or similar things, they said the old ways of healing with great words, which did not help much at all.
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have made instruments in various ways.
I say that in the globules which come before the worst, there is no remedy or health.
and also those that come directly in the second rib, and one cannot cure except for that proper one which comes to the back, as I say.
and it is that the pain should be extended over his face in one even line, and he should have some strain away from him, so he does not bleed.
then apply the following bandages to the head in earth-colored cloth, and the other on the feet, and tie a bandage around the leg without the painful area, and the other on the back, and hips, and knees, and ankles.
and two ministers tie the bandages, one on the head and the other on the feet, among the two bandages.
and they should be well tied, the bandage as we have said, and the minister places his palms on the spine, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this treatment, take a traction table of three arms long, and turn the painful area away from it, and the painful areas should be on the side, and press the head of the table away from the painful area, then place the middle of the table on the spine. and place the patient's feet on the other shoulder of the table, and press well until it returns to its place.
and if you see, do it to the thumb that turns to the hand. And it is that you fix two ropes at the head of the dislocated arm of a strong person, and on each side of the feet, and between each rope, outside and inside, a long span of distance.
and let there be in each rope one knot, where the thumb is straight, and the ropes are firmly on the ground, so that they do not move.
and between each two ropes, let there be one rope turning, around which the thumb turns, and in the two turnings, two small ropes of a long span, to turn the thumb.
Then tie the ligament that is among the tendons at the top of the shoulder, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other end, and each of the ministers turns its end to all the ligament, and the masters put the spine evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, put a drying plaster with abundant sulfur on top, then the dressings, and then the splint of a tablet of three fingers in length, which preserves the shoulder from the disease and the part of the spine healthy, then tie it with a ligament, as we have said, and use the subtle bandages until they are healed.
and if no remedy comes at the end of the illness, then one must administer medicines that are soothing and stimulating, with the advice we have given before. and never administer a piece of lead, and never appear in the back of the spine, and be careful that it is not a dislocation. and it is the bones that are open, for which we should not have any presumption: by chance it would bring death.
It should be noted that the joints of the waist and the joints of the shoulder come only from dislocations alone, and not like other joints.
and the hip joint is dislocated in four parts: forward and backward;
and more inwardly than that, and slightly dislocated forward and backward.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inward is such that when the misaligned leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and more open than the healthy ones, and the misaligned cannot double over at the fire; and it is the thighs that are inflamed with abscesses, for the reason that the patient has lain there.
And the sign of those who come after is that this accident is contrary to what has been mentioned before.
And the signs of those who have it in front are that they keep their leg well aligned according to the completion; Throughout, do not double the angle of the joint with pain, and if they wish to move it, if they cannot, and retain their urine, and swell the wound, and when they go, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of those who come after are that they cannot spread their knee, nor double over, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the anger is softened, and they have a pain in the ribs on the side.
The removal of this similar dislocation is that you reset it if it is old, and it stays according to its nature, without any treatment. And there is no need for it to have pride.
And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of four kinds of dislocation, you must hurry to return the joint, and extend it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left. If by chance it returns, and there is no other treatment needed.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply forceful treatment, and extend the leg firmly at two fingers, or at one joint that is connected to the thigh. And other treatments extend their hand above in this manner that they push their hands away from their armpits, then squeeze a cloth connected to the belly. And other treatments grip the head of the joint.
And they extend above and below at once, until the pain is raised from the ground once and remains hanging.
This method of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then you must put care to its appearance.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you must first support the misaligned arm on its sound side, then place the bone over the root of the shoulder blade, and the limb that is outside the arm, then extend the bone upwards towards the arm and the collarbone;
then take other assistants to hold his arms, and grasp the large bone of the misaligned shoulder blade, and extend it behind him in a proper manner; if it returns to its place now.
and this method of dislocation is less painful than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary to bind the two affected feet together with a strong silk rope above the two heels, and above the two ankles, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then it should be hung from the head of a stick, and suspended above the ground two arms' length.
Then command the surgeon to grasp the neck of the wound, and have other surgeons hang with the affected leg, who grasp the wound properly, as the joint is now healing quickly.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder, if the hairs are pricked as we mentioned in the case of gout, and the joint is held steady above the misaligned leg properly, and also above the foot.
Then apply two bandages, one at the top and the other at the foot, then fold the bandage between the thighs over the misaligned area. And place wet cloths around, so it does not become dry, then stretch each helper towards him, and the mirror put equal to his hand, the dislocation.
If it returns, it's good.
If not, place it on the flat surface, and press as we have described in the grease, and cut the hairs off the sound side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the misaligned leg quickly, as I have said. and places the fingers' pain above the bad joint, then presses with the other hand, and stretches it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is on the other side, it does not require extending the bad joint downwards, nor lifting up towards the earth, but it should be as it was when it was dislocated on the other side, as we have said of the position of the two shoulders; and it should be on its face, and the arm extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be in place when the bad joint extends its legs, and they will be even; Then apply heat to the knees, and put on the ointment, and wrap it in a bandage, so that it does not move. And rests for three or four days, then reset it, and put on the ointment.
And if you see that they are even, tighten the bandage as before, and leave it for three days.
Then reset it, and make the limb move well, until the member is comfortable.
of the shoulder dislocation
The knees are dislocated in three ways: That is to say, from the inside and outside, and behind.
and do not dislocate again before.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if they cannot straighten it at the knee, then they are dislocated.
And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, extend their leg if they can, and put your back against their face, and put their foot on your feet.
Then take their knee to your palms, and pull it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee correctly. And other ministers extend their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that they can straighten their leg lightly at the knee.
and apply the plaster on it, and let the leg cool down at the thigh, and leave them together for three hours or four, then release it.
and do not work the hairs too much until the limb is comfortable.
And if the limbs are not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the back, until they are healed.
of the dislocated ankle
The ankles are never bruised and never fully dislocated, neither inside nor outside.
And if the signs are that the joint is dislocated, and test before to the part where it is displaced:
the return is light, and one should gently extend it to his hands when it is only slightly sore.
And when it is displaced too soon, then you should make the hairs straight, and hold it with one hand at the leg, above the knee;
then draw the knife towards yourself with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and strike the knife forcefully against the top.
and do this twice, as we have said, by striking and drawing the knife.
if it returns, it is good.
if not, if you start the work again, it will return.
and if it cannot return in this way, then lay the limb on its back on the ground, and insert a firm splint between its ribs, and wrap bandages around it, so that it does not bend the limb.
then the minister applies the poultice to the back, and other ministers extend the bandage over his hands or arms, so that it covers his neck. then each minister stretches evenly, and the bandages are placed between the fingers to hold the fingers in place as they stretch.
then the minister places the injured hand evenly on the dislocated joint, and other ministers apply a poultice to the healthy leg at the same time, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it has reached its point, if the plaster is applied and poultice is placed over it, and the bandage forms, and the bandage is tied to the leg, and the tendons that are above the ankle behind are warded off, so that the joints are not too stretched.
then leave it for two days or three, and if its joints are not strong enough, then strain it.
then reset it on the third day or fourth, and let it heal for four days; and if it moves before that time, then it is certain that it will dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes, it is necessary to treat it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
for two When the two are dislocated, if they should be extended evenly with work, it is a simple matter.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the body, then it is necessary to sit the patient on a flat surface or table, and place your hand over the joints, then press firmly until it returns.
and when it is even and there is no opening, then place the back of your hand on a flat surface, strain it firmly, leave it for three days, then reset it. And let him rest until he is well.
of wounds and of dislocations together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often times the patient dies from the pain:
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, and if you are not wise in the art and have not used it long, and if you are not merciful and slow to act, then do not be harsh:
and at the beginning of things, apply healing remedies gently, and leave the wound in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery: and when you see hope, then reset the member at once as soon as the healing remedies come:
When the member is reset, administer things that soothe abscesses and cleanse the wound, as it should be, with dry applications of ointments.
And if the member breaks due to dislocation, and bones are broken, remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
And beware of entering into the path of fear, as I have said, for it is better for you according to your Creator, and because of the knowledge of your arm and your body.
