Oh you, very cherished sons, I have completed this book which is the conclusion of the science of medicine, and filled it with its contents, and I have finished it by its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is extinguished from all to all, so it has perished the science and has been lost, and nothing remains but the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this comes the error and the futility, and the minds are closed and the knowledge is distant.
It seems to me that I can revive it along with the order of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring along the forms of the irons of cauterization, and other instruments of the work with the addition of declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Because for the reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is lengthened. And it is necessary for him who enters into this to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of joints, and the movement of the veins moving and resting, and the source of their issue.
And because, as Hippocrates says, we are not with the non-living, and with the work is little. and even in the art of hand.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not familiar with the things mentioned before, so that they may not err and cause harm to men.
such that I have wanted many times to test these who interfere with this science and if they abandon themselves to ignorance and lack of experience.
For I saw a foolish one who cut into an abscess of the neck or the breast of a woman, and cut the arteries of the breast; which caused so much blood to issue out that the woman died in her hands.
And I saw another foolish one who removed a stone from an old man's eye, and the stone was large; and took with it a piece of the bladder, and died within three days.
And I had already been called for the extraction, and saw the position of the misalignment and the size of the stone, and it was clear that if they cut it, it would die.
And another mirror who took in care the duke of our land who had the leg broken, and with the breaker got the wound;
and the mirror pressed the break over the wound with great force, and did not leave any salve on the wound, and thus left it to the end;
and he ordered that it not be moved little;
and thus waited until the leg was completely rotten and the feet and came to destruction.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to remove the leg; and when I saw it removed so was in the field and did not feel any pain.
But all ways of healing the corruption were already confirmed or the member, and it could not be healed.
And the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
And I saw another method that would crush the abscess and make it worse, and then it would inflame due to the evil of its lordship.
For an abscess, when it is free of melancholic humor, it only needs that one touch with iron if it is not in a place where one can completely remove everything that is corrupt.
Therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: That is to say, the first part where he has placed in many positions;
and I will show in each chapter of this book where he has fear and danger.
Therefore, it is important that you keep this, so that the evil people cannot harm you.
If you take your arms in a firm and steady manner, and use the best way possible, then by the grace of God, you will come to safety and be healed.
And let the contagious diseases spread no further harm;
And take your arms away from what causes you doubt, and be in such a state that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galenus says in some of his admonitions: «Do not take up the care of a seriously ill patient unless you are called a foolish one.»
I have divided this treatment into three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medical cautery, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
and the forms of instruments, and the cauterizing irons, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
and the chapters are ordered and the forms of instruments.
The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things.
and is ordered by the high chief just as the feet, and the forms of instruments.
As we recall the work, it is necessary that I mention the quality of aid and the new harm from each condition.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest spoken and most subtle science and the secrets kept;
and many wise men have spoken of this, and agreed to it;
but I shorten the words little by little, because I reduce the length.
I say that fire cauterization helps universally in all matters where there is matter, whether the matter: is to know whether the matter is hot without matter, and dry without matter.
In hot and dry weather together with the matter, they devised any and said that fire cauterization is great help; and the others said the opposite: that fire cauterization is not good for disease that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat or dryness;
and those who said the opposite claimed that fire cauterization does great help to hot and dry disease that comes from people. For when you compare the body of the man and its moisture to the hot fire, you heat the body.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it once by experience.
And in all cases, one should not interfere except those who have experienced it, and who know by long use the chapter of cauterization, and the diversity of the complexions of people, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the symptoms and the space of time;
We have no fear of other constitutions, even in diseases that are cold and moist. And all the symptoms gathered and agreed to the cauterization.
And know, sons, that cauterization with fire is one of the secrets of cures, and has greater goodness than cauterization with burning medicine.
For the fever is simple, and comes only to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members unless it has a name.
The burning remedies come from one member to another by separating them, and bring diseases of difficult healing to the affected member. And perhaps it finds the pain.
The food for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not make it sick, if there is no excess.
And I have found this by experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is above the truth of things.
And because I excuse myself from the length of speech, for I only like to give you the secret that is hidden or by fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating. receive in your thoughts.
And know, my son, that they should be made in what degree the cautery should be done, and ask for permission.
And I say that cauterization is beneficial in all cases, because the evils that come from it are removed by the help of cauterization; and indeed if it is for necessary pain, short and not able to wait until the greatest evil comes to the limb.
And do not think like a fool, child; for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return; and it says so thus;
and it says so thus; but it is not as they think, because cauterization is only a medicine that moves the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more valuable than any other medicine for its swiftness of action, and by the power of its work and its authority.
And it is a matter of fact that the sickness comes at no certain time according to the nature of the body and the part of the disease and its power;
and there are gathered in him the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless if cauteries are administered in the place where he has little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries of dense por la dolor, and similar things, and the pain does not return much; but this happens little.
and many people do not understand why cauteries are called the back of medicine, and that is to see;
but they do not believe that the fire cauteries are effective after medicine, but rather their intentions are false, and they use fire cauteries at the end of medicine because when we administer methods of healing in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the fire cauteries, and it is worth it.
Therefore, it is necessary to carefully use cautery as a last resort in medicine, not according to the intention of those who are misguided.
The ancients said that gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, and they did not say why except for the quality of gold and its high value;
and they said that the points of the cauteries do not cause putrefaction, but it is not to see because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is so in some men;
And gold cautery is better than iron, as they say. And whenever you heat a gold instrument, do not hold it when it is hot because of the color of gold, and it has cooled slightly;
and if it is heated too much. then they do at the fire. and thus there is enough prevention.
Or I would order this chapter on the shoulder joints from the feet, because it is easier to find there.
This fire cauterization is used for moisture and cold on the head, and it is done because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the joint to the eyes, and to the ears, and due to many dreams and tooth pain, and throat pain, and also for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the hairs should be removed by solvent medicine changing the head III or IV times, depending on the virtues and age and custom of the hair that it can suffer; and then make the head of the shoulder right again.
And then let him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on top of yours;
after place the root of your palm above the root of his finger between his two fingers; and let your middle fingers come out, if he bleeds from the wound then heat the cauterizing agent called "olive oil", of which this is the form: And put it on the wound with a feather, and move your hand slowly and steadily in returning; then lift your hand slowly, and reward the wound if you see the small bone of the forearm; and if you do not see it, restart the cauterization until you see the bone as I have told you.
then take some thread, and put it in warm water and soft cotton inside, and put it on the limb, and leave it for three hours.
then put on a soft bandage in butter. and leave it on until the burn is healed. then treat the wound with the ointment called "tetra-farmaçon" until it is healed.
And the old ones said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges. and therefore to help them.
And none of these said that one should burn the cauterizer so much that a part of the bone is burned away, and then remove what has been burned off from the bone, and treat it.
And they should apply the fire cauterizer as much more gently, and push it in as far as possible to break the bone as wide as a spoon that women put in their hair for the reason that the humors are pushed out moist.
and one should leave the wound open long. After that, one should cure and bandage it.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be good for everyone at all times, unless in some men where there is a view of fear.
And it seems to me that I should leave it.
because the bones are weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other members;
and even when the affected bone is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is safer and less painful for me, and from this I work in consequence with a similar method to achieve health.
When the main cause of chronic pain and lasts for a long time, one should use the years and pills called "cochie", and head cleaning and eye and plasters; and if one does the cauterization that we have previously mentioned, and it is not effective. Take care when dealing with a patient who has a severe illness, and do not make them too cold. Therefore, use the fire cautery to treat it as we have mentioned above. After applying the fire cautery to each horn of the skull to the bone, as we have mentioned before, and apply the "vasselz" cautery where it is needed. and place suction cups there. and keep your hand steady so you do not press too hard against the bone: The hairs feel much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of that later.
and it is necessary that the cautery of the horns be more subtle than that which is used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form:
For the fire cautery When in one part of the head there is sudden pain, and the illness has spread to the oil, and the patient is purged by medicines that are not effective, and the other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of diseases have been done, and all this does not help: therefore, the cautery is done in two ways, that is to say, by medicine and by fire.
The cautery by medicine is such that you hold a sharp instrument and remove the scab and the skin, and then make the temple or where the pain is located in some way so that you can replace the sharp instrument outside the skin;
And when it is reset, if the joint and the constraint are well done, let it rest for twelve hours. Then release and treat further with a poultice of garlic, and leave the wound thus for two or three days. Then place a cast on it soaked in butter until it becomes firm.
After the treatment of the wound, until it is healed.
And if you see that some burning remedies that I have written or advised for treating burns, are causing harm.
The fire cautery is done in this way. Heat the fire cautery with this shape:
And it is called "closed" because the main part is made in the shape of a clot or it has a little beak, and in the middle has a small appearance.
and place it on the painful joint, and hold your hand and gently press the bone slightly, until half of the bone's width is exposed.
and gently press your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is below, and there is abundant blood flow.
After placing gauze on a string, and place it on the joint for three days; then apply wet gauze, and then treat the joint with oil until it is healed;
and if you want to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing iron called "cultellare", at all points, and be careful not to cover the artery in this wound which is not ancient.
of the wound
When you treat migraine as we have previously described in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the fire before mentioned from medicine and iron does not suffice to alleviate the pain, then it is necessary that you extinguish the knife which is called "cultellare" until it is white.
and let it rest on the painful limb for a line of half a finger's length, and take your hand once, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and that it does not come close to the bone;
and guard the jaw that moves when bent, and the nerves should only regard the moving part and that spasm should not cause pain, and guard against the escape of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting at a great risk and immediately to those who do not know, and which are not studied and experienced; and leave the work in the middle way;
but I will tell you how to stop the blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
And if you see that this cauterization does not suffice for the disease, and the wounds are painful, cauterize it with the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cauterizer that has two blades; and this fire cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
of the pain in the ears from cold
When pain in the ear comes from cold, and medicines have been administered and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", of which this is the form:
After poking all around the ear pain, or both where the pain is felt, and push it slightly away from the root of the ear, then you have identified the joint. and have ten points around each ear.
after curing the joint until it is healed.
of the mouth torture
The torture that should be cured by cauterization is no more than those that move the stream, as we have said in the division of diseases.
and do not use cauterization like those that come from blisters and sweat of the flesh.
When you encounter this appearance of torture that moves from a stream of urine and spitting out of the mouth and choking, and it does not cease, then it is necessary to cauterize the pain with three cauteries. One at the root of the ear, and the other slightly behind the temple, and the third in the junction of the two lips.
And place the cauteries in the part that opens healthily, and make the cauteries in the part above a little behind the ear, and another in the temple as long as a little finger. and let the cauterization extend as far up as half of the wound is exposed;
and this is the shape of the cauterization:
And it is the similar shape of the cauterizing knife that we have placed before, but it is a bit more delicate and it should be a bit bigger;
after curing the limb as I have previously said, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the pain does not have fever, then do four cauterizations: II above the II horns of the head, and I press the head, and I place the one which is called «vasselz» as we have already said, and behind the fire cauterizes above the mouth of the stomach;
and so treat it as we have said before.
of laziness
For this disease, one should give the patient large and modified brain pills;
after rubbing the entire head of the patient with the mustard plaster which is written or treated in plasters;
and this is the way of the fire cauterization: if you do as I have said.
If he is thus healthy, good. And if he is not, then make three cauterizations on the head by descending along the neck, and let there be space between each cautery of one large span;
and treat him as with the others, and if you see that he is stiff, and the pains are severe, then make one cauterization in the middle; and if he is a laborer, two more on the two horns, and treat him until he is healthy.
And let the cauterizations be called "olivare", as I have previously mentioned.
It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and the flesh that we have previously mentioned.
After removing the bad flesh, then perform cauterization on the head and each horn, and at the back and three times above the spine of the neck.
If you have more skill, and the body is wet and the bad flesh is suffering, and the disease is far, then perform four cauterizations above the spine of the back. And let it rest until the most skilled is satisfied, and release your hand. After the treatment until they are healed, and the cauterizations called "olivare" that we have previously mentioned.
Of epilepsy
The epileptics should not use cauterization except for those that are bleeding, and it is first necessary to modify the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the pain is great and suffering from lack of medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot bear the suffering, give them gargling and chewing, changing the brain often with good meat.
After the head is removed in the middle, and the cautery is performed as we have said before, and the cautery on the neck, and on each horn. And if the pains are outside and severe, give them cautery as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be made with olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
If the pain is intense, apply the subtle cauterization in this manner:
When due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture is great, then use the cautery of parts as we have said for those who are paralyzed.
And if due to melancholy, the excess declining towards melancholy is wet, then give it to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
After healing the main injury; After making a well-done tortilla, like a circle, and placing it on the head;
and if the wounds are crosswise, and held firmly from all sides;
After applying the liniment, and it is good to use old birch bark butter; and heat it with fire at a moderate temperature, so that the patient can bear it when drinking; After removing the circle from inside and placing it on the head, let it cool;
And do this to the wound every week with good management, until they are healed.
If you have seen cauterization done by making several pricks with the whole cautery.
This method of cauterization moistens the brain excessively.
Then place a wet cotton cloth on it and in goose grease.
of the eyes When the first sign comes to the eyes as I have indicated in the previous section, then begin and give the patient to drink a medicine mundifying the head, and keep it from all moisture, and make it sweat or bathe it several times a day on an empty stomach.
After that, command him to turn his head, and perform the cauterization on the back of his head, and make two cautery marks on both temples, above and below the ear, where one is missing.
And cover all the cauterization with veins and arteries that are outside the skull, and let the cauterization extend along the length of the temple.
And guard against bleeding from veins, and if you see too much blood coming out, stanch it with a piece of cloth that you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision, how you would do it;
and never cauterize or heat anything outside of the two lower bones.
and we see that it is an excess of cold fluorescent, therefore the cauterize that I have said at the beginning of the work, descending to those. The cauterize the main, and two cauterize above the two temples, and two cauterize outside of the two bones. and if there is more, then the wise one should cauterize it thoroughly with a small firebrand.
When you apply medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then drink three drops of bad vinegar. After that, the king's oil, and the middle heat of the olive oil cauterization. And make two cauterizations of the heat that is called "clavilis" on the two firebrands, a little away from the hooves.
and guard the artery so you do not cover it.
And this is the form of the cauterization called "clavilis":
When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cauterization which is called "olivare". For what purpose this form is used.
And if you see that you make two cauterizations on the two firebrands as long as the firebrands are.
and do not leave off the hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that does not hold the oil Never is it the case that the hairs of the eyes are converted to parched, and they prick the eye, and if cauterization is done in two ways: which is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then place the hairs on your skin. After drawing a figure above the eyes that is as similar to the mirror as possible, and starting from the beginning of the sign below the hairs.
Then place moistened cotton in glare of egg and musk of lavender on the oil, then heat the cauterizing iron to this shape.
After cauterizing slowly and gently a few times, until the patient's skin is no longer sensitive in that place.
And the signs of health in this work are that you see the eyes retreat, and the hairs stand up at the height of the oil.
Then gently place your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put cotton wool on the burn until the burn is healed. After the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
And if after this the hairs come back, and the skin is softened, then begin the cauterization again on the same limb, as you did before.
And if the hairs are not enough, then cauterize until the skin is at its natural level and even, and do not prick the hairs with it.
The fiery cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a piece of parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle.
Then take French soap and live charcoal, of each one. Z., and grind them together well. And make it into a paste, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you have made like the leaf of the mint, and put it on the paper of the eyes. And if the disease holds only in one eye, then you must cover it with a cloth, and also do so in the other. And put some woolen cotton moistened in front of it.
And the patient with the pain should be in a healthy position and put your other hand above the medicine, and press the poison and the mouth every time the pain feels the sting of the medicine, because it feels stinging also like fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then you will have the knowledge of the remedy to your task. And when the cauterization has been passed, lift the limb from the fire, and reward yourself if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, it is good.
If not, still put the medicine on the limb or the medicine has not worked until your work is equal and your eyes are fixed;
then put cotton moistened in burre on the limb until the wounds are cleansed, then cure the limb of the burn which is called "diaphnesis" and others, until they are healed.
And if you have the task to stay within your work, be careful not to cut into the medicine with those.
And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then the treatment begins again on the joint that is softened properly by the paper, as you have done before. after the cure until it is healed.
and this is the form of the fuller's thistle:
And it is known that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to what your constraints are.
and do not reply the wrong way to him who has studied this art.
Of the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
When you treat fistulas as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work, then it is necessary to cauterize them in this way.
Command the patient to put his head in your hand. and tie the assistant's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor remove its head.
after put wool felt under or in the juice of parsley on the oil;
after heat the cauterizing iron that is there:
and is shaped like a pen of vulture, together with the quill so that it be the cauterizing iron;
if you see, if it is pointed at the head from one to the other, and if you see, if it is also like a tent;
but anyway, this which is shaped is worth more for your work.
After pressing the fistula, it is opened, and through it, the pus is drained, and dried. And if it is closed, then open the wound, and drain the poisonous fluid out of it.
After applying the cauterizing agent generously, hold your hand on the cautery at the part below the navel, so that your hand does not do harm. And apply the cauterizing agent to the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just at the bone, that would be good. If not, then begin the cauterizing agent again once more, and if you have the skill, leave it for three days.
After placing moist cotton on the wound, and applying a drying ointment until it is healed, if after 40 days it is not healed, then apply a corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed. And the treatment according to what it would come in its chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that no ancient people mentioned. For fistula, and fasten the limb; After placing in the wound, the subtle instrument of which this is the form: And they make with the quantity of one ounce of lead; And hold the instrument firmly in your hand, and do not move the hairs until the lead melts and corrodes its oil;
and it is necessary to put on top of the wound, cotton oil moistened with urine in front of the inflammation or behind.
the plug if the hole of the limb of a fistula, and the healthy one by miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have said, it is good. If not, then you must administer poultices to the wound, and bring the fistula back to the core of the wound according to what is proper for that limb.
of cracks in the lips Many times there are cracks in the lips that are called "hair", and also in the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing needle according to this form:
And put it firmly in those cavities until it comes just before it sets.
After healing the limb of plaster until it is healed.
When an abscess comes at the root of the tongue or in the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it is pierced and drained and swells and becomes a fistula. and you treat it as we have said in the sections, and it does not improve: then it is necessary that you apply the fire cauterization according to the size of the fistula; after the boil or rupture of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes to the bottom of the wound and behind the bone;
and do this once or twice, after treating as we have said in the cures, until it is healed.
and if it is treated thus, it is good. and if not, then you must reveal the bone and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
When the teeth are softened by moisture and the joints move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not help, then put the head of the painful part in your mouth. After heating the cauterizer of its shape will come out after in some way that you put a cane on the tooth.
And put the cauterizer deeply and hold your hand so that the pain feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth.
After releasing your hand and start the cauterizer according to your will.
After filling the pain with salt water, and the tissue for an hour and let it dry out.
And in a similar manner, the tooth that was moving is now fixed, and the gum is softened by being held, and the moisture is corrupted and dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When pain from the tooth comes from cold, or there is cold or wind, and medical treatments do not work, then it is necessary to use cauterization in two ways: and cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a fresh cheese, and the end in an iron or silver spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and dip it in melted butter, and put it on the painful tooth quickly and hold it until it is cooled;
and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that dipping linen and cotton in melted butter does not work, then put the hot iron on the painful tooth until the heat reaches the movement of the tooth.
The cauteries are such that you grasp a needle of iron or brass, and it should be large enough that the heat does not reach the mouth of the wound.
After heating the cautery, from which the form will come after, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauteries are cooled.
Do this often, for the pain will be as strong the same day or the following day.
And it is necessary that the wounds fill their mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cauteries, and then the rich one.
et c’est li forme dou cautere: This is the form of the fire cauterization.
And make the fire cauterization as you wish, and according to what you have at hand;
This is the form of the knife.
of tumors When the scrofula are cold and humid, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cauterization of hair from this after, and have two openings for the fumes to escape to the other side of the cautery.
And put the fire cauterization on top of the abscess once, or as often as necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess.
And if it is an abscess, apply cauterization according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like this for three days. Then place a piece of soft cloth soaked in butter until the burn is healed.
After care for wounds and dressings until they are healed.
When the moisture is strong in the pores of the skin, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary to first remove the pains by means of solutions.
Then apply cauterization to the root of the throat, and be careful not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn it with a strong heat but with a small amount.
After the other cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and it is the cauteries that are called "claviere" by which we have the shape in front.
and heal the limb as we have said above until it is healthy.
When all and the disease of pormon are from cold moisture, and the pains do not have fever or sweat, and the disease is ancient, then he should make two cautery above the forehead in his eyes. and the other cautery between the breasts.
and it is the cauteries that are called "claviere" according to the shape that is said in front.
And if you see, perform the fire cauterization by holding the entire cautery that is called "points" because of its form in the disease of the ears.
and let the points be just to 30, or within.
After treatment, the patient according to what has been said before, and let it be that the cauteries are applied at three intervals according to this form:
And because the cauteries are lighter, because you make three of them in a cup.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After, let the hairs be shaved on his back and on his ribs; After, relieve the part that is within the ticklishness of two fingers of your right hand.
And if its joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery that has two needles at the end in this form:
and cauterize the part until it pierces to the ribs, and bring the figure of the cautery together with four cauteries.
and because of this, the fire cautery is made with the cautery that has three prongs, for the reason that the shape of cauterization is these three cautery.
and the nerves are according to the thinness of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery that has three prongs.
And never are they placed on this one nerve because it has eight cautery.
After putting the cautery on top, press with silk; After allowing the wound to rest, and not making the limbs too long by stretching them until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, this thing happens quickly, then make a cauterization above the thick part of the cauterizing knife, or with many cauterizations in pricking.
For the joint is closed, and it is covered by moisture and is healthy of the pain.
When in the stomach come cold and much moisture until it is at its condition, and are multiplied by vomiting to him, and are customary ways of cures and he does not improve, then it is necessary that the pain be soothed above his back, and extends his legs and his hands. Because of this, after making three cautery with the fork from the least amount of one dog, to all the cautery clavicle, and two cautery before the two ribs until the shape of the cautery is at three angles, and has equal space between them so that they are not joined together when they are moving;
and let the fire cauteries be so sharp that they pierce both parts of the wound, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without jostling:
and if you see that a great cauterization is being done in the stomach according to this form;
and the one who has fear of this cauterization, cauterize by pricking and holding above the stomach i.e., not according to the quantity that you see of it; then cauterize with the whole cauterization called "point".
After the care of the cure that we have had before, as long as they are healthy.
When the liver comes from pain and moisture and great swelling, as long as it is forced out of its natural condition by excesses; and the pain is treated with what we have said in the sections, and it does not help him much, so it is necessary that the pain be removed from its base. and the sign of three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, under the hypochondres, where the neck of the swan comes;
and there should be space between each cauterization the thickness of a finger; and let the cauterization be long along the body, and do not press much with your hand on the cauterization;
and let it be arched as much as only half of the curve, and let the hairs be straight up on their feet;
and if he cannot, then let him lie on his side, extend his legs, and loosen his breeches.
And if you wish to, then cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and guard that you do not burn all at once, for you would make the whole body harder; and that it does not come to boiling, for the wounds are very delicate in that place, and the hard parts to see.
When he has an abscess in the liver, and you know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: If he is in the carriage, he does not feel the pain much.
And if he is on the bed, he feels the pain greatly.
And when this cure lies down, it is necessary that the pain be above his head;
and then the lord of the limb where the abscess is, and then heat the cauterizing agent which is similar to rice, from which this form is made: And cauterize the cauterizing agent until the wound is sealed, and it comes just to the surface, until the suppuration is completely gone;
After the cure according to the cure of bandages until they are healed;
and it is only appropriate for this cauterization to be used by none other than those who have long studied the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never corrupted.
Therefore, it can be bravely overcome, and in all ways, it seems to me that it is worth leaving it alone.
The cautery of the chest
The ancients said that one should apply a cautery of aristolochia roots in this manner: Take a long aristolochia root, the longest you can find, and let it dry, and let it be as thick and long as your fingers; and grind it in oil, and put it in the fire, and apply the cauterization between the nape and the neck, and use two small cautery irons to burn on the part that is outside the beard.
And the second fire cautery between the fifth rib and the sixth, in declining behind a little. And the first fire cautery at the worst place, and the second above the stomach, and the third between the shoulders, and the fourth on both sides before the fire cautery that is between the shoulders;
And do not press too hard with your hand, but make it open as if smelling.
And they said no ancient one that any man uses a fire cautery like the razor, and they clean it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to the abscess. and it jumped out of its place, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this work, there is fear or the wounds are fatal now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the mouse disease that we have said about divisions of treatment, and it does not improve, then they resort to three methods of fire cauterization that are all good.
When one method is such that you make three or four cauterizations, along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver that we have said before.
and do not press your hand too much on the entire cautery, and let the hairs be above its back.
And another method of cauterization is that you heat the cautery with two needles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
and relieve the curvature that is near the mouse, where the pain of the hair comes from the side, and let the elevations that you relieve the curvature along the curve, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After applying the second cup, let the flames reach as far as the other side, and then remove the cautery, and thus you will have four.
And if you see that it has been cauterized with the entire cautery at three cups.
After the treatment when it has grown worse due to prolonged tension, and this is appropriate that the other cures before mentioned should be done.
Caustic is not good for hydropsy, except in the manner which is called "asclepiades".
If your treatment according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the worst place. and let the cauteries be close to the edge of the wound.
After leaving the cauterization open for a while to prevent scarring, and do not neglect the care of the wound after the cauterization; and healing will proceed quickly, and together with God's help, the two intentions will be achieved.
The shape of the cauterization for the belly is as shown in the figure we have before us; and the one for the back is olive-shaped, according to what is shown there.
When the feet are swollen to one who is hydroptic, and are plain of a yellowish hue, you must cauterize above the back between the auricular and annular; And lightly touch the wound with the fire cauterizer, heading towards the opening.
And do not enter too deeply into the flesh, thus avoiding the yellowish part, and let the cauteries be done in this form:
After making two incisions on each leg at the tip of the knife; And either cauterize the longer one behind the knee in front and the other in front of the leg inside;
and leave the cauterizations overlong to cure, as it is better to do so.
After the other treatments that we have said.
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and in the intestines are affected, and cannot be cured by other methods of treatment. and you see the patient suffering greatly and of great virtue, then apply a large cauterization on the stomach according to what he has spoken of before or cauterization of the stomach, the cauterization circulates. and IV cauterizations around the neck delicately to all cauterization of the cross, and II cauterizations on the hips.
If you see abundant moisture and the pain is intense, then perform fire cauterization on the base of the nail, and I cauterize each one, and II small cauterizations above the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when it has good help.
of the treatment of wart
When the emorrhoids are at their foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and are large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not improve, then apply cauterizations: III above the spine of the back, which is completely undisturbed and gradually triangular, and I cauterize II below the ribs.
et if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swells, then the face is cauterized above the stomach as previously mentioned, and the other above the liver, and the other at all the cauterizing knife; and let the cauterizing knife remain long and tense. After healing, the limb as long as it is healthy.
when you cut the skin, if the cauterizing knife seems like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on the skin that is being cut; et let your hand approach as the fire cauterizes the vein at its birth, of which there is no pain.
Do this once or twice, and if there is much bleeding, cauterize as we have said. After applying ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large firebrand, it will have greater help.
When the wound cannot be suffered by a lancer or opened, as we will tell you in its place, if it is an illness that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When any comes with fistula, and is awake and given porridge and corrupted moisture, then you must apply a thin tent to all of it, and guard that you wash the tent as much as it has of purity.
After heating the cautery to the sharpness of a razor, and inserting it into the fistula according to the amount that enters, and then reapply the cautery as long as the corrosion and decomposition are sufficient, once, or twice, or three times, depending on the amount needed.
and guard against the veins that are within, and great veins.
if the fistula goes to the center of the bladder and intestine, then guard against these paths, and do not make any other movements except in the belly, and think that it is not healed.
after curing the limb as long as it is healthy, and if the wounds are closed, and the matters are removed along with time, then cure that the wounds are completely healed.
and if the matters are not removed, close the wound and corrupt the bone at the source. And thus, as one of those that we will say in its place.
When pain from cold comes to rain, and great moisture, and does not take the form of a woman, then it is necessary that you make a fire cauterization on both sides of the rain with the clavile cautery that we have already mentioned.
And if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have three cauterizations in a row, and they will be greater help.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and thin from cold and moisture, and the hairs retain the urine, then make a fire cauterization in the part before the bladder, where the beginning of the hair begins, and on the right and left, and let each cauterization be as long as a pin.
and the first fire cauterization after the back, or II if you have a strong desire for it.
and let the fire cauterizer be applied according to the form previously mentioned.
When the wound is cold and moist, and does not leave any trace to be conceived, and the flowers are corrupted and their termination is late; and when they come, if they feel great pain: therefore it is necessary to apply the third fire cauterization around the wound, as we have said or the fire cauterizer of the bladder, and two fire cauterizations after the back.
and let the fire cauterizer be applied as we have said.
When moisture descends to the bottom of the back, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
and it is found in the lower parts of the back, then you should cauterize the pain above the bottom of the back with a cautery similar to a circle, and sign it in front of the joint around the back so that it returns, so that the back is within the circle;
and if the cautery is such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, then make three cauteries of large olives, and the cautery should be applied as usual to all the careers;
and the cure as long as they are healthy.
of the pain in the back When pain comes in the side of the belly, and it is from cold and moisture, and the pains are treated as we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient: then it is necessary that you purge the pain of large humors with bad-smelling pills, or other good-smelling pills similar. After you do the cauterization;
and the manner of the cauterization is according to the two methods: that is to say together with burning medicines and fire cauterization.
1. The fire cautery is performed in many ways, such as:
2. you cauterize the sac of the hip III triangular cauteries in this form, and it makes good depth and great, and has between each cauterization a space of the size of an egg, and let the cauterizing oil.
3. one never cauterizes in the middle of the hip joint, because it is there with four in this form:
4. and if you see, if it cauterizes with the cauterizing circle that we have previously mentioned in the hip dislocation;
but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the waist, and all the spines are straightened.
And this is the way it is done in lithotomy, when the pain is in the groin and does not reach up to the thigh or the leg.
And if it comes to the thigh and leg, then make two cautery marks where the hairs are, and one above the ankle four times, on the right side a little.
and let the cautery marks be even, and straighten the spine.
and if the hairs feel that the pain extends to two fingers or near the bone, then cauterize where it feels the pain three or four times at the cautery called "points". And if the profession requires it, do more of it.
And if the pain is located from the groin to the thigh, perform cauterization with a point or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause greater harm and contraction.
And I have also seen many who have done cauterization above the ankle of the foot, and left it for so long that the leg was completely numb, and the feet as well, and all the feet were rotten and corrupted. After a bout of vomiting that resulted in death.
And if the pain is on both sides together, perform cauterization on one and the other, in this manner.
And the wise say in the cauterization of the loins, regarding this method, take such a needle and make it as large as a navillon of a finger, or slightly smaller, and make it with interstices and make one interstice join to the other at the distance of the quantity of a new penny.
And let there be pliers over two parts, and also like a nose, and there should be one well-made iron tongs;
And this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is completely red and gives off a scent, and then place it on the back of the bad shoulder, and turn it over to the healthy side;
and the cautery once the heater has cooled and leave for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says that we use this cauterization little due to its fearsome appearance, and few see those who use it.
And therefore, this is a bad cauterization, which can suffer, and where it is applied.
The cauterizing instruments of medicine are such that you make an instrument for piercing through the edge of the door, and either of brass or iron at one end, and in the top has II us, and between each the quantity of the size of a doe; and they should be overturned and above, and they join together according to this form:
After placing the board of the back lying on its side, and quickly place your hand high on the board of the back. After pouring between the two circles of the hot water which is heated by the fire into a pot, and let it stand for an hour with low heat, and suffer the patient with the heat and burn of the.
For it also has the effect of biting as if by fire.
And when the biting has passed, loosen your hand with the instrument and lift the back of the hot water gently, and let it stand for three hours, and put on butter until the black part of the burn is removed. and let it remain three days to ripen;
and this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds until they are healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, use the same instrument that you have used in the buttocks, increased.
and this is the method of hot water, and I wrote it to treat the correction of medicine. Take chalk and live charcoal, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new jar. or if there is a small puncture other than the tip of a razor can be inserted;
or if there is a small puncture other than the tip of a razor can be inserted; and put the other one can be well soaked in salt and alkali and soft water above, until there is the second above the powders that you have well soaked in your hand;
and let it remain so long as it descends like awake and cuts or could break down, then take all of it, and pour it over the charcoal and over the alkali as before.
And if it is very hot, it should be administered in the form of work of other medical works and cauteries of other members.
For it does harm like fire, and if there are other medicines that are well cauterized in the abdomen like this, and honey, and charcoal with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure that some people were cured of the pain of the back and sciatica, and it was very effective, and he said that no other cure was made, and that they were well after one time when this cure was made, and he bathed himself as he teaches afterwards.
And in this way you should apply a fresh and dry green fig, and grind it very well with a little fat, and put on the abdomen and thigh and leg where the pain is, and bandage it.
and he leaves it for three hours, during which time the pain is not felt anymore.
Then make the patient enter a hot bath until the heart is slightly warm, and then make them lie down, and the pain will go away completely and they will be healed.
And let it be known that no one should use such medicines with cauterization, unless after the evacuation of blood.
And Dioscorides says that when the vein of the throat is cauterized with the wool of a goat, it helps a lot.
and it should be done in this way. Take linen and pour old oil into it, and place it on the groove that is between the thumb and the other one called the foreshaft.
After taking dry goat's wool and putting it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and placing it on the linen, and leaving it until it is soaked.
and do again in the same way, and do not stop doing so until you think that it is approaching the back, and that the pain has ceased.
and these methods of cauterization are called "goat's beard cauterization".
of great pain to two joints
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or by impact or from too great evacuation, or from similar matters spread out cold, none of these is as effective as cauterizing with hot matter.
It is recommended that the hairs are removed with fetid powders or similar substances, which are applied on top of the wound, where the pain is, three lines deep, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the hairs can bear;
and the cauteries are made according to the cauterization called "puncture".
and if you see, make III cauteries or IV at the average cauterization called "clavière" in this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have narrow backs when they stand, and fear. and you push in the lower spinous process of the back and see what appearance comes above the others.
When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the fire cautery according to this form. If the fire cautery grasps every part of the spinous process.
And if you see, then cauterize around the spinous process with the fire cautery touching the second or third line, and they are close to each other.
After treatment, the limb should be kept as we have said, and you must not administer cauterization in a way that causes damage to the nerve.
The pain of the joints
When the pain of joints is from moisture that is spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which is properly called "gout", and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this way:
Make much of the cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be done in this form:
And if there is a time when you must hold the face down, then perform the entire cauterization as claimed by the term "point". And if the pains come from the groin and other joints, and often occur, then cauterize above each groin with three or four cautery irons of each part, using the oil cauterizer.
And if you have more skill, then do more, but do not hold your hand too far from the patient until the spirit of cure is present.
And if the pain descends to the jaw and the back, then administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then cauterize around the knuckles two lines deep.
And if there is no pain after that, then cauterize above each joint and above the hair of the hand.
If the pains come from the back or shoulders, cauterize each part, and apply good care and many medicines.
For if you give good management and purge the humor, it will be healed with the help of God.
When fracture comes in angles, and the bowels descend to the groin, and this is not new, then when you see it to cure, that it does not move more that day. and that he uses things that lower the belly, so that the bowels descend from his belly;
After, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to comb his hair until the bowels are returned, and tie them at your feet, and sign with your finger from above the broken bone of the thumb, and to all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the chest.
then heat the cautery of this kind, which is in the form:
so long as it is white and sweats scents. then reset the dislocations at their joints. and the assistants wipe their hands above that they do not return backwards.
and work well the thighs at the hairs, and put a cloth and a bandage above them on the thighs, and the other below where he wipes his hands.
then place the cautery above the sign of your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then continue with another until you come just to the bone. and guard subtly so the pus does not escape when you perform the cauterization; so you do not burn it. and that by this means the hairs do not die, or other harm.
And when you do not see the bone at the fire cauterization, your works are worthless.
And it is necessary that the cauterizations for children be subtle according to their age, and for large people also large according to their size;
after three days care for the wound of the cauterization with butter until the scab is hardened;
after the care of other remedies until it is healed, and grind the hairs 40 days on their back until the wound is well healed;
And it is necessary that his bowel movements be loosened long before he enters the chamber.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, apply a well-made bandage for forty more days.
And he should have good rest, work little and avoid too much overeating and drinking, and too much loud noise.
And when he does this instruction, he is completely healed.
And I will say what to do after the treatment of cutting into his chapter.
When wounds come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, apply the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be third-degree heat. After the cure as we have said;
And none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the fire cautery at three angles according to this form:
but the first sign is the swelling of the limb and make a line across the width above the tear, and another below, and hold your hand on all the cauterizing iron.
But the first cauteries are lighter and more painful.
of ancient pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, or to fall or to be injured, and this pain lasts long, and the medical cure does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize with the cauterizing iron called «poins», and the cauteries should follow the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its strength and its location of twists and its pain.
If it is healthy and the first cautery is applied well, then it is good;
If not, then begin another cautery above the first one, for it is usually customary that it should be allowed to die in the member that is closest, which is why you must make the cauteries until the hairs are healed.
Medical instruments are often not helped by cauterization due to great harm, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
If you see that the cautery has not taken effect, then take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not remain or disappear, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the wound, then make five cauteries above the chief: I embrace the head with both hands, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the jaw. and II above the two horns, and I behind on the hauterel.
and let the hand be as far as the cautery comes to the bone, and as long as the scars come out so that the vapors of the large humors can escape.
and cauterize on the small one according to what it is in front.
And if the wound is scattered everywhere; and it is evident that you should cauterize with these cautery we have said or at the head, and the cautery in the nose, and two cautery on the spine of the neck, and six cautery on the spine of the back, and one great one on the croup and one other below, and two on the shoulders; and II above the ears, and II above the tendons of the little finger, and I above each joint of the hands and feet, and above the wrists;
and guard against the nerves that are above the lower back, so as not to burn them;
and never perform a fire cauterization above the bone of the thumb, and I above the bone of the stomach, and I above the liver.
And know that the more you perform a fire cauterization, the less you should give aid, and move it less;
And know that the hairs do not feel pain as much as healthy people do, because the body is already corrupted.
It is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and the joints, as you will find in the methods of irons.
After curing the wound with flour several times with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
When a swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then you must cauterize over the member according to its size and smallness.
and let the cauterization go a little into the healthy flesh; then treat the wound until it is healed.
And never cauterize with the hand and at the back and at the elbow, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if it is calcified the swelling;
and in no way intervene unless they are known about the members and the outlets of the nerves moving the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and medical treatment does not help, then cauterize with a cautery a little in front, according to the amount of the spirits' strength, until the whiteness is stopped, and it is moved its color;
then the cure of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of a pigeon and blood of a dove, of each one a part; and let it be mixed altogether, and let it be tied with a cloth, and let it be applied to the limb as long as it is healed.
the treatment of chancres by cauterization
When a chancres appears at the beginning, and you see it stop spreading, then cauterize it with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around the circumference of the chancres.
And all the wise people said that one should make a fire cauterization as in the middle of the chancre;
and this does not seem good to me, because I believe that it should not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen;
and the better thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the fire that is called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to die out or due to the excess that it causes or due to the age of the malady when they are decrepit (that is, too old) and they have little blood, or due to the tension; and you see it hurrying to die: then cauterize around the wound with many small cauteries by holding them; then leave it thus. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierced by the entire cauterization, then warm up the cauterization from where this is the form:
And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the skin, and be such cauteries that the pain felt before is in a similar manner to the course of the porridge is alleviated.
After the treatment until he is completely healed.
Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a piece of member, for it twists the members as if the dry reeds would.
If you see this disease in the limb that can suffer cauteries and fire together, then heat the small, sharp cauteries greatly according to what is needed for the limb or the disease.
then cauterize all parts until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that all that is corrupted is removed.
And then leave it for three days, and apply a poultice with oil over the wounds until the burnt flesh is removed and all the corruption.
After the treatment of boils, they generate carbuncles.
And if you see after three days that healthy pus does not appear, it is good;
And if not, then restart the fire cautery on the part that has remained undamaged.
And this method has never been treated with medicine in place of fire cauterization.
But all fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already given the cure of medicine in the division: Take it when you have the opportunity.
of the peas that come to the feet Many times it comes to the feet by defect, and a disease arises which is called "clubfoot" according to our understanding, and it is a great disfigurement that makes the foot ugly.
And the cauteries of this disease are according to two methods. That is to say, fire cauterization, and water cauterization with hot iron.
Fire cauterization is such that it heats the cautery hair as if it were a pen feather, and it should be made of good iron at the measure that it can pierce the nail of all parts, and that it has thin edges.
After you put everything on top of the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the head of the nail. and let it stay there for three days until it begins to rot. Then make a poultice of wild savage crushed herbs with linen, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be removed from its roots.
Then cure the joint with poultice applying hot char until it is healed.
And if they are converted by the previous wound, and often in the hands and feet, then it is necessary to apply fire cauterization with very hot fire. and in a similar manner: Take a needle of iron or steel, or a quill pen, and place it above the nail and the althelul, that is to say, the verucas. And place the needle above it so that it pierces all around, then put a little hot wax, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand back and forth so that the edge of the needle reaches the root of the nail, and find the hot wax penetrating to the root.
And suffer the pain a little from the burning of the hot wax for an hour. Then leave it thus, and it will fall off at all its roots.
After doing another one like this, remove all those who are in the chest, then treat the boils that cause char.
When some tremble from cold or fever quartan or other, it is necessary that you make four burns or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine. and one on the belly, and one above the stomach at the cautery of the olive.
It will let the trembling go, and it will hurry the health from the cold disease.
No times have appeared previously when the chest was bathed with pus and pustules that come from large corrupt matter.
If it is necessary at the first when they appear that one makes burns above each head of the pustule: a fine cauteries of willow bark, of which the point is grasped in the fire, or of the root of aristolochia long, or at the lens cauteries.
And often the cauterization is done at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it cannot grow into new ones, but breaks down the excess that comes from it, and are healed.
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from the perforators, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stop.
And in any case when it has to do with anyone, you must quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it tight until the bleeding stops completely and no more comes out.
Then, apply fire cauteries of olive oil, many small and large ones, until they are all red.
Then, apply I, or large or small depending on the wound and the location where the artery is, and place the cautery above that vein or where you hold your hand, and keep the cautery until the blood does not flow out.
And if you have to lift your elbow quickly when lifting the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take the other cautery that is at the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is stopped.
And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that other harm does not come to the wound.
And be aware that when the vein is not cut, it cannot be stopped immediately when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods that we have mentioned. or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by strong ties of thread, or by medicines placed above that have the power to stop bleeding; and either tied and restrained in this way.
Whoever administers tight binding with cloths or other things burning above, or similar things, does not benefit if not done carefully.
And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any remedy present, then they should put their finger index above the wound of the vein as we have said, and well compress it until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein; and they should not move it, but they should apply cold compresses often until it is very cold and the blood is congealed and stopped.
and make inquiries about the matter of cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all about the diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cauterization or burning medicines, and their questions and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries.
and I have put that chapter of the neck down to the feet, and I will go to this chapter by the same way because it is easier to find what we want.
And therefore when I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it is necessary to take greater precaution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you should not undertake foolishness. For many methods of people come for cure. if they come from such people who have become so with their illness that they die quickly because of the treatment they receive for their disease, and from the greatness of its evil. and one must fear these.
And there are those who give you their sense, and say: wait, I am ready"; and the disease is spiteful.
You should not grant permission to those who come to you with this manner, but put more caution in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely of what you are certain and what you have taken and lost.
and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your ailments so that health may be converted.
and this will help you to gain good reputation, and glory, and memory for the long time.
Very dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and rightness, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or I have ordered you this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what is before or after the chapter on cauteries, that I have divided from the beginning to the end, because you will find it more easily what you will have to do.
It is known that this disease often affects infants at birth, and when the neck of the child is held too tightly;
and sometimes it comes from a cause that has not been remedied.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen have died; and therefore it seems to me that I should avoid this work in these treatments.
And I saw a child who was suffering from severe pain, and the head was swelling each day until it could no longer bear it.
and I thought that the swelling was so great that he died, and this swelling is assembled outside the bone above the shoulder, between the neck and the bone.
and the work is such that if the swelling is between the neck and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you must make a wide incision into the head.
and it should be as long as we, until the swelling flows out.
and here is the form of the space:
If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is outside the bone, and you see the signs that you see the commissures of the head opened on each part, and the sharp pain that you feel when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not return to you: then it is necessary that you cut into the head three incisions in this manner:
And after the incision, drain all the moisture out. After you strain the incisions with bandages and powders, and put in wine and oil, and leave it so for five hours;
then you release it, and treat the wound with bandages and blisters, and leave the head strapped again, and give the patient to eat dry meat without moisture until the member is comfortable and healthy.
And another way of incising is that you look for the size of the abscess and the sharpness of the needle;
for it is never in front; for it is never behind; for it is never on the right; and it is never on the left.
Then cut where the abscess is open, and fill the needle with, and make the incision according to what you have the power to do;
and be careful not to cover the artery. and if blood comes out, so that the hairs die from the detachment of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When it comes to any disease that is called "cataract" on those or in the foot, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not help much, then the treatment is to cauterize with what they cover the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see that the joints are dislocated, it is necessary to make them return to their proper place. After that, rub the limb with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, then hold the dislocated joint against the entire cloth. Then look at where the blood flows, and if the veins on both sides of the ears are not restored, they are not yet fixed.
Then sign the veins of the ear, then cut both sides with a sharp knife until the vein comes out from the bone, and it should be through the width of the head.
And if you see, pour out the sponge outside the artery and cover it above, cutting in the same way as it should be through the middle.
And when the vein is cut, let it bleed continuously until it stops on its own.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, then it is necessary to measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then drill into and through the bone;
and put six drops of blood outside if it is necessary to do so, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery;
then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point do not let any pus come out, then strain the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
for the head of the shoulder when the ancient head of the shoulder comes, and it is stuck due to the moisture of tears and chills in the temples and old age and similar things, and it is treated by means of medical cures and nothing helps him, then we should cauterize the arteries of the temples and burn, as we have said.
And the manner of their extraction is such that the hairs of his temples face the bad ones, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is not quickly restored in anyone who is too fat.
And if it is restored, hold the neck with some cloths, then rub the limb with some rough cloth, and raise the limb in hot water until the artery opens clearly; then take the spoon that is here: then gently scrape the skin until you come to the artery, then pull it up with pincers, and remove it well from all parts of the cloth;
If the artery is thin, then turn it back to the tip of the needle, then cover that part according to the amount of the two needles. But if it is not covered, it will not jump all at once.
And draw out a little blood from the vein, just enough to fill three small containers.
If the artery is large, then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong silk thread, so that no blood comes before the healing of the wound, and so that it does not cause further bleeding.
Then cover the excess that is between the two knots with a small amount of ointment in the same hour, and then, if you see, if the cautery cutellaire is applied to the bone until the needles are covered.
And this is the work of death, when the pain is not accompanied by fever and it is of a hot constitution. For the cautery is to finish the moistures: For it is of greater help against moistures.
Or it is necessary for the extraction of arrows that one fills the wound with old cotton and places on top well-made bandages;
And when they are removed, if necessary apply dry remedies that cause blisters and bandages until they are healed.
And if without cutting the artery as you work, then quickly cover it with cauterization, or fill the wound with vinegar and apply it to your hand that the uncut part is not stained. and if you do not have this present, put it on the joint as much as the sinew should not be frozen, and raise the joint from high cold until the sinew ceaselessly, and it should be stretched as it should be.
And it should have between the two knives one inch of space, and then when you have slit the two veins, and you melt the hot iron over it until it comes just to the bone, and cop the vein in two parts. and let them be separated by the two shoulder blades because it is not known how much of this cauterization affects the whole body.
and this is the form of the cauterization:
and what is more movable and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery cutting from two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to last longer in their heat. When instruments are too tight, they hold less heat.
of tears When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are above the skin of the head, and it does not improve with medical treatment, and you see the face of the patient becoming twisted, and it feels like a tremor. and they are held and moistened so much that the hairs of the papers are burned, and the papers are charred, and scorched by the heat of the tears, if it is necessary for this treatment. And they called the old "wound healer," and you should do this for the painful part that has this disease, whether it has hair or not, then make three cuts evenly along the length of the forehead.
And they called the old "wound healer," and you should do this for the painful part that has this disease, whether it has hair or not, then make three cuts evenly along the length of the forehead. And either one of the cuts as two downwards from the forehead, and the others two along the ribs, above the ribs, and be careful not to incise the arteries that are above the ribs.
And keep your hand away from the continuity of the two jaws, and let each wound have the quantity of three drops through the joints.
and have prepared a piece of sponge and much of cloth to wipe away the blood, then boil the spatula in two parts of water that is this form:
from the incision which is from the temple to the second incision; and scrape all that is between the two cuts to the entire face which is above the bone, then make another part from the same incision to the other second, and then stretch forth this spatula. If you insert the instrument called "curette" into the first cut, it is very sharp on one side and dull on the other, and this is its shape:
And place the sharp side of the curette towards the eye and the dull side towards the bone, and continue scraping until it reaches the same cut.
And copper all the vessels that descend from the head as those which are so long as the incision is continued to what opens the face, and then make another part in the same cut to the other side.
then evenly extract the blood, and express the joint for the blood taken;
then place a piece of old cloth in each wound, and put on dressings soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and make sure that abscesses do not come.
and at the end of the day, release the joint, and apply a great amount of salt, then the healing poultice with red oil, and other remedies to heal wounds, until they are healthy.
When anyone comes for the usual cauterization, and you see the eyes tightly closed and small, and weakened vision, and burnt papers; and the hairs prick, and where the hair meets the skin, it causes sharp pain, and the hairs are discharged. therefore, avoid these accidents that these matters and this cautery do not come from many veins, and the movement that is, is this.
And it is that you command the patient to turn his head back, then make a deep cut into the forehead, and another one wide at the forehead. and begins at the cut of the right temple to the left temple, and let the incision just to the bone. and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that cause pain.
and when the bone is exposed, soak up all the blood with a sponge, and then clean between the two lips of the cut and put wool, and test with linen. then lay strips of cloth soaked in wine and oil above it, and guard against abscess.
when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until charcoal begins to form, then treat with things that cause vomiting, like char.
In a similar manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of cologne earth, and make a poultice. and administer it in these wounds to cause vomiting throughout.
of ear deafness
All that which enters our ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beasts, or stones from the mine or similar things like iron. ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When it chiefs in the ear pebble or other kind of thing that does not fit well in the ear, does not grow in the ear, then put the ear to the sun.
If you see a stone, spill a little purple oil or sesame oil, then moisten the extraction. and the patient should spit out the condition, and stop up the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear. and hold the ear upwards.
Many times it comes from this treatment.
And if it does not come forth, apply gentle extraction with fine tweezers, of which this is the form:
If it comes out with the tweezers, that is good.
If not, apply gentle extraction with a fine needle;
And if it does not come out with the needle, make a small hole in the rain and pour water into the top of the hole or the ear canal very strongly, and stop up the hole with melted wax so that nothing can enter with the needle. Then remove it properly, as it often comes out as we have said.
and if it does not come out in some way, she takes glue from some means, and puts it on the wound, and places any instrument that is sharp to this purpose, and puts a little cotton around; then press the glue over the stone or whatever, and pull it out.
And if she does not do any of these things that we have said, then you must quickly cut the ear as soon as an abscess forms and pus comes out, and spasm;
and the way of the cut is that you first make a small incision into the painful part of the ear, and extract the pus according to its strength, then place the wound between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear where the grease or fat lies; and let the cut be as wide as a crescent moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck the poison into your mouth.
and treat it until it is healed.
And if it is small and swells up, administer extraction.
and if it cannot come out, then administer the following subtle method according to this form: and administer an incision to that small one.
But do not crush it immediately if you think the grain is wet due to earwax, until you have made many pieces of it.
then extract it with small tweezers and the suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
In the acute case when it is in the ear, it is necessary that the hairs use blowing of a soft condition first, and widen the ear with old cotton. And let it lie across the very ear itself where the sharp is. If it jumps out because of the sky, it's good.
If not, take many small, sharp needles according to the length of your hand, and heat them slightly in the fire. And place the hairs one or a pinch of their ear, and go up to the other foot from its other part, and pierce with another needle through the ear which is in the ear. And do not stop pricking with needle after needle until the sharp pain is all gone, and thus it will all go away.
And if you see, take a reed, and boil one of the needles in the ear, and the other head take from the fire until the thinnest reed is hard.
Then repeat the process for other joints until the sharp pain is gone, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of an animal, if it is small like a mouse and similar, treat it as we have said in the division.
But if it is of large size that one can feel, then anesthetize extraction of pins. And the thing to remove that is in the ear is the least difficult.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, if you treat them as we have said in the division and do not help much, then you should look at the ear in the sunlight. If there are no open wounds, if they prick at their base with small needles, and if they do not open, then take the cannula of which this is the form:
And it should be tight below and wide above. And push the more slender needle into the ear according to the amount of pain, then it is successful throughout the cannula; Do this often until all the blood flows out.
And if they do not obey to flow out, then apply pressure around the cannula of cotton as I have said in the stone;
and if they do not succeed as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the opening of veins, and you will find them where to treat distillations;
And if you drip your oils and medicines into the ear of this instrument, as you see here: And it should be made of silver or tin with small holes below and larger ones above to drip;
And to press within the distillation of the tin instrument well made for this purpose, and if you see take the razor and wrap it evenly with cotton around the tip; Then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines into the canal, and the canal should be in the ear;
Then press inside the razor with all the cotton, and press your hand evenly until the oil is distilled or gently from the ear; and the patient feels the pain inside, and the distilled water should be slightly warmed over the fire as it is poured into the ear. and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be very good.
of ear deafness
No child is born without any deformity in their ears.
And the same thing happens to men due to the swelling of a wound or a foreign body inside the ear, and this swelling never occurs from within the ear, if one cannot see it.
And the same thing never happens to the water outside of the ear, and one can see it well.
Therefore, if one cannot see it, it is a severe illness in many positions, and in this one where one sees, one must put the ear of the bad hair to the sun. and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the work has all this span of time because of which here is the form:
And let it be smooth and thin in front and behind all plain, so that it does not blind the ear;
if the operation is of bone or the ear canal, if your pinchers are thin and the coping lightly, until that bone is completely removed.
And if the wart is inside the ear, then take a fine razor and slightly warm it at the fire, then put it on the skin of the ear.
If you feel the inflammation that the hairs cause pain to hear, lightly puncture, and ensure that you do not injure the nerves of the ear.
Then place a tent according to the width of the pustule in the ear, and insert it using the Egyptian method. Do not do anything until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and insert it using acute rose, and powder above vitriol broken.
And if you see the ear swell, then it is advisable to remove the tent and insert another tent inserted using rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed. Then the healer as long as they are healthy.
And if there is a flow of blood, soak an sponge and wipe it with cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the flow of blood which are to treat distillations.
This is the method that comes on papers from the eyes when they are wet and dry, if it is necessary to extend them with forceps and pincers, and the lid of a spatula from their roots; Then put on the broken glass leg.
And if without de-corticating, then cauterize the subtle lens with the fine cauterizer, and the cauterizer after the incision is valuable;
and many times repair them, but nothing remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the gravel Often in papers come things that seem gravelly in their form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail," and is an assembly of large moisture above and below the paper. The work is such as follows:
The work is such as follows: Take care if the hail moves from one side to another, and this is an easy thing to know.
Then make the wounds wide, then scrape each part lightly, then take them with tweezers and cover.
If you do not cover it without pricking the paper a little, it will not hurt the patient.
If the wound is large, it should be sutured with a stitch, and the care should continue until it is healed.
If it is small, do not force it, for the wounds heal quickly and easily.
And if the grain is falling down into the inside of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and catch the grain with some tweezers, and cover it and press from both sides.
And if the paper is separated by the incision, it does not matter.
And when the grain is removed, apply a solution of strong salt water, and care for the wound until it heals.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a grease that is soaked in threads of paper above, and it has more effect on children than adults, and it causes great pain to their eyes, and they have diarrhea in the morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears rush to their eyes.
And because of this, they sleep on their faces down, and lie on their backs, and their papers are moist under their pillows that the grease enters and covers them with its appearance. And when you press the limb to your ears and feel the cracking sound between them.
And the manner of the work is such that the evils put their head in your hand;
and then take a linen cloth, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains the external parts of each part, then put it on top of him. and press with your fingers on both sides, so that the external parts are assembled inside the circle.
then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a cut of a wide size, and it should not be any wider than the wound that is made at the vein opening.
and make the skin in front until you reach the external parts. and in many positions come the external parts of the cut, in the shape of a piece of white fat.
Extract the bandage from all over the piece of cloth between your two hands, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out.
And make sure you do not tuck it into the wound, that you do not bring the whole length of the bandage to the oil, that you do not hurt it.
And if it does not open at the beginning of the wound, slightly scratch the wound until it opens.
Then extract it as we have said, then wipe the bandages in soft and sharp, and put on the limb, and spread out evenly.
And if there are such men who breathe and place on to corrupt the moisture that is remaining.
Then, let the healer as long as they are healthy.
And if the healer comes to the abscess, let them apply wet dressings until they are healthy.
of hairs of papers When hairs are artificially placed or arranged other than their natural way, and are awakened, they can harm the eyes, and bring about diseases such as tears accustomed to and softening of the papers and cornea, until this is caused by the destruction of the eyes.
And there are four ways of treatment: or by cauterization with fire together, or by medicine as the case may be, according to what is before or in the chapter of cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching, or by caines, according to what I will say.
It is necessary for you to place the head of the hairs in your hand, then return the paper of the oil to your right hand;
If she is converted, it is good; if not, then prick with a needle at the top of each thread; and let it be either on the edge of the paper or where the hair grows above these hairs, and pull the thread up from under the paper, and turn the blade to the razor;
then cut in the part outside the paper, outside the hairs, and smooth out the skin, from the large arm to the small one;
then pull the thread, and place outside the paper a small cotton and linen tent, then above the paper, a figure of a wheel, like the fuller's wheel, and all the while it should be according to the quantity that you saw raise the paper which is divided into each one.
And if for a person who has skill, one should copiously apply a great quantity of paper according to how the paper is softened;
then make all the space above the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large calf to the small; and let one of the cuts be near the hairs naturally in the large root, then bury the needle in one of the two angles of the curve, then scrape the whole;
then gather the two lips to one stitch of a needle with all the thread of fine linen, and suck the blood, and remove the excess hairs above the two edges at any things glued, if you see this being done.
and if not, then do not worry about it, leave the stitches and threads in place for three or four days.
then heal the wound from the side of the stitches with dry and constricting substances, because the paper swells at the moment of the wound and brings together the parts, but the stitches are dissolved (as the ancients said), and this is without fear. and if another way:
and if another way: and you should shape the paper into a form that is like the fleece of wool, as we have described, and cut it into three pieces according to the form that is here:
then copper which surmounts as small equal forces according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the needles, and the thing is not even, take a needle or one with a thread, and bring it into the shape. and put another thread over the large arm, and the second thread over the small one, and bring the threads together evenly between your two fingers.
then lift your hand evenly, and lift the skin over where you have sewn, as we have said, then gather the two lips of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed.
and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with ointments and similar soothing substances.
and never has it happened that the hairs of the paper are converted.
if you should use what we have said about incision;
but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is as follows: and you should convert the paper and make the incision inside as I have said, then make two wounds by art, and two ligatures as thin as the paper and the width of the space is; and tie them as the two threads of which you hold the thread;
then bring them together thinly above the paper of the oil, and strain the two wounds from the two parts formed; and it leaves it thus for several days, and the skin that is stretched will die and rot and putrefy, until it falls off from it.
If it takes too long, if the copper has some strength, then cure it until it is healed.
And when the wound is soaked, and if it is raised with paper, and they will not grow back.
And this is the shape of the two needles that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is such that you grasp a thin needle, and pull the silk thread soft and thin; Then gently gather the shoulder blades and bend them slightly, and let the arms hang down by their own length, a span long.
Then order the other arm to be raised quickly and slightly, and bend the shoulder blades of the other arm.
Then put the misaligned joints in their proper place.
And let the work be done in the shade so that the work is not too difficult, for it is a delicate and small task, then push the needle through the entire arm at the base of the hair, and pierce it gently into the paper until you draw it out above the natural hair.
Then remove the hair up to the skin, and cut off the hair that is in the skin, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then remove your hand until the hairs come out of all the skin in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the skin is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then treat the skin with the discharge until it comes out completely and you can see through the oil.
Then treat the skin and the thread, and close the oil and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and grows on top.
If the hairs are short, accompany them with long hairs from goats, and lift them with that which you leave, until they are lengthened and then let it go.
of the stirring of the oil When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the pimples, comes in the oil, there are two ways:
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it comes by wounding, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar things.
And the way of the work in it is that you break that sewage, and dehydrate the lips from it, and put inside tents of linen, and hold it until it is healed.
and you should only use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrict. If you do this, the disease returns worse than the first;
but I work with things that soften, like fenugreek; and the rose of sharp or high and seed of linen be cooked, and stinging nettle boiled in any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a tent, and the cure for this.
And the treasures of your cure are that you take care not to let it spoil according to the form it was before;
and these works that we have said are only to bring it back to the form it was before.
This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things.
And the method of the work is such that you hold a needle with a double thread, and the thread in the shuttle, and make it pierce from the right arm to the left, so that the thread comes out on both sides.
Then the shuttle is above all the needle, and the copes at the span width. And if it appears like paper according to what is necessary, it is good.
If not, take the razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts or where it costs inside the paper.
et soient les chiés des deux fendures des deux angles de l'incision que tu as copeit, et fais des angles si que lorsque elles sont assemblées, que le figure soit ausi com le figure d'une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;
then remove that char, according to the quantity that its cost is of, from what teaches the paper, then add the two parts severed, and the cut of a thread of linen;
then apply the care that we have said about the softening medicines and tents, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a plain cut outside of the hairs of the paper, and according to what is above; Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said.
Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said. And one should perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the wise masters compare all possible means to how they can make the figure return to its natural shape.
And the misaligned joints themselves, according to what is necessary for operation and instruments in many positions.
When this sewing is done by hand in a somewhat manner that the paper above is glued with the white of an egg, and cannot move or do its natural workings, then it is necessary that you bring the point of a razor outside the paper, and lift it up.
and it is set with pins, until you copy what is on the needle's subtle edge, which should not be too sharp or too blunt, so that the pain does not suffer from the needle being too sharp or too dull.
and let your incision, from which you scrape that assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape.
and it is healed completely, and never in the sharp salt oil, and lift it with the gentle sweet, and of vinegar.
then place between the paper and oil a linen cloth, and place above the oil wool moistened with plenty of honey. and after the third day, use a cold compress and unclean things until they are healed.
There are two ways to do it: It is either nervous and similar to the hard sphacelus, or it is not nervous but similar to a white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and cut with knives, does not move.
Both start from the great arm and grow slowly until they cover the entire eye and light and movement of the oil.
And the manner of incision is that the evil ones put their head in your healthy place, then they work the eyes. and gently hold the paper to your hand, then bend the angle with small forceps, and extend it above; then take a needle, and put horsehair, or goat hair, or beef hair, and thread it tightly; and double the tip of the needle a little and insert it into the angle, and push the needle through the entire angle, and tie the angle with a thread and extend it above, and scrape all the hair on the side of the angle that faces the prickle and silk to the skin at the top, then cut the remaining in the root of the arm at every subtle hair and with small forces, and leave the natural flesh or the arm, so that by the incision it does not usually bleed;
and never has the joint remained out of place alone, and over time, as we have said. then the skin is removed to reveal all the soft tissue that gives it its shape:
And beware that the soft tissue does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the bone is not pierced;
and after the incision pour in a little broken silk oil, and a poultice made of litharge, and let it rest on the other side; then the care that is needed until it is healed.
And if the joint is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the incisions cannot enter, often this remedy of joints is cured by medicines;
and grow like I have described in the previous section, and if you see it covered, work with the oil of the hairs, and take the sharp needle lightly as follows: and gently scrape the edge above, and if you see that it does not soften and the razor is sharp, then drip from your mouth into the oil of the candle made of litargire and the red wax and silk thread, and stir the oil just after;
If nothing is contrary in the oil, such as an abscess, then milk it, and first cure the abscess until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is completely healed.
then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is completely open.
and if the appearance of the flesh of the arm appears in the oil by great harm, then remove it at once, and take a part and not all at once, so that tears do not come to it;
Then apply a red wine oil infusion made of litargire.
Some men are born with no red hair, and cover the prunelle and hold it above the papers and turn them to the defuer, and it seems like a baldust rose.
And the work is such that the hairs put their head in your clean, then they do the eyes, and with all that red hair, it is convenient for this, and support it at the force.
Then cover the first hair, and go all scraping to the razor just at the end, and make sure you do not smear the oil at the work.
and let the incision be made with the space-like method that we have mentioned in the incision of the nail and with small forces to remove the base, as it forms after this chapter demonstrates.
and when the incision is made and all the char is removed, use the oil of silk that you distill or red mercury and similar corrosive medicines, and put it on top of the oil with cotton wool, so that it is ensured to be a healthy wound.
and if nothing remains and the sinus is overhanging, and you doubt an abscess is forming, leave the oil and treat the abscess with calming remedies for a healthy wound.
Then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make the same charms cast into oil by this similarity.
But it is necessary that you add the cure of each weak oil from its natural source; and of the accidental way, in ironwork;
and do not put your hand into any of these workings until you see that this limb is suffering from that working.
which are red veins that cover over the eye, and take away its work and weaken the eye always.
The work is therefore to the first that you look at this oil, in which previously was, and outside, and there is no other disease besides the previous one; then the joint should be bent in a certain way:
instruct the patient to put his head in your healthy hand, then bend those vertebrae along the spine according to their wisdom, and let the vertebrae be slightly doubled according to this form:
And let them be done twice a degree in one course according to this form:
then bend those vertebrae gently, and squeeze the blood out of them hour after hour, until you can remove those vertebrae from the joint;
and be careful not to bleed the joint with sharp points of the spatula, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not cut those vertebrae;
And when you have done this, if you distill green and red oil of turpentine to corrupt the humor that remains above.
And if you cannot collect all the humor in that hour, then make a poultice on the oil of things calming the pain of the eyes, and let it stay for some time until the pain is eased and the abscess is securely healed, then continue according to this method until they are healed;
and this is the form of the forces:
The master calls it "arissati" fistula:
When you cure it by cauterization and with medicine boiling according to the humor that I have before said, and it is not healed, then engage in what you did above the abscess, where it should rot, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is discovered.
And when the tooth is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, if the forceps of all the instruments used here are in its form;
and it is called "rough file," and it should be made of iron from the same as the tooth, and it should be pointed as a needle, as it is in the present form:
And put it on the surface of the rotten tooth, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you feel that that corruption is removed;
and do not do it again, then restore the tooth with drying remedies.
If the joint is reset and the limb is straight, and the body of the bow is straight, it remains thus for forty days, and it does not recur and is not postponed, and no bad accident happens to it, so it is considered healed.
If not, there is no other means than to return the fistula to its proper position according to this form: And you must dislocate the bone the second time with iron and with medicines, and when it is discovered, take the fork according to this form, and the nail should be bent at three angles, and the fistula should be attenuated from the top as you see here:
Then place it on top of the bone of the arm, and move your hand away from the oil and pores, then turn to the full extent of the forearm until it pierces the bone and the patient feels pain as it comes in that position if he holds his hand above his shoulder.
And then restore the joint of dry medicines as I have indicated, and when the char is born and hardens the limbs, it goes to the shoulder. If it is a lighter thing for the pain.
When the eyes are wide open all at once, and it does not come to dislocate at the shoulder, nor is it discomforting, then you must bind the pain.
then the healthy one, then it places leeches or hatchets to draw blood, then it applies oil mixed with acid, aloe, incense, and sarcocollis, and then strains the oil, and applies the ointment with bandages and cloths;
and the way of the cloths is that you press cloths that are enough soft, and double each one into four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity they have to do;
then strain it through a cloth that is strong and firm, and then restart the leeches to draw blood;
then remove the suction cups and let the oil remain on it day and night, and if the joints are dislocated, it is necessary to strongly restrain them.
then remove the joint after the day and night, and if you see the oil return, it is good.
if not; then restart the plaster and bandages and the joint and the suction cups until they are healed.
For the tearing of a vein, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if When dislocations occur in the woven cloth, then open it, and come forth with papers like the grain of resin, and is expansible to see.
then if you see the joint, the work is such that you should poke a needle into the root of the part below this one above, then poke another needle where the tendon of the elbow is double. and make it pierce, and let the first needle follow its position;
then cover the arm with a piece of cloth and tie it tightly, then pull out the needle and put oil on the wound in abundance.
and let it stay until the child's wound heals with the cloth, then care for the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed.
and never a wound is restrained by the use of each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if they appear very large, then pierce the thin spatula that comes from the oil, and wipe away the yellowish moisture and clean the hairs, and enter immediately.
then extract it until it is healed.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing more than boils that are gathered in the oil, resembling sharp droplets, and it is not sharp.
and the manner of the appearance of the work is such that you make the dislocated joint sit properly on its seat and straight, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the bone coming above to your eyes; then let it be released, and do not descend and be disassembled the light, and see the dislocated things as they should be;
and if it does not descend, then it is acute, and do not straighten the bone as we have said.
then make the dislocated joint between your hands, then take the thin spatula and put it under the eye lid from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the eyelid and the eyebrow, until the bone is;
et when she was born, if she is distilled in hot vinegar mixed with honey, or hot or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then she is cured of other cures until she is healed.
of the oils of the oil We have similarities in the divisions, and what is needed to pierce it. if in work according to health.
It is necessary that you make the pain between your crossed hands sit, outside of the light for the sun, and the oil is clean and tightened very tightly.
Then put the paper of the oil to your right hand if the eyes are on the right, or to your left hand if the eyes are on the left.
then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the tool called «almagda», or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right.
then place the tip of the tool above the crown by the thickness of a pen in the part of the oil that is called «almagda», then strike the tool called «almagda» firmly, and withdraw your hand until it pierces into the part of the oil, and feel that «almagda» is empty;
and it is necessary that the measure of the opening «almagda» be at the length of the space from the nail to the end of the finger. and this is the crown of oil;
if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cloth, then put the instrument just above it where it is sharp, and press out the blood one after another through a hole.
if he is now sharp, then he sees the hairs in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After a short rest, and if the sharpness returns the second time, put the force with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not rise, gently twist around your hand little by little.
and then put a small silk thread, and leave the oil inside. Then apply a warm compress or wet cloth soaked in rose oil and plenty of honey, and bind it with clean oil.
And those who are from our time, apply it with plenty of honey.
And if it cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are some people who have very hard eyes, then you must use the tool called "alberit", of which this is the form:
And then pierce only the connective tissue, and do not go too far in front, but make the sharp instrument, then press gently, as we have said.
and at the completion of the work appears the evil of sleepiness that happens, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
and it should be done with all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and it should be tied according to its position just above the eye;
then reset the dislocation in that same dark place, and prove his sight, and let him see some things, and then return the bone to its position just before sleep;
and it should not be done only in the morning or after the incision, but it should be done when the pain is at its peak.
when abscesses come, then you should apply oil in front of the seventh hour, and it will alleviate the abscess.
and when it is calmed, then remove the bandage and put on its face a gold coin to cover any light, and let it stay in that dark house.
And then slowly go out of the house and return to his own home;
and tell that no one should interfere in this case. And some came to us who were of the Yrach, who told us that in their country people used to do something like this, because of which the arrowhead would stick, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I read it in any books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the similar forms of the almond, because those who do not know them see it as such;
and they are truly made of rain: And they are the masters of this very subtlety, and the others in three angles awake.
Never do charred or burned arrows of various kinds appear, because there are some that seem like scorpions at the tip;
and if there are such with enhanced burnt color, and if the arrow has a good color. In that case of those arrows that are good and not enhanced, it is appropriate to make the pain between your hands against the sun;
In that case of those arrows that are good and not enhanced, it is appropriate to make the pain between your hands against the sun; and work his nostrils, and pour the liquid into those charms, and pull them out; so that you can hold it in your hand at the subtle tip of a needle, until you know that that char is entirely hardened.
And if there remains nothing that can be held, open it with all the delicate instruments lightly, so that nothing remains. and if without harming yourself, an abscess bursts, then let the pus drain as it should.
And if they are malignant abscesses, then quickly and cauterize it until the wound is not moist and all the charms are removed, then pour in clean, cool water or vinegar. When the shoulder is injured, and moisture comes to the palm, remove it so that it is healthy.
And if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, remove it because there is cartilage above the bone, so that the tools do not come out for cutting.
Therefore, it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen slightly thick, and soak it in our hands, and put space between each one as much or little as needed. And put the hairs of the injured person in the thread of the needle at the top, and pull through as far as it comes out of the needle through the mouth.
And often they do this to children in schools, and it is an easy thing for those who wish to do it.
Then hold the child's head with one hand, and the other child's head with the other hand, and alternate them back and forth as we have shown in the picture.
Do this until you feel that the teeth have not been corrupted by that charm, then draw out the child's tooth, suck the blood, and wipe the wound with an Egyptian egg, and return it to its place as before.
Do this three times or more, until the wound has eaten away everything that remains of the charm.
and then place or remove a bandage as needed for several days until it is healed, and if there is a need for medicines, use them.
and this is the shape of the instrument for purging the head, with which one distills oils and medicines that are applied.
And it should be of silver or tin, shaped like an open lamp, like a tube, and the conductor is also like this.
and if you see, then make a closed tube, and the instrument is polished to purge the head.
and it should have a handle at the top to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the sinus headache
Many times a disease is born at the head of the neck, which is called "tulum", and grows and becomes large in size, as it appears to be seen.
And for this reason, you should cover it at the beginning, and the bone is all bruised, then put the fire cauterizer or hot medicine on it.
And if you delay in covering it for so long, if it is hard, of poor color, and without feeling, then take heed.
If you do not touch it with a little iron because it is an infected abscess, for when it is covered once, then great harm comes to the pain.
and if they are abscesses, gently touch them, not with burning hot, and you see that one can cover the whole, if the pain and fear allow, and cure the limb of things that are tight and restrictive.
However, when the solution comes in one of these cartilaginous places, it is of little use, as it is not beneficial to everyone.
It is therefore necessary to wait until the wound has no blood, if you look and see that the wound is fresh and full of blood throughout. and then apply both lips to a seam, then cure it until it is healed.
and if the lips are already decayed from one side and the other, then it is necessary to scrape all the parts of their edge until they heal, then assemble both lips to a seam, and hold them together, and powder with powder of blood of dragon, and broken incense. and apply powders on top of the plaster of strong or other healing plaster, and leave it until it heals through it, then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the abdomen; or with thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses on the lips
In some people, there are abscesses inside the lips, similar to grains, and smaller and larger;
therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut above each one, and take them with forceps and clean each part;
Then apply the limb after the incision of broken glass, until the wound is cleansed.
And then apply a dry bandage to the limb and treat it with dry things until it is healed.
Often gums rise above the teeth, which the ancients called "albulus".
If necessary, hold it with pliers and cut at its root, and let the blood or pus flow out.
Then apply the limb broken glass, or other astringent and desiccating powders.
And if that swells again after the incision, and often does, then cut it the second time and cauterize it. if it does not return slightly after the burn;
Sometimes they are gathered at the root of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scraps that are unpleasant and sharp; and sometimes they are associated with black and yellow and green teeth, as far as the corruption reaches the gum, and are with foul-smelling teeth;
if it is necessary for you to remove the pain between your hands, and its roots are in your holy place, and remove the teeth or scraps that appear, as long as nothing remains; And thus make of the black and green, and yellow and other stains, until they are removed.
And if it is taken out what is at the first layer, it is good. If not, start again from the second layer and the third, until you have removed everything.
And wash the teeth with various instruments to remove, according to what the operator demonstrates, because the razor that is used to remove the teeth has other shapes than the one used between the teeth. And these forms and others be with you prepared.
When you are treating a tooth for pain that you delay pulling as much as you can, because no one should do this. because it is a very high substance from which we have no excuse to pull it.
Therefore, when the toothache is extremely painful, you should be certain that the tooth is dead. Many times the pain of the misaligned tooth, and take care that it is either a holy tooth, and pull out the good tooth. And in any way do not leave the pain because of it, until the bad ones are removed, for we have already done this to these sinners.
And when you are well certain of the painful tooth, it is necessary that you burn around the tooth on all sides. with a strong iron rod to protect the gum from all parts.
then move the joint gently with your fingers or thin needles at the first point and point, until it is well dislocated, then firmly fix the needles. and either the painful part between your knees and ankles, and keep it still so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, take one of these tools and push it gently into each part lightly, and shake it as you did first.
And if the dense part is punctured and damaged, then it is necessary to fill it with cloths where the pores are. and if the thin needles are firmly held, so that they do not break when being pulled out.
and it is necessary to carefully wrap around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And be careful not to break it and leave a part, and again cause the pain by the evil of the root more great pains of the first.
And beware that you do not act in such a way as the ignorant sainors, who by their haste and boldness break everything at once, and never amend what we have told.
but bring forth every time by the wise one of this great disease because of the roots that they delay, or for the cart that they break, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is drawn, wash the mouth with wine or sage and salt;
and if blood comes out and often does, then use the mouth with broken glass wine;
and if it does not heal, then cauterize it.
The forms of instruments used to remove teeth should be long and thick-handled, so they do not double over when you pull the tooth.
These are the shapes: And they should be thick-bodied so they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of well-made iron, and they should be pointed to hold the tooth.
from the root of the tooth When the root remains in the tooth, it is necessary to place a moistened cotton ball on the tooth for I or II hours until the tooth is softened, then extract the forceps called "algefri," which are shaped like a beak.
and they should be made inside as well as a lime and that is the shape:
And if the roots do not wish to come out at all these needles, it is necessary that you dig around the root completely, and put the tool called "althali", which is a spoon-shaped instrument, in order to:
And if it is large, so that it does not break, and if its root springs up through the sky, it is good.
If not, with all the instruments, from which the forms come after this:
And if you use this tool that has two prongs, with which comes the shape: and other tools that are before in the realm of the teeth, and with this tool that looks like large needles, from which comes the shape:
And let these instruments be such that they cannot break, and they are many of dense ones. and also other instruments, which are not counted.
And the wise masters find their own instrument by themselves, according to their works and the disease shows them, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach the instrument for the diversity of the others and it has not broken the cart or other bones, or it has not helped, if he searches for the instruments that he needs, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, from which these forms come:
And let there be thick and strong bands to hold the bone, that it not escape, but be able to hold and remove.
Then restore the limb to its proper position with suitable medicines, and if there is any pus in the bone, and it is small, then remove all of this tool:
When the tooth appears not in accordance with its natural position, and its form is ugly, and especially in young women, then it is necessary to remove the tooth if it is not in the right place, and cannot be straightened or cleaned.
Then the root: and if he is held by the tooth, take this instrument which has the following form, and it is similar to a small beak, and let it be made of iron, sharp at the end:
And the copper bit by bit in your hands for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be removed, then the copper bit by bit like this is the form:
and it is also like the lip of which one makes arrows;
and in the lip of the tooth, lightly and carefully, so that it does not move until it is cut;
then the flat end of it to any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, then one must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt the speech.
When the tooth is knocked out, whether by impact or falling, and the pain cannot be relieved by pressing on the gum where it was located, and you treat it with restricting remedies, and it does not help.
if they need to be restricted with a gold wire, because the silver thread becomes green and rotten, but the gold never changes.
and it should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth.
and if you see that the teeth are moving, take the wire and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the injured tooth between the other teeth, as many as there are, until you can safely chew on the healthy tooth on the other side. Then, reapply the covering just to the part where you began, and gently and skillfully stretch your hand, until it does not move at all.
And let your fingers be tied to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the roots of the teeth with some needles, and assemble them, and put them back between the healthy tooth, and place it in such a way that it does not bleed on the tongue.
Then leave it so tight as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the thread breaks, then tighten it with another thread.
If it persists and serves in this manner for the entire duration, it is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the second molars, and the second incisors, as you see.
And when the tooth breaks, if it is reset in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said.
And it does not interfere with any other teeth that are wise and painful, and never is the shape of a goat's bone made, and it is reset in the place where the defect is, and it is held as we have said, and it persists and serves for the entire duration.
Never are these joints that come out of their place from the tongue or naturally, which one is born thus. or by accident of a burned wound;
and the works are such that you work the mouth of the dislocated joint, and have their head in your safe place, and they lift the tongue;
then press the nerve with a wide, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if it has hardness or no, and it is by burned wound, then beat the thin one and press the wide one gently;
and be careful that the cut is not too deep, for the artery that is out;
When you have done this, lift the limb of high rose or ash, or high cold, then place a tent of linen over the tongue;
and apply the tent to the hairs every night, so that the limbs cannot move.
And if blood flows out, put a piece of broken glass on the limb; and if the blood does not stop flowing, then cauterize it with the slow-burning cautery, which is good for healing. then use other treatments until it is healed.
and if you see that the wound is yellow or black or hard, and the patient does not feel pain, do not touch it, because it is a chancre.
If it is leaning towards the wound, and there is moisture, then pour the needle, and the opening of a thin spatula, and deliver from one side and the other. And if it does not want to enter your work, then place the broken glass shards on top as long as it is cleaned, then return to your work until you remove all the foreign matter.
Then lift the limb from above and below, and treat other wounds until it is healed.
of throat abscesses No one ever comes from within the throat wounds that are called "godath", and they are properly called the II mandibles, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then be careful:
If abscesses are hard to feel with a small sense and of fuzzy color, then do not touch them with a little iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, then do not touch them with a little iron, also for the running of blood. But let it be until it is ripe, and then you will break it, or it will break by itself.
And if it is of white color and the root is thin, then prepare the instrument to cover, but first check if the abscess has settled and is calm.
Then let the pain sit in front of the sun, and its heads be in your healthy hand, and the work the mouth and the arrow that the soldiers have between their hands, and press the tongue away from all the instrument, because of which is the shape.
and let it be of silver or thin brass like some knives:
if you press the tongue with this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the point and chip it in the amber, and draw it out above as much as you can;
and take nothing with from the threads, then cover the instrument with a cloth, of which this is the shape, which seems like forceps; and all the heads are hooked, one on top of the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel;
And if you do not have this instrument present, with a hook, of which this is the form: and let it be cutting on one side, and on the other not;
When you have cut one of the splints, cut the other according to the same method, and after the incision gargle the sharp pain with hot, hot, and salty water, and if there is blood flowing, gargle the sharp pain with hot water, or use pounded green pomegranate skins, or similar things, until the wound is cleansed. Then treat it until it is healed.
And never any other abscesses than the two splints are born in the throat, so cut them then as the two splints should be.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was lodged within her throat, specifically a small abscess.
And she had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the condition that was choking her, and could not eat or drink, and died if she continued like this for a day or two.
And the abscess was so large that it had been inserted with two needles through both nostrils.
I therefore acted quickly, and inserted it into one incision, then removed the rest, and removed a large portion of blood.
Then I inserted it into another incision through the throat, and performed the operation on the mouth and pressed her tongue.
After I had extracted these abscesses, and I took out a part of it, and it did not stop bleeding until a little blood came out. And thus the woman's throat was cut, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess by a long stretch.
And the abscesses kept recurring, and filled up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large.
Therefore, I advised her to cauterize it internally in the throat: Thus, she did not grow without it.
And I departed from these parts, and knew not what God would do after me.
of the eye
When referring to the eye, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular".
And if it is large and round, it is called "uvula".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help much, and you see that the abscess has been relieved, and it is small, then you must lance it.
And the one that is round and not long; and it is bloody or of a dark or black color, then you must avoid the incision of the latter. Because there is great danger in the pain.
Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its size and length, you should place the pain in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the tool that we have mentioned earlier. Then fish the thorn out of the wound, and remove it, and wrap it with one or two of the tools that I have mentioned in the incision of the two mandibles.
And it is necessary that you cover only the excess that is beyond the natural limit;
for if you cover more, it hurts the voice and speech;
And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the second rib, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the pain is too great for the copper, then you must use an engine for the cauterization of the sensitive pain.
And the manner of the cauterization is sharp and hot. And if the hairs put their head in your clean hand, and then press the tongue against the instrument we have said or in the chapter of cautery, and fix it with a sharp, live knife, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and use the movement of this instrument, which has this form:
And it should have one hair or how the man puts the medicine, like the movement of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine over the eye;
and the hairs lie across his chest, so that saliva and muscle juice from his mouth flow into the medicine inside, so it does not drip down his throat and into his stomach.
then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it on the eye, the quantity of half an hour, until you see the medicine is softened and the bitter taste of the medicine is eased.
and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wipe the cotton in the medicine, and blow the instrument through all the cotton into the corner above, until the cotton becomes red on the eye.
And do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for several hours or five.
And if you have the skill to restart the cauterization of the eye, then restart it, and after the cauterization, wrap it around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the eye.
And either apply a cold sharp instrument, and treat with gargling until they are healthy.
This treatment is more saved from incision than from the cauterization;
If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take chamomile and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and gather all or some of them in one pot, and add vinegar, and make it boil;
And the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot there should be an instrument like this: And it should be of silver or tin, and one end of the instrument should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the brain through the nose, until the brain is dead.
After that, it is often repeated until the brain dries, and make sure you do not apply this at the beginning of the onset of the abscess, for many things happen. And do not apply it until the decline of the abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, take a knife and place it inside the head, so that the mouth does not close too much. because the knife does not cause excessive vapor to burden the mouth, and this is a good remedy together with saving life.
Many times it is asserted at the throat with an object or fish bone, or nothing;
so it is necessary that you remove what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun at all times, so that you see the thing;
and what you cannot see and is pushed back into the throat, it is necessary that you make vomit the thing as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; If by chance, the thing is also moved by vomiting;
or the hairs have swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a root of lettuce, or some piece of dry bread; and it has tied the thread to the sponge, and then swallowed it again; and when she comes to the shoulder, she will be caught, and then drawn out forcefully;
and if she does not come out as we have said, take the instrument of force according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that it does not come out, or push the bone inside;
and move the hairs and push the instrument, because it is more or less or the thing is as such; if the pushing goes down, or it pulls the instrument evenly, as far as it is strong.
of the throat wound
Never use the saliva, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when it does not profit, then look in the throat of the hairs to the sun, then you press the tongue against the instrument that I have told you.
And if you see the sandal, take it to all the small nails, or with thin needles that are worth for this.
And if it does not work, take a hairy rope, and push it into the throat of the misaligned joint, then push or move the rope with the sharp iron, and do this often. And if the misaligned joint is stiff all day.
then take full handfuls of sharp, cold iron, and work the mouth, and pour in water against swallowing, and move it frequently to your hand. and if the tongue soon feels the sharpness, it will spit.
and if it does not spit as we have said, then smoke the bad breath with asafetida, with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the grape;
do this many times, for it will eventually stop.
and the way of the fumigation is that you hold the pot with charcoal inside, and place it in a covered dish, and in the middle of it put the instrument;
then give your steam, and the painful one puts the head of the snake in its mouth, and closes its mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes up to the nose.
and the nose will now drip, and if it does not drip, then repeat the steam many times.
and suffer the painful one thirst, and give it salty and sour things, and do not let it drink anything sharp.
and then it will have the task of being cured by this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the nose, so is, when one can see it, similar to curved needles for mucous membranes to enter into the throat; and it resembles the beak of a bird, and there is an abrasiveness to the lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot wear out.
Many types of abscesses are, according to what the memory comes with after one and another in this book, and they differ in puncture and cut.
and it is in two ways that one is in its very appearance, and because it holds moisture.
And the second method is for the bones or when they are broken.
For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the thigh bone are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if to abscesses there is one that should not be punctured, until the hole is completed according to its completion.
And if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses which are beyond the joints.
For when abscesses come beyond joints, and it is left until it is swollen around, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which this is the cause of contraction in that member.
When the abscess is beyond the main member, and if you delay the piercing until it dies, it will harm the main member.
When it is beyond the foundation, if you pierce it while it is dead, it will harm it.
And it is necessary that you pierce the abscess when it is ripe for digestion completed, rather than that which is beyond the foundation, so that it does not putrefy and be long inside, and a fistula will come. and cannot heal in a long time.
and it is recommended that you scrape the head of the abscess perforation according to its completion, and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and swelling, and the decrease in debatement and relief of the main symptoms of the abscess, and the others.
and it is recommended that you make the perforation sit lower than the abscess, and where it opens more widely.
and the perforation should be long and straight, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all these places evenly without any bleeding. In these cases, according to the position of that limb.
And when abscesses are in the chest, it is better to leave the incision until it is confirmed that digestion has been completed, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before heaven, then the blood of the vein flows along with it, and it is full of much filth. And perhaps they harden the lips and pierce through them.
And if any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the arm, according to what the limb has need of.
And it is necessary that you apply small abscesses, small holes. And in large abscesses, large holes, and many cuts according to the resemblance of the size of the abscess.
And if there are such abscesses or it is necessary to cover and protect them. When it has become just like the cloth, and is softened, then you should do as one does with rags.
and if there are some that are cut into three angles, and if there are some that are treated as the back of a mullet, as in abscesses;
and if there are some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Those who have no head, as in superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you puncture clearly;
and when the abscess is large, and it has much pus, and you puncture, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but a part of it; then flatten the abscess just after, then draw out nothing else immediately; Repeat the procedure for many times until the bowels are completely empty.
Even if the patient has weak vitality, is pregnant, or a small child, or an elderly person with decrepit bones. For the experienced never treats the wound once with the outflow of the pus, because by chance the abscess may die, and you will not be harmed.
Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, dress the wound, and check if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a large opening, apply bandages of linen or old cotton. and if there are large abscesses and much pus, it is necessary that you place a bandage in each one so that they come together against each other.
and if you have pierced a part of the skin in an abscess, and you have wrapped it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or shredded linen against moisture, and bind it to the wound with a bandage.
then the bone, and the ointment for the wound until it is healed.
And if there is blood when working on your task, apply sharp cold and wet, and clean the instrument, and place it on the dislocated joint multiple times.
and if the bleeding persists, and is not stopped by government and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book are not effective, and if it is very painful, then it is recommended to apply leeches and damp cloths soaked in wine and oil.
If it is in this state, and the joint is charred, then you must apply warm cloths soaked in vinegar and oil, or in wine and oil heated, as we have said.
Then drain the abscess and dress it, and treat it as necessary until it is healed.
And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses:
as I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and see the chapter.
When small abscesses come from the head, and there are ways of them that are in cloths, like the lance of a swallow, and many there are.
There are some and such as have moisture like chickens;
And for those who are hard and rough to cut, there is no doubt if the artery is not cut against.
And the work of the cut is such that you prove with all the tool called "entromissoire", from which the form comes after, what thing it contains.
If it contains moisture, then it makes it from above downwards long.
And when the moisture is drained, scrape off without leaving any hair that contains that moisture, for it will return if left alone.
Then soak cotton in Egyptian oil, if present. If not, use vinegar and salt, and apply to the wound, and leave it there until the next day. And cover it with a clean cloth that remains at night.
And then restart the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the dressing, until you are sure it will not remain at night.
Then treat the wound of inflammation according to what is suitable, until it is healed.
And if the abscess remains large, then cut it according to this form, long. And pour your salves and the scar tissue from all parts, and put all your care into drawing out the pus where it is located.
And if the artery makes it difficult, then do what I told you afterwards.
And so do with the abscess if it is piercing, and cut and cure as I have told you.
And when cutting into the piercing abscess and the moist, it is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if any of these abscesses or wounds do not have moisture, and are from the type of old woman that I copied or wrote about;
and found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, which could not be broken. and if they had made any incision, it would have been just as bad as a stone wound.
In other abscesses coming or near, it was because those who come to the head of children and roots of ears, the opening should always be at the most dependent part, so that the pus can come out.
and treat them as appropriate.
Many times there are abscesses at the neck, and they are removed with forceps, and then they are opened, and sometimes they come from other parts of the body or chest, and they are large, and they are joined together.
And each scrofulous swelling is properly within its side, like the neck and abscess of the head, as we have said. and similar scrofula are many.
and similar scrofula are many. There are some things that contain moisture, and if there are evil ones who do not want to obey health.
in that one you see of good disposition to the touch, and similar in color to the flesh, and moves from every part and is not attached to the bone or the artery or the vessel, and is not deeply rooted;
if it is necessary to remove it from above, and scrape every part, and place the two lips of the wound together as one, if you have skill, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
and pull it out slowly and carefully, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, and is not too thin or too sharp, so that the hand does not slip, and do not expose it too soon, until you have covered what you should.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not stop bleeding, pour vitriol broth or some powders that stop blood flow into the wound, and apply pressure. and let it bleed until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is soothed, and then begin to bind it.
And when the wound is cleansed, return to your work until you complete it.
Then check if there are any remaining small pus pockets, and cut them out and drain them.
And if there is a large vein in the base of the abscess, it is not recommended that you cut that abscess at its base, but tie it with a strong doubled thread, and let it drop through, without causing harm.
Then apply a wound of old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then the treatment.
And if you have completely removed the scab, it is necessary that you gather the two lips of the wound and hold them together, then as there is no excess due to the size of the scab. and you should cover the root of it with a bandage and pull out the thorn, and hold it as we have said.
and you should cover the root of it with a bandage and pull out the thorn, and hold it as we have said. Those abscesses that hold excess fluid, pierce where it opens and dies;
And pierce it in such a way as the one previously mentioned, depending, then apply bandages with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; And when the wound is well bandaged, the treatment with healing ointment until it is healed.
The ancients said and spoke of the throat cutter; but I have never seen such a thing in our land, and it is their written account of their words.
For those who have hernias, the neck's part called "epiglottis" must be avoided. and it cannot be helped by this, because all the veins and the root of the evil are in those who have abscesses full in the mouth, or in the throat or in the armpits.
When the disease is in the throat pore, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we must cut it outside three circles or four a small cut across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut of the throat, not in the cartilage.
and those who are not accustomed to the section of the epiglottis, as there is no cartilage, and the valves are long and narrow.
And if the master is cowardly, then it is necessary to stretch the skin of the neck all around, then cut the throat until it reaches the windpipe. And avoid the blood vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the sinew, as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the section of the flap of the windpipe that jumps out through the limb that is broken, and by the lack of voice.
and leave the wound open for a piece.
And when the hour is passed for which we doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound carefully, and stitch it all together without the cartilage;
then administer medicines that cause heat to rise until they are healed.
Albucasim says that one should not do this unless the throat is completely stunned, and the limbs are judged to be dead, and the defect is paralyzed. Therefore, one must cover the epiglottis because the hairs cannot keep it in place, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death;
and because the ancients ordered to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four, and then they ordered to stitch the wound and heal, as long as it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a young lady take a knife and stab herself in the throat, cutting part of her jugular vein.
and I was called to cure her, and found her as if dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the arrow that had come out of it, and although she had not bled much from the vein except for the throat, and the blood flowed through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed the wound, and healed it until she was well.
and there was nothing left to the young lady but that she was hoarse, and returned to her usual state.
because I know that in the throat there is no fear.
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and is a large abscess in the color of pus, and is very common in women;
and there are two ways: natural, and accidental;
or natural, without cause.
And accidental is in two ways, one of which is similar to our gout, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from us through the artery. and there is fear, and it does not require to be treated with fire except in the small one, and the proof and search are made throughout the whole body: if you treat it as you would gout, and cannot find any vein, if the copper, as we do for ours, and bring it to all its clothing, if there is none. and search for it quickly, and treat it as it should be, until it is healed perfectly.
Many methods we have, of which I will say all the similarities;
and now it is fitting that I tell you all the differences between us and them.
I say that they are hot and feverish, until the boils have passed, and is accomplished by the pustulation; therefore the fever and heat subside.
With us there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains the abscess, which is its own pus and is according to the color of the skin, and begins like a small sore, and becomes large;
And there are two kinds, dry or moist, and many colors, as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when coming to the care of a new patient, to first test and inquire about the "entromissoire" instrument, according to its form as it appears in the following chapter or book.
And the method for examining abscesses of ours is that you grasp or slightly moistened cloth that you insert into the abscess, and turn your fingers gently, until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core, then it is according to the size of the abscess;
then extract the contents, and be careful that it does not spray.
If the running wound is moist, of whatever color it has, make it as I have said for other abscesses.
and if afterwards the joint becomes moist, take away the grease, then cut it in a cross shape, and take pincers, and lightly scrape off every part and wash the coat or where it was with clean water;
and if you cannot remove it cleanly, then tear it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it returns to us many times;
and if it remains for a little while and does not bother you, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, and strain the wound, and put on things that calm abscesses, and treat other cures until it is healed.
and if it is large, use two fingers of the wound, and treat the wound with charcoal.
and if it is against or other if you hasten and fill the wound with broken glass, and leave it for two hours or three, until the wound heals, and rest the discharge of blood; then return to the copper that is left out of the water.
See the shapes of the instruments inserted, and they are of three kinds: large and medium and small;
and there are three kinds of quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three ways: great, medium, and small, to search for the abscesses of fistulas.
They are also like the needles used to extract them, and are of gold, or iron, or silver, and cost as much as those that are yellow, and are more experienced at removing black pus from fistula boils.
And there are three ways: great, medium, and small, according to the amount of the size of the fistulas.
The shapes of needles are of many similarities, such as you see here:
And if there are bones with two crowns of three kinds;
And if there are bones with three crowns, and they are also of three kinds;
And if there are bones with two crowns, and bones of one crown only, and they are also of three kinds;
And all these are necessary in their place.
The main ones of which they are made are cutting, and there are some that do not cut much more than one part, from which we peel the flesh, because otherwise they would cut the vein or the nerve;
And among these intermediaries are the awls inserted into handles, so that the pain does not persist at the opening of the abscesses;
There are three ways: great, small, and medium, as you see.
and we only use them in the joints, such as knees, arms, shoulders, and similar joints.
and never made another small instrument like the scrapers of pustules, according to this form, with which we drain blood. and it is never placed back into its proper position which can cope with veins, and arteries, and it always returns according to this great form:
Never inflate the breasts of some men when they begin to rot, until they seem like the breasts of a woman.
and they remain swollen and infected, and whoever wants to heal them, if it is necessary according to this form of this line from b to g: Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with healing ointment, then sew together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the wound is large and widespread, like those seen in women, then make incisions in two places above, similar to tears. To hold the one to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g. Then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and follow what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in care until it is healed.
If it is not well-healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the hairs do not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in a caustic ointment. Let it remain until it melts the remaining and the grease, then cure it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come from the ankles are ways of hard scrofula or when there are pustules, and they contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b to the line g: And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply old cotton to the wound and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and care for the wound with a poultice until it is healed.
And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, then cut them as we have said in incisions of scrofula, and if the wound does not heal, then cauterize it as we have said before.
When the artery is cut, and the skin above it is dry, often abscesses form, and just as often there is bleeding from the vein and abscess.
And if one knows how to do it, then one should treat the abscesses long and wide apart. and when you sense pain, if you sense tightness.
and if it is for the vein, then look for nearby appearances.
It is foolish to cover this abscess, and immediately when it is outside the arms and legs and neck and many other parts, and it is very large. Therefore, the treatment of iron is necessary, and the one at the top should also be covered, and in the one that is inflamed by an artery piercing through the long skin.
then make a cut in the belly with needles, and then remove the artery of the webs, until it is discovered.
Then push out the other arrow, and pierce it through to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread of linen, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then do not remove the limb that is between the two ligaments of an intromission until the pus that is in it has been drained.
Then administer the care that was prescribed, until the wound heals. Then treat this inflammation that comes from it, until it is cured.
And if the abscess is in the belly, it is necessary that you clean your hand with what you can from the abscess on all the skin, then pull out the needle outside of the body that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and if there is a double thread, so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or with one of two threads from the two ends of the thread;
and if you doubt that the thread will not hold, then bring another needle to the end of all the thread outside of the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four knots;
Then drain the abscess until the excess pus is removed, then clean the wound and leave what is connected.
Then apply a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat the wounds with bandages and ointments until they are healed.
As abscesses come to the artery and vein, abscesses also come to the neck when it is cut, or from too much work, and similar things.
And there are often complications and doubts in all cases where there are joints, and this is the most common abscess, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and it is in many positions with pain.
And when it is squeezed, the patient feels great pain, and it is not in front of the flesh, but outside the wound.
and moves well from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor dislocate or displace, and that which is in the joints should not be covered by iron: by chance I may have contraction; and that which is at the neck or face, makes the skin soft:
and that which is at the neck or face, makes the skin soft: If the abscess is small, if it has pus, and it is in its root;
and if it is large, then suspend it at the tip, and scrape, then remove the bone, and stitch the wound together at the seam, and the treatment until it is healed:
No time ever occurs in the belly and no other place, and it is a disease called "funge" by the resemblance of snakes, and it is to the fine roots, and the large joints;
and in it are small and very large;
and I saw the man who had two bellies which were more like snakes than any other thing, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had fine roots, and they were torn, and in them flowed moisture.
I took them and found in one eighteen ounces heavy, and in the other six ounces, and the workings in the incision are such that you look to see if the snakes are moist, and the color of the artifact is white and moist and of fine roots; If the copper is too wide at the tip, and the fire cauterizer is present.
If the copper is too wide at the tip, and the fire cauterizer is present. For in cutting, there often come great bleeding of blood, and if you do not stop it, then hurry to use the cauterizer.
And if you see the pain spreading and causing fear of the incision of the iron, then take a well-made thread, and tie it around the limb as we have said, and leave it for two days.
And then restrain, and do not cease to tighten the thread around the limb until it copes with the limb, and work through it.
and if the roots are large, then it is necessary to cut them immediately for the belly, but you must also cover half of it, then cauterize so it does not regrow.
then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cover the thalus which is of pale color and poor sensation and milky appearance.
For these abscesses are infected, and I will come to the treatment of pus afterward.
When the wound is deep if the appearance of the abscess comes from fire wound or cut of a boil, and is above the belly and in some of the bruises, as it has in other wounds, or of blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of moisture;
And if it is by the bursting of the pustule and by the outflow of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of blood, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various sources. And if it is for the issue of the intestine, then it is most diverse, and when one presses it to its two sides so it returns, and then it comes back, and perhaps if it is torn, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and for great effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, do not strain too much.
And if it is due to blood, it is open with these signs, the abscesses are large and hard, and it is closed according to an amount. And if it is due to windiness, then it is frothy at the touch, and the work is that you look to see if it is from the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
And if it is due to windiness, then it is frothy at the touch, and the work is that you look to see if it is from the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. If you must leave the care. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if it appears to be for the intestines or the bladder, then you must command the patient to stain his linen, and be completely extended straight, then sign all around the belly; then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the limb that you have signed all over, then extend half of the abscess above all the large joint; then bind him tightly with a strong thread or a firm silk cord, and let him be completely wrapped;
then operate on half of the abscess extended over the limb, and insert your finger, and search for the intestine; If you suspect the shoulder is dislocated, and it is, then push it back into place, and push the intestines up from behind the belly.
And if you suspect the shoulder is dislocated, take it by the bone, and remove any excess.
And if the artery opposes you, or the vein, then go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two pieces of thread, and push the two needles around what you have done in order to pierce.
Then strain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it heals, and kill the dead flesh by itself. when you see it going underneath and protruding, then treat it as necessary, and drain the abscess as we have said.
when you see it going underneath and protruding, then treat it as necessary, and drain the abscess as we have said. and extract the arrow or the moisture that you have removed, then treat the limb as necessary, and soak the limb.
For the fire cauterization, we have said in the division the similarities of chancre, and how one should treat it with medicines, and how one must avoid the treatment of iron.
and let us say that the chancre enters into the marsh, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when chancres are in a place where one can remove it as with chancre that is in the mammaries, and in the chest, and similar places, and all of it must be removed when it is in the beginning.
nor have I ever seen any heal before me.
And the workings, when it is in its place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you remove any once the black bile of the body;
then make it heal if it has obvious overfilling, then remove the pain from the good place to do the work;
then pour out your boils or sores, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything;
and let the blood flow freely, and cleanse the wound well with your hand or any other thing, and if the bleeding does not stop despite the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding is stopped. then apply other remedies until it is healed.
of hydrocephalus we have said in the division of the resemblances of hydropsy, and how the assembly of the sharp is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment by medicines, and that which is cured by fire.
And one should not touch iron in these two similarities: That is to say, tympanites and hypospadias, for it is a fatal matter;
Therefore, when you treat this resemblance of hydropsy which is called "eclytes" of medicines, and the cure does not work, look if the pains are weak, or if he has another disease than hydropsy, as all and solution of the belly and similar things; if not touch iron, for it has doubt.
and if you see the pain of great virtue, and he has no other disease than hydropsy only, and he is not too thin nor too old, then thus one should proceed: Hold the painful area straight above your hands, and the assistants press the abdomen by placing the sharp edge of the spoon at the lowest part of the belly, then take the spinous spatula in this form: And cutting of two parts. and the point should not be too sharp so that it does not pierce the intestines when inserted, and it cannot be bent.
Then look to see if there is any hernia towards the intestines: If necessary, you should make an incision of three fingers' width from the belly button downwards. And if there is a hernia due to the disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly button three fingers' width.
If it is for the mucous membrane, then it should be to the right, and it does not matter that the hairs grow above the wound where the excess does not run to the weak limb.
Then pierce all the skin with the tool, and push it through, and lift your hand to all the space between the skin and the flesh as if scraping at the quantity of one angle or inside.
Then pierce the flesh until the space between the skin and the flesh reaches the desired depth, and this is the length of the blade, then remove it, and push this tool through this form: And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and is made of light rain or chalk, and has a small opening at one end. and has three small openings on its side. and two on the other side, and one on the other.
And it is shaped like a quill, and its form is like the incision that the scribe makes to cut the quill:
At the top of it is the hollow, so that when the ink comes to the tip, then you should now place the instrument inside.
Empty the other third part, for if you empty it more than necessary at that hour, then by chance the pains may kill him from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he may lose his hand, or he may approach death.
but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the evil mean, and its hairs.
then take the instrument and hold the needle, and it is now held by the one who stops the purulent matter that is above the tumor, as I have spoken about, that you pierce in this manner;
then begin the instrument again the next day, if you see the evil suffering, and take from the needle a small quantity.
do this every day, and guard against following too much until it does not delay but a small amount of needle.
And if you doubt the pain, and leave it for a long time, then the treatment of the sepulture or sand cushion, and with much sweat or bath and in the sun, and if it becomes infected from drinking. and the treatment of desiccate medicines until it is healed, and cauterize above the stomach and above the liver and above the spleen after the extraction of the arrow, as I have said before.
No child ever is born who does not have a cord in the staff, or the cord is small, or it is not in its place.
If it is necessary to prick often with a very thin needle according to this form:
then put or plug a small piece of cloth underneath, and tie it and keep it in this way for three days or four, and when he wants to make urine, if the cloth is removed, and he makes urine, and then put it back.
And by chance, it is not suitable, because the urine that comes out does not allow it to be closed.
If the one who is punctured is small, then treat it with a thin silk thread as we have said, and it will expand.
Those who have not the phallus in their shoulder are impotent, because no one is born with a phallus at the top of their back, which prevents them from urinating before it leaves their back. And they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come just to the tip, and this is a very bad illness.
And the way of the work is such that the hairs grow on top of their back, and the phallus and the penis are like the tip of a feather, so that the phallus pierces in the middle, as it should.
and protect from the separation of blood which often happens, and if it does, if the stench of blood which comes from blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of pustules on the staff often come these abscesses in the thigh, and it is an appearance of a bad wound;
and there are malicious and not malicious;
if it is necessary that you incise them at the thin skin, and cut and clean all, then put above cotton moistened in Egyptian oil; then the treatment of wounds continues until it is healed.
And if it is a bad dislocation, with a putrid color and smell, then you must apply the fire cautery.
When you have cleaned it, and if the splinter is in the back, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the splinter that is inside first. And when it is removed, then the one outside.
For when you treat them together, do not be sure that the splinter of the bone is not broken, and it becomes black and corruption in its bone and where it is connected.
Then cover all that is black and corrupted with honey and flour paste made of ground pomegranate seeds and rice, then treat the other wounds until it is healed.
And if blood comes out, then apply the lunar cauterization according to this form:
1. The fire cautery is helpful for two positions together: 2. that is to say, at the extraction of arrows, and at the decay;
3. and if the patient is corrupted and withdrawn, then it is necessary that you beat or conduct a lead rod through the wounds, and urinate on them;
4. and when the flesh is erupted at the end of the rod that has been to those who have not yet been circumcised, or it has for a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scorch it with the instrument cheveit, until the sinews are loosened, and deliver the patient from all parts of the rod;
If it is a difficult thing to divide the vein, then you must burn it with a small amount of heat from the tip of the knife and the scalpel.
Then thoroughly dry between two, and place a thin layer of linen moistened with cold water on it, so that it does not stick.
Circumcision is not different from other wounds in terms of continuity. Therefore, when we perform this work of our will, and especially with children, it is a matter that we should do the best work, and the lightest in terms of health.
I say that the ancients did not direct circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Because I have seen the greatest part of masters and wise men who performed circumcision in the past, and with force, and all at once.
if there were two curtains, because it has two layers, and if by chance one is lifted up and the other delayed below. and it returns covered, and the pain is doubled, and to the wound which is from the top is not always assured at the tip of the member.
and to the wound of the finger by chance the iron escapes, and the work is ruined, and often they are born in such a way that they have no need of healing, and I have seen it.
Of the wound healing which is done by force to all the length of the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly throughout the entire length; but that the thread be well stitched around the skin.
And the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he listens, that you are only binding the thread around the rod as much as possible, and then throw it in all the ways that you can.
Then place the child straight between your hands, and bring the forces between your hands or away from your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.
Then close your hand around the rod and blow gently, and pull it up until the thread of the rod is tight. Then clean it well of the dirt that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it away from one end to the other.
Then clean it well of the dirt that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it away from one end to the other. and the second joint of the second finger should be treated with the second herb and the correct index, and balance between the two joints, then lift the hand gently and take the head of the staff; then let the blood flow slowly and slowly, for this is the most dangerous; and put powder on and on the powder a piece of cloth glued with the marrow of a well-cooked egg, tempered with rosewater, confected with rose oil and fresh, and let it stay on the other side, and the cure of the other cure until it is healed.
The form of the forces at the purification is thus:
The two forces should be equal and sharp, and the forces should also be as great as the hand equally:
The error of the purification is that it is when the knife is inserted into the incision;
Therefore, you must extend it to your angle, as well as when the legs make abscesses;
And the coping equally, and if you cannot hold it at your angle, then hold it with nails, and then the coping.
And if they pass three hours, and what is outside the rod is inflamed, let it remain until the abscesses are healed, and scrape lightly;
If you move the copper as you can move it, and keep away from the part of the rod, it will not harm you.
Therefore, cure the limb of things that are dirty wounds of powder, which we have said or treated for powders, and if you copper too much care, it will not harm.
Cure the wounds as we have said, until they are healed.
The retention of urine
The retention of urine is of obstruction of stone, or of blood frozen, or of bowels, or of charred, or of similar things, which we have said in the section.
and if his urine is not released, and you see it is retained by the stone that is in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary to bend the hairs over his knees. and the feet are placed on his back, and he extends his belly from the upper part of the back, and restrains the hairs as much as possible. and therefore the neck of the bladder is pressed against the stone from above, so that the urine is released and;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the hairs cause great pain, then it is necessary to administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", of which this is the form:
And it should be of thin silver wire, as like a quill of an eagle; and it should be the tail of a long and half-palm, and thin at the head.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie the head of the wool or cotton bag to the head of the thread, and pull the head of the thread inside the catheter;
and fold the excess of the wool and pull it to the head of the catheter, then oil the catheter with oil or butter and egg white, and place the patient on the seat, and the urethra and the clyster of moist oil and olive oil and vinegar;
Then lightly insert the syringe into the shaft, until it reaches the base of the shaft, then double the shaft upwards towards the bone.
Then press the syringe forward just short of the bladder, and feel the hairs coming towards the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless because the guide or it goes is twisted.
Then stretch the thread along the entire length of the yarn bit by bit, and the urine follows the yarn, then remove it far, and correct the urine.
And restart the syringe until the bladder is empty, and align the hairs.
When skin or blood comes into the bladder, and there is putrefaction and assembly, and you see distillation of waters and medicines, then do all the instrument that is called «clepsedre», and it is the form:
It is closed, and has three tubes: One on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
And the joint is opened by the doctor's knife in such a way that it does not damage the bone too much, so that if possible, the moisture can be drawn out and replaced as needed.
And when you see your remedies going into the bladder, put the tip of the catheter in the moisture, and draw it out through the opening which is there.
If you draw the moisture through the catheter, then strongly replace the catheter again. If the moisture enters again, it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel the pain.
and this is the form of the subtle plaster with which one applies a catheter to the bladder:
and it is of silver or of lead, and it is the highest of the following:
and it is disinfected with salt or with lime where the legs are bent.
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see used to apply a catheter to the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a double thread of strong wool, and heat the poultice above the fire.
then push the head of the plaster into the rod, then hold your hand over the bladder evenly with all the moisture, until the hairs feel that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a wad of cloth, take a piece of parchment and make a circle with it, and pierce it roundly around. Then stuff the thread tightly into these holes, then gather the circle as one would gather a bag, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it with the instrument.
And do as you did with the wad of cloth, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the wad.
of the stone
We have said in the previous section the ways of arrows and extraction together with remedies.
And I have said the difference between an arrow pierced in rain and all signs, and in which arrow one should make a cut. and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone that is lodged in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and it is a sign that the sharp blow of the bladder resembles a sharp blow in its subtlety.
and it has a harsh sound, and great pain in the penis, and it can often occur, and then disappears. and from many of these blows, the foundations;
and it is light in the healing of children until they are four years old, and it is very painful in elderly people, and it is common among those who are between youth and old age.
And it is the lighter care of those who have large stones, than of those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is first necessary to cleanse the wound with chalk, to draw out all the impurities that are in the intestines. For it never obstructs one from seeking the stone.
Then take the misaligned joint by the feet, and make it stand up and move away from the center, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and never once rise above the body.
Then let him sit between your hands, and his hands be away from his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downwards.
Then grasp and touch inside.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut above the stone.
And if she does not chop at the touchier too, then grind your right index finger of your right hand with oil, if the hairs are short, or your middle finger, if the hairs are long; and press at its base, and cut into the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, then apply the ointment to the anus;
then press above your finger, and cut at the place where you saw it cut.
And command the minister to press the anus with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand to hold the testicles high, and his left hand to remove the skin which is outside the testicles in the part where the cut is made;
then place the spatula underneath, which is its form: and make an incision between what is between the ribs and the foundation, not in the middle but on the right side of the naval;
and it should be straight above the stone, and your right hand should be at the foundation, and the incision should be across so that it is wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
if the pressure from the hand that is at the foundation causes it to slip out of place;
and scrape away any stone or edges and margins; if it is gray to pull out;
and if there is a thorn that is smooth and sharp, like a needle, and round, of which the extraction is light.
In this case where it has angles and margins, make the incision wider;
and if it does not jump, then you must hold the forceps that are also like a lime at the head, to prevent the stone from escaping; or you push out of the way the instrument sharply curved at the head;
and if you cannot grasp it thus, then enlarge the small opening, and if there is no skin, then strain it with vinegar;
And if there are more than one arrow, first remove the largest one from the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are many.
And if it is very large, then it should be made larger, and a larger wound should be made. For two things happen to the dislocated joint: or it dies, or the urine comes out through the opening where the bones cannot be set.
but you must forcefully pull or tear it with pliers, until you remove it in pieces.
And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, bind it, and place above the moilliet cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and vinegar and cold vinegar, to relieve the pustule. then resolve the misalignment on its own collar, and do not dislocate it from its joint again.
And when you reset it, rise the joint well with oil and vinegar, then apply ointment of mustard plaster and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.
And if an abscess comes into the wound and corrosions, and clots of blood in the bladder, and is retained by it so that the urine is held back, which is known in some way as without a leak with the urine: then place your finger in the wound, and extract that blood clot, because if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and rot it;
then lift the wound of sharp and swift and of silk, and help it in all ways that you can, until it is healed;
And it is necessary that all the bandages you use to treat it, that you tie both thighs together, and place the medicines above the limb.
And if the stone is small, and it is conducted with a catheter, and tied off, and the urine cannot flow out; if the treatment I mentioned earlier, that you cut many times, is excused by this treatment. I have experienced this before.
Take a piece of iron according to this form and be at three angles tied in one thread:
Then take a thread and tie it around the catheter outside the stone, so that it cannot return to the bladder;
then push the thread into the catheter lightly, until it reaches the stone; and slowly turn the forehead against the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side.
if soon comes the urine, then press your hand above the stone that is remaining inside the urethra. If it is already broken, and shoots out with the urine, and is sharp against the hairs;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that defends it, then tie a thread below the stone and another above, then make the urethra in the place between the two threads, then extract the thread, and release the other, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound; and the care as long as they are healthy.
of the stone of women
There is often a need to pierce in women, and if it happens even once, it is the care of the doctor, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
The first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-versed in such matters, specifically when she is chaste.
And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who is well-versed in this art of hands.
And the fourth reason is that if the woman's piercing is more forward than the man's, because it should be made with a deeper incision and great fear is involved. And if necessary, one must send to the surgeon, so it is necessary to have a skilled person, and if you do not have one, do not attempt to perform the operation yourself;
and present a skilled woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command that she do what you command of the investigation of the stone; and look very carefully if the woman is virgin:
and look very carefully if the woman is virgin: then it is necessary to put her foot or base and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, then hold her away from her base, and recommend that she put her foot or with the painful spot, and press and grind her right hand firmly on the anus.
if she finds it, then it is necessary to move it from great to great from the entrance of the anus until it reaches the root of the thigh;
then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh, against the middle down, where it is painful and feels the arrow in that part. and do not move the arm above the stone or below, and let the cut be small at first.
and do not move the arm above the stone or below, and let the cut be small at first. then push the arrow into the wound, if you feel the arrow so sharp that the arrow can come out, and there are many ways of arrows.
it is to know, small and large, sharp and blunt, long and round, and those with barbs.
if you know the similarities to know the outcome.
And if you cannot pull it out, then put the arrow in vinegar, and hold it for an hour until the arrow is clean.
then return to your work, until the stone is fully removed, and have the tools that I mentioned in the extraction of the stone for men to assist you in your work.
and if it is not removed, and it is the artery that has been cut, put powder on the wound and bandages and ointments, and do not start again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, lest by chance the patient might die. then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the wound has healed, return to your work, until the stone is formed.
wet gauze is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white sponge, which is outside the court of the teeth, which contains the wound.
And it is called "syphac", and it is never properly in the web of the eye, if one considers that it is from the other eye. And it is the thick skin between the white of the eye that we have said.
And it does not heal on its own. And the generation of this branch is weakness that comes to bones, and it spreads that matter.
And if it comes from impact on the eyelids, and this moisture has many colors: Or it is a changing color from yellow to green, or without red, or black, or watery white, and there are more.
And these are the signs to know this condition, because if it is white syphac that we have said, then the abscesses are present, and not long like the figure of an eye, and does not open the eyelids, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the own cloth, then abscesses are treated with a part of the egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the fingers and the white sap, then it feels good.
Therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, then test all the intermediary parts, from which it was previously formed. According to what comes after the introducer, judge what is inside.
And when we cure them with iron, then it is necessary that the hairs be cleaned according to as much power and the replenishment of their bodies.
Then the patient lies on his back, on one thing a little high, and puts much cloth on him.
then lean over their right shoulder, and command the assistant to hold them on the left, and extend the staff against one of the two ribs near the sternum;
then take the spatula and cover the skin of the ribs with it from the long bone to above the knuckle, and make your cut straight across the skin of the ribs just below the white line, and carefully scrape the subcutaneous tissue;
then pierce the white line flat with a sharp needle at a wide opening, and extract all the sharp pieces, and then put your needles, and stretch the white line above;
and do not touch the bones of the ribs, but only the sinew. and cut out or even piece by piece the costal part of him subtly, for if you do not cut it properly, it will return to him sharply.
and if the joint springs up at your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the sinew.
then gather the two books of the ribs at one seam, then treat it as with other wounds until it is healed.
and if the joint is corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspended, in doubt of the evacuation of blood.
Then apply the bandage to all the suspensory ligaments, and extract the arrow, and treat it as we have said.
And if it is sharp and assembled in two parts together, these are two branches; then apply the bandage to the other part as you have done the first evenly, then suck out the blood, and put in the wound linen soaked in red oil;
then apply the bandage to the other part as you have done the first evenly, then suck out the blood, and put in the wound linen soaked in red oil; and put on another linen soaked in wine and oil, and put over the two bandages, and put on doubled cloths, and tie it over all the limb that is according to this form:
Then take two cloths and place them according to this resemblance, and assemble them by sewing in the neck of the breeches, and one of them should be placed above the buttocks just at the back, and the other at the part of the elbow;
and the other two should be placed above the two knees, and the entire assembly should be tied in a loop at the belt of the breeches;
and this branch of the fire cauterization should never be applied in the form of an iron needle, and it is that you should prick the skin with a fine cautery needle, and scrape the skin of the wounds, and heat it as we have said, so that the white scab containing the acid is removed;
Take the fire cautery in this form, and pierce the gum at the teeth, and scrape the skin with this delicate cautery thoroughly.
And the copper in all ways that you can, until you remove everything.
And be careful that the fire does not touch the eye.
And make sure that this work is safer. And keep from the correction of blood, and make sure that the work of tailoring fits well.
And if nothing goes against you, or abscess or bleeding of blood or other thing, cure whatever goes against you, according to what is said above.
And if the pain is severe and does not want to endure this work due to its horror, then apply perforation as I have told you, and when you are certain that the acqueous branch is ready, place the painful joint on the elevated seat. then pierce the abscess in the outer part with a wide space, and place the perforation far down the body.
and let the openings be wide enough that all the sharp pain passes through.
then place cotton on the limb and tie it, and leave it to let the remaining sharp pain pass through, then care for it until the wound is healed.
And if the white cloth does not allow the sharp edge to exit from the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you insert a pen or the instrument used to treat the sharp edges of hydroceles, of which the form was previously mentioned.
And enlarge the wound slightly, and when the sharp edge returns, and is gathered after six months or within a year, and when it is gathered as before, and thus passes the painful days.
When cutting this branch, many positions cause fear in many people, for which it seems that it is better to leave it.
And I will tell you the work and similar things about abscesses.
I say therefore that many abscesses come from wounds, and simultaneously from the same. And this is often the case.
It is to know by excessive sharp and wet, which is spread out in wounds, or from impact.
And the color of the abscess according to the color of the wound. And does not find pain, and is a painful abscess.
And sometimes it is grayish, pale, and yellow in color, and never comes from a vein or an inflammation of blood.
When it is from a vein, it is known by the position of the abscess being high, when you press it with your fingers. and you must not touch it.
Those who are made of wine grape are known by their arrangement in the expression of the two fingers, and can well make the waist above this resemblance, and above the others. and it is that you copulate the courtesy of the coins, then the eye is in the top, and the tail is of the white swan, and deliver the suspension from all parts of the eye.
If the eye is already soiled with these coins, then it is necessary that you take the eye, and the copulation.
and if it is air in the white swan, or in what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all of that which is held, and the copulation rounded.
And if the shoulder blade is broken at its base, then it is necessary that you remove it entirely, and extract the bone, as we have said.
And when your treatments are completed, apply the wound with soft linen in red oil and wine, then use other remedies until it is healed.
This is an abscess surrounded by a pus-like envelope resembling a bone, with the softening of the joints, and the painful movement of the limb as it goes.
And the treatment of this disease is as difficult and dangerous as the previous one, and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit with the misaligned joint on the highest seat, then lift the suspensory ligaments of the joints to your fingers, all the tendons that are close to the thigh, and stretch them evenly.
then cut the sharp spatula through the wide area of the vessels, until they are exposed, and then scrape each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples.
then I insert a needle or one with double thread, and tie it to the first limb where the vein came out, and tie it to the other end. then cut them straight in the middle, according to the length of the vessel, and remove the corrupted blood.
then treat the wound as for others or apply a bandage, so that no vessel is cut that would issue from one of the incisions.
Because by this there does not come any harm, and if it comes to all the veins, then one must draw the cups from all the veins. If the person does not lose their strength by the incision of the veins, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
The advantages of this chapter are by the section that comes out or syphilitic, or the extension over the belly in the part of the groins, because the intestines descend from that break to one of the veins.
And this break is either by syphilis, or from the extension of it, and these two ways come from many causes:
from percussion, or from jumping, or from shouting, or from lifting heavy weights, and similar things;
and the signs when it is the extension of the face, that is to say that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the forehead, because the face is close to the intestines.
And the signs are when it comes to the section of the tooth, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and has various appearances of abscesses outside the skin, and this is for the outcome of the intestine and the heart due to the tooth.
And sometimes the worms are found with the intestines, and they are retained inside, and cause great pain to suffer from the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these cases of iron with fear, for which it is necessary to withdraw.
And the manner of the work is that you command or let the hairs grow on the intestine at its hand inside the wound, if it can be pushed back in; then place it over its neck between your hands, and lift up the ribs;
Then they put the hand above, and cover all the skin of the bones with it. Then push between the buttocks uncinated according to what you have skill to open the wound, and let them be such that the eyes can come out.
Then scrape the skin that is outside the bones of the ribs, until the white skin is exposed from all parts.
Then push your index finger into the place that leads to the bone, between the white skin that is outside the ribs and between the second skin, and behind the rib, and between the second skin.
and then move the finger to the right inside the curve of the nail, and place the white thread on top of your left hand, and lift the eyelid over the entire face towards the waist; and command the minister to extend the eyelid upwards, and release what is behind the lower lid;
and ask if he has any intestine wrapped or white thread hard, and if you find nothing, then let him blow into the belly outwards;
then take a needle or a thick thread made of several threads, and blow into the back part of the eyelid, which is after the skin of the nail; After the waist, then cut the tendons that appear from the hairs, until there are four hairs. Then assemble them one above the other in the shape of a cross, and tie it with a thread of two parts from the skin of pigs, which we have said is strong. Then wrap the tendons of hairs, and tie them in two parts, so that none of the wounds that they cause can enter into the flesh, so that an abscess does not occur. And then put the thread along the first thread of two parts of that, and after these two threads leave the thread which is from the skin of pigs, the great one of a dozen. and then all the other according to the roundness that the horse carries.
then cut in the part that is outside the skin of the hooves, as we have said before.
then apply a moistened linen cloth in oil, and put it on the wounds, and apply the remedy that we have mentioned. And never cauterize the white facial wound that we have mentioned, after incision, due to fear of blood clotting. for this has happened many times, and leave the cloth until it heals through it.
and if it is slow to fall off, then soak in hot vinegar, and put on what we have said until it heals.
then treat the wound with other treatment, until it is healed perfectly.
of hernia carbuncle
In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure by iron.
And the ancients said that it is made so as to be like the branch that is together with the view, in a way that you bind the vessels, after the cut slightly above the leg lightly.
then cover it with a cloth, and treat the abscess of that which works, until the vessels die.
and the treatment as we have said, until it is healed.
Never comes rupture and tears, as we have said, and open the veins;
and do not make any incisions into the intestines, and if they do, it is rare, and repair them hourly.
and in any case, if it remains too long in this state, the wound or abscess will continue to spread until the intestines are exposed.
and this will happen due to the extension of the abscess which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and inflated and opened.
and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have previously mentioned.
and never is the treatment done in this way: and it is that the misaligned bones are often pushed up against their back between your hands, then wrap the joint with a cloth inflated to the size of three fingers;
then strain the sinew that is outside the skin that toughens it, then take the raw and put it on top of the joint appearing from the sinew;
and press against the front of the belly, then cut the two joints appearing from the sinew above the head of the raw, and cut both;
then strain the head of the raw, and do not cover the sinew nor extend the belly or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the broken rib; Then, treat with the treatment of wounds.
Then, treat with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the ligaments, defend and heal the wound until it is healed.
The wound is closed, and does not appear in the tear, and the cauterization is quiet in this limb, and closer to healing.
of the softening of the leather of the shoes
Many times, the leather of the knees is softened in some men, because the chariots that are inside are softened, and it is to be seen.
And it is a matter, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the painful part lie on its back, and the copper on the softened skin over the natural skin;
then gather the two lips to a seam, and if you see, cut off the excess of the softened skin at three or four seams;
then cover between the seams, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healed, and cut off the thread.
tremblingly
Since it is customary in our law to use such things, and because I would prefer not to speak of them in this book;
and they are only necessary for two purposes:
one is that the patient may answer when asked, and in seclusion, the care;
and the other is because we often have need of castration for animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and rams and others.
I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: or by traction, or by cutting.
In what we do by traction, let us sit the animal in high heat, until the ligaments are softened and during. Then pinch them with your hand, until they are returned and you no longer feel them.
Of the severe treatment of the waist: You should sterilize the animal, and press the skin of the ligaments with your right hand, then tie the suspensory, and scorch each one as you have them.
And leave no pus or subtle pus that is on the tendons;
And this method of severe treatment is more effective than that which is done by traction, because at traction something remains in the ligaments, by which the animal desires to luxate.
Then treat the wound until it is healed.
For hermaphrodites
There are two main methods for men: One method is that between the two testicles, open as wide as the natural shape of a woman, with hair, and sometimes cutting into the urine.
And the other method is in women, and it is like a finger as a rod and two knives.
And the treatment of the man and the woman is that you cut off all the hair around the wounds, and treat them as other wounds;
In the second method, men who urinate through the skin of the testicles have no treatment.
Shaving is hair that grows above the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have had it as large as a hand, and this is the care.
It is necessary that you remove excessive swelling from your hand or fingers, and gently rub it.
and do not move it too much, as blood does not come, then treat other wounds until it is healed.
and in another case where a child is born with a marshy mouth, and it is used, and sometimes it jumps out, and it is similar to a cow, and because of this they called the old "cow disease". If it is necessary to clean it as we have said the tenting, and the cure until it is healed.
It is erratic whether the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the pustules are small. and is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come.
and is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come. or it is by fire cauterization, or deep lancing with a sharp knife, and is done in the marsh, or in the ribs, or elsewhere, or as it may be.
and they prevent conception, and childbirth, and possibly the flowers to have.
and the knowledge of this is by looking at the belly.
2. If the patient is close and appears to be in distress, then approach them or go to them.
If it is deep lancing with a sharp knife, and it is close to the liver, then you hurry, and do so thus:
put your two fingers together, and the woman is on her back, spreading her legs;
then the two books are formed, as long as the subtle surface is rounded, and is covered by the suppression.
Then take linen, and dip it in oil, and place it on the limb, and grind the woman to a man every day, so that he cannot glue it.
And if the swelling is hard and sharp, it is necessary to apply a poultice similar to a leaf of mint.
If the suppression is of chalk, then dip it in water and cover it.
and have the medicines steeped in blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and an abundance of wax.
Then apply a broad piece of cloth, so that the wound cannot glue together.
and then let it be long, and the bandage a tent of clean linen;
then care for other treatments until they are healed.
And when in the marsh there comes charcoal, then cover it according to this manner, unless it is an abscess. For abscess which is in the bone, one should not touch with fire.
for hemorrhoids Varicose veins are openings of veins which do not usually heal, and when the varicose veins are old, they become ulcers;
and we have had in the division the likes of them, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive treatment.
I said that hemorrhoids and thromboses, when they are in the bone and do not open to the touch, can only be treated with fire.
Those that are at the opening of the bone, which can be felt, are those that can be treated.
Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the ulcer with needles, and cover it with its roots, then powder over medicines restraining blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
then close his feet to the outside for an hour, then put them in hot water;
and if blood comes out, remove it and place it in a decoction of sumac and the skin of green pomegranates and galls and similar things, then take flour of wheat, mix with honey and egg, and make an ointment on his back.
And if it stains, it's good. If not, apply suction cups to his back and breasts without causing injury;
then take linen, and soak it in juice of plantain or agrimony with old wine, and apply to the limb.
And when the abscess is at rest, treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And the one called "albathir" is red and resembles the harsh chief, so it should be covered as I have said for the thistle. Then treat it until it is healed.
Many kinds of abscesses come from the marsh, such as chancre and pustular abscess and herpes and estiomenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and chronic abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the section.
Therefore, I must advise in this treating the abscess that comes from the marsh, which is not one of the abscesses that are filled with pus.
And if you know the work of iron, look at the abscess to see if it is agus in the beginning of its arrival, and plain of cholor and fever, and if it becomes red, and if you can see it. Therefore, do not rush to pierce it, but let it cool until the pain is relieved;
and then place the misaligned part on the seat, and have two small seats where he leans, and support it on his back and gather his feet to the sides of the leg;
and let his knees be spread, and place his arms away from his knees, and tie them together with a strong rope;
then put the ball against his right side, and then introduce the instrument used to make the mouth of the wound, from which afterwards comes the form;
And it is necessary that when you see this instrument to be administered, you first check the sharpness of the blade, so that what enters from the instrument does not come out more than it should, and that it does not cause harm. If the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the sharpness of the blade with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt it.
And it is necessary that he puts the tip of the instrument on top, and stains the instrument.
And when the abscesses are open, and they do it by hand a lot, then it is necessary to cover the head, at the spatula level.
And when the wound is empty, it is necessary that you place in the wound soft, moist cloths in rose oil or in dry green oil.
And place the flour bandage on the wound at the back of the marsh, and place it above the marsh and above the clean, soft cloth in vinegar or in hot water.
Then the healer after two hours of bandaging, until it is healed.
And never lift the marsh and the wound with a poultice of vinegar and honey, and then with vinegar or roots of lily and aristolochia longa boiled. then reapply the bandage.
And if the wound is placed in the marsh, it is necessary that you avoid cooking with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth The midwife is first to the birth that she knows the natural shape of the childbirth, and the signs if it is when you see the woman approaching, and wants to smell the air:
then quickly take the child out. then check that this childbirth is according to the natural shape, and it is the first out with its head, and the second with him;
and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly, so that the child comes out quickly.
because when it descends over its head, and the second is with him, and it is cleaned of its excesses by good washing.
And this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it never comes above its feet, and comes from the back or the neck, and the hands, or it comes up its belly, or sometimes, and is turned by chance onto its shoulder, and by other bad figures.
If it is the business of the bath that she is wise and skillful in these things, and warns against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as one should help her.
If the child comes up its head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and the child's strength is weak, then let the midwife sit on a seat, or the women hold her.
And let its natural oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then pour the liquid between his two fingers, using a small spoon of this form: and scrape off the second layer, and cover it with a thin layer until the moisture that is inside has been removed;
and take the belly of the woman until the infant descends, and if it does not, then you should apply a muskilage of fenugreek with oil of sesame to the woman;
then let her swallow and spit out the mixture, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if now the infant is born.
And if both hands are dislocated, it is necessary to reset them gently and slowly. and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up high. then lower the chair to the ground, and lean the woman over, so she does not fall during the lowering.
and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then place the hands under the child as previously mentioned, extract the child, and reset it gently.
from the birth of the child above its feet When the child comes out of its feet, it is necessary to lift it up high. and then slowly and gently, until it is even.
then take the two feet and gently extend them.
If it jumps out of place, command him to bite down, and make him spit out the condition. if it jumps again, if God wills.
And if it does not jump as we have said, then turn it slowly and slowly, until it is in accordance with its natural shape. For then it is completely straightened.
And if it does not come out as we have experienced, say to take muscle relaxants of high potency, and oil of garlic, and melted wax, and grind everything in a mortar. and put the natural remedy of woman on both sides and outside this incision, then make him sit upright until above the ribs.
When it is softened, apply a mirepoix collar, remove it, and let it remain for an hour. Then place it on the seat, then sneeze and hold its mouth and nose, and gently press its belly, for it has now vomited.
of the birth of the child above its knees When the child comes in this form, I place my hands on its back gently and gently. Then lean it against its neck, hang its legs down, and lie it on the bed. Then gently fold its hands, and then press its hands on its belly, and remove the diapers as it becomes clean. and if it does not move, take its feet and move them firmly, then move its belly upwards, then push with your hands. and gently shake the child. and command the woman to push until the child is born.
of the issue of the child who comes out widely a hand during It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand. if it cannot be brought back, lift the woman and go.
if she cannot go, lay her on the bed, and firmly straighten her legs.
then apply the muscle relaxation that I have mentioned;
And if she does not give birth, then sit on the seat, then study to bring back the hand. And give birth according to the natural shape, and make her spit, and command that she prepare until the child is born.
of the issue of the child on its neck, and has extended its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother It is necessary that the midwife wash her hand, then return it slowly and gently, and give birth.
And when it is equal, put the natural musk of aloe and oil, as we have said, then command that she move slowly.
And when you have done this, sit on the seat, and command that she prepare. and the method is to spit out. In the same manner, for all the others
In the same manner, for all the others When it comes to this manner in the second method, if the second method fits your angle, until the moisture is drained.
and if it can be felt above its face and above its neck, if the coping holds the bandage, that it is not held, and die the infected one.
Then push the child inward, until you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman that she never do so again.
of the issue of twins It is said that gnomes are born many times, and sometimes they are born three or four at a time. and this is not an uncommon thing, and it happens often. And these are strange things, and they do not live if not named;
And these are strange things, and they do not live if not named; I know that they are multiplied, and they are destroyed by the sweat that causes them, which is tied to the skin;
and never come out naturally like some others, as we have said.
And if they come out severely, as the cure we have said, and if the slight bleeding occurs, and do it quickly and lightly as it does; and do so that it is worthwhile for health. of many children
No one is formed in the marshlands I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious, and it is convenient that the baile saiche all of it, because perhaps similar things happen to him; if he does according to what is necessary.
of the dead child
When you care for the woman of the child dead or belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to work by hand; if it is necessary that you save the woman if she is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she fears death;
if it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her arms bent downwards, and her legs raised;
and the attendant shaves the pubic hair of the woman where she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated in the delivery of the child;
then rub the mouth of the woman with moistened oil mixed with mustard and fenugreek seeds and linseed, then insert her hands into these oils and mustard.
then push them into the mouth gently, then wait until she bites the pieces that are suitable for the child, and if the child is present, be sure to deliver it over its head.
if he pierces the needles into his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or behind the beard or in the armpit or on the ribs, and if they descend below his feet, then he should remove or hold them at the sides;
and it is necessary that he dye the needle on his right hand and place the burning iron between the fingers of his left hand, and lightly press the needle in any of the ways we have mentioned until the thing is empty.
then pierce against the other needle, or if you have the skill to do so, so that the extractions are equal.
and then it is reset by moving from one side to the other, in order to move out, and hold the teeth together as follows:
And if any part remains, use a needle and thread to sew it back in place.
And if it does not remain, put this jaw higher and continue until it is all out.
And if one hand comes in front of the other and it cannot be brought back by force, then wrap it around the other arm until it all comes out. Then, place the copper in the joint of the foot or the heel, and thus you should do in the other hand, and with two feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is stuck at the neck, or it has a sharp acute assembly, then you should push the spatula with spinous between your fingers, and make the head and extract the sharp. or you break it with the tool called "almidach", from which the form comes with the tools or chapter that is after this one.
and thus do the same for the child naturally;
and then pull out the bones with pincers, and if the patient jumps forward and is held by the chin, it should be cut until the moisture that is inside or has come out is removed.
and if she cannot get out, cut the copper into pieces and use it to plug the hole.
and if it is inflated in the abdomen or out of the ribs, it should be pierced until the moisture runs out.
And if the arrow is above its feet, then the light attraction is on its legs, and the advice to the mouth of the marsh is light.
and if it is swollen in the abdomen or in the groin, it should be stretched out on a cloth wrapped around your hand. and cut the abdomen or the groin until the moisture that is inside runs out.
and if the other member is broken, and the patient cannot move it, then push the ball of the hand against the marsh, and pull it out through the mouth of the marsh; then push the pin or II, and pull it out;
and if the mouth of the marsh is retracted due to an abscess that has come, then it does not need to be forced, but one must manage wet and fat things; and apply poultices, and place in high moistening and softening agents.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, then manage as we have said for the living child;
And if they cannot, then let them try by pieces, and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, let them treat as we have said in abscesses that come from the marsh.
And if an arrow comes out, it should be immediately bandaged and treated with other remedies.
I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had died, then consulted the other with that one, and the other died. After a long time, some abscesses appeared in the armpit, and they swelled up so much that they burst open, and began to cause great pain.
I was called to the patient, and I thought for a long time, and could not close the wound.
I applied strong adhesive, and some bones were stuck to it, and after some time others were stuck as well. I was very surprised because the belly does not have any bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I dressed the wound, and in trying to remove the bone, the woman was not improved at all. And the woman remained long like this, and then a little blood came from the wound.
And I did not remember this chapter until now because when the masters find something strange, they know how to use help.
Here comes the form of the compressor, by which we apply the books.
And at the second turn, to the second question of the two joints. Nevertheless, the horn should be more slender than the restrainer, and be made of smooth or boxwood.
And its mouth should be the width of a finger and a half, and the edge of the trees should be one palm and a half long. And between the two joints should be two additional pieces of this same wood, which are firmly fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more.
And these two joints are placed in the mouth of the marsh when turning the two horns.
Another form, with a more subtle and lighter appearance, should be made of flat iron or boxwood, according to the appearance of tongs. And it should have two joints, like you see, of a palm's length, and they should be wide.
And when you see that the marsh is being opened with all the instruments, then make the woman sit on the bed, with her feet hanging down and her legs open, then place the two joints inside the marsh, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs. Then work your hand with all the instruments, as you have done evenly, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the marsh, until the bail does what it wants.
These instruments are all above, and are multiplied in their similarities; And when the mirrors have them all matched, the work is more rapid, and higher as men for their quantity.
If you do not despise this instrument because you have not prepared it, for their need is not excused.
When the second is retained at childbirth, it is necessary that you command the pain to hold its hair, and then let her excrete from condition, and your hands to the mouth and nose; If she jumps through the sky, well then.
If the sky does not, then take a pot, and make a poultice or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calamint, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury. All these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or boiled over the fire.
Then put a cloth or poultice from the pot in her mouth, and the other head in the mouth of the marsh, and let the steam come inside the marsh.
Then make her spit, as we have said. If the second method does not work.
And if she remains after this treatment and is not better, command the midwife to massage her right hand with olive oil or musk oil of high quality, and then rub it in the natural way, and apply the second one. And when she has found it, grasp and stretch it little by little and straight, so that the husband does not tear it during extraction.
But move it gently to the right and left, and then pull. If it comes out and dislodges.
And if the husband's mouth is stretched and injured, we have said the treatment of vomiting and fumigation of herbs.
and if it is not all that we have said, then guard that you do not follow it.
but it is necessary that what is in the mouth of the marsh, that you tie it to the breast of the woman, then cleanse it with ointment tetrafarmacon. if the pig will return and come back, and will be forced.
but nevertheless, when it returns if it comes with bad smell to the stomach and head, and bleeds the pain. If therefore, one must do fumigations witchcraft to that:
none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of celery and dried figs.
The form of the instrument used to smoke the woman at the retention of flowers and the second one is this:
And it appears like glass, and one places the head subtly in its natural position, and the others wide over the fire;
and either the smoke over the coals, and the lice until they are destroyed, and then begin another one.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped by some subtle swelling: therefore it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that swelling at its proper place, and not pierce too deeply with the sharp instrument, and remove the position so that it does not touch.
then place on the wound a soft cloth in wine and oil, then the treatment of poultice until they are healed.
And if you doubt that it will not set, place or press a bandage of cloth, and let it remain for some time, and be sure that the child wants to go into the room.
And never comes this stoppage of wound or abscess. if it is necessary to cover that wound: if it is treated, as we have said of the dog's flesh.
Fistulas that come from the base are nodules, and grow larger than those that come above the base, or in the space between the two parts, if there is one fistula or more.
And when that nodule is old, it works, and grows moist with white or thin blood, and never are those fistulas permanent.
And they are known by the fact that there is outflow or vapor when the wound makes an emission, and perhaps some verses.
And if there are fistulas that protrude from the bladder, and from half of the penis; and reach up to the joining of the ribs, and out of the mouth.
And thus one knows the fistula by its base, and not by its opening: and you should prick your index finger or base into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if there is twisting, then you should prick it with a thin tent of cloth, or horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair at your finger.
and if you do not understand it, and it does not come from perforation, egestion, or wind, as we have said: that it does not pierce through; if you hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula is persistent near the bladder or near the urethra, if it allows urine to pass, and cannot be healed by medicines.
If it has pierced through to the joint of the elbow, then the tendon is drawn towards the arm; if there is no twisting and the invention of the pain is not there, then it is that it is dislocated, and there is no medicine or salve that can help;
and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure but labor, and the vanity of those who try to treat them.
In that which is not yet fully formed and is not yet ancient, in hope of healing by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the hairs lie between your hands on their back;
and the legs are stretched up to their knees, and its knees bent towards its belly; then pour water or mud, if there is twisting, until you clean or the tent comes out.
If the hairs feel painful at their base, then you must insert your index finger, as if you feel that the tent has pierced it;
and it is discovered or you feel between your teeth the bone or the horn, then spit out that it has passed. if not, do not bother if it cannot be healed.
It is said that one can heal all things, but this happens rarely.
and the aid that is done, if it is to heat the fine cauterization according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before. and the whole mouth is filled in the fistula, until it comes out of the base. and do this two or three times, until you know that these bones are broken, which are similar to a quill of an arrow.
Then the treatment of burned tent-cloth, until that one is healed, then the treatment of cauterizing with heat and sealing.
If it is thus sound, it is well.
If so, nothing else can be saved;
And if it is placed between, and does not pierce just at the spot where it is based, and between your finger and the tent is a thick layer of charcoal or ash, and you see the fistula that results from the covering of care; if the copper at the beginning of the fistula is closed and pushed forward before the tent, and then the cauterizing after, until it reaches the top of the tent; and will be delivered from the tent, and fall.
then make sure those charred ones that seem like a goose quill, and none remain denying it.
And if you cannot remove it, and cut between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
For the fire cautery accomplishes two things: that is to say, the burning of these charred ones, and the stopping of blood and the sealing of moisture.
then the treatment of muddied tents with butter or in a mixture broken down, until the lees are poured out, and the charred ones are burned in the pot.
then treat the wound of the soaked arrowheads with hard charcoal, and the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if the fistula comes from just above the base, and is distant from the body, then press on the top or base, and ask for water.
If you feel the tent, and between them is the cloth or the saw or the charcoal where it is near to pierce, if there is no other remedy than hope and faith, by the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it just above, or if you can, put bandages and treat it as first aid.
and do not move too much in front, so that you do not cover the part that holds the foundation, and brings the excretions by the way of voluntary movement. then treat it as we have said.
then treat it as we have said. If by chance it is fractured, then you will remove that covering and the bandage as soon as it is cut below the foundation, or by tent or by other instrument appointed. Then examine this wound which is in the sore, as you can. Then study to restore the wound and to delay the fistula in the part before the foundation.
Then study to restore the wound and to delay the fistula in the part before the foundation. If it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are in this manner: And when you place the tent in the fistula, and it is where it costs the foundation below the skin above, then take a tent perforated at the head according to this form. And push the thread into the fistula, and push the tent along the entire thread in the fistula until it reaches the top.
If she is persistent on the edge of the foundation within, then hold the thread of that perforated one, so that you bring your own or foundation.
and trace the head of the thread, and gather the two shoulder pieces together, and hold one against the other, and leave it for one or two days.
and hold it not once, until the thread covers those charred parts that are between them, and heal.
then treat the wound until it is healed and clean.
If the fistula does not perforate, then prick it in all possible ways that you can, but do not make it too thin. For it is not good to make the bandage too thin if it is too thin, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spiny bone that is made into a fistula is very sharp and one-sided; And on the other hand, not for the reason that we do not know what we should not do, as you see here:
There are two ways of doing it: Or they are inside the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and some cause bleeding, and there are one or more, and they are under the foundation and at the base of the foundation;
But those that are underneath have little moisture, and some cause bleeding or a little bit of sharp citrine or a little bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
and for those who have them in the foundation, it is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, so that they may shine in other chambers, until the foundation is full, and they open the son. if you are in a hurry, and you can do it with pincers, or you hold it at your nail, then cover it in its roots.
and if they cannot hold them with their moistures, then take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of linen. and hold them to your fingers, then cover them, and powder with any hot powders that are in the work of cauterization. where you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then treat other ailments until they are healed.
and if the base cannot be lifted, apply a sharp and biting cautery to clean what is stuck at the base, so it can be removed openly. if the hairs are tightly attached to the base, and if the base is very deep, then the treatment is light.
if the hairs are tightly attached to the base, and if the base is very deep, then the treatment is light. and you should grasp them with your fingers or pliers, cut them off, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and do not fear the incision by iron. If it is necessary to suture according to this method:
If it is necessary to suture according to this method: Take a thick thread, and make it into a needle, then pull the thread through the top and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread away from the needle, and if it is too wide;
and hold the thread firmly, then cut the thread, and pull out the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave one to let the excess blood out;
then put above the wound a soft cloth dipped in red oil or cerate, and put above the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then let it remain until they have healed, and when they are healed, apply ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
dryly and without delay at the base often occurs in the intestines and due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help. It is necessary that you reset it at the tip of a small knife or at your fingernail, which does not allow it to become moist. then treat it until it is as it should be.
and if it cannot heal, then repeat the scraping more forcefully than before until it is fully healed and scarred. then treat it until it is healed.
dry heat Mice are a small appearance that grows on the body and spreads quickly.
and never the cold, and they feel it as if they were dying of cold, and it comes to the whole body, and more in the hands than in other parts.
And the cure is that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a pen of vulture very strong, and place that quill on the cold, until the circle of the quill completely encompasses the cold. Then turn your hand all around the quill until you cover all around the cold, and put it in warm water, and extract the cold from its roots.
And if you see, then make a suture of a needle of rain or iron in this form, and be subtle to remove and raise it up: Do not let go, to hold at the two ends, and to press.
And if you see that the heat of the cautery is too much, as it is before or in the chapter of cautery.
Never do you make a plaster with silver, lead, or tin, whether melted or in powder form.
And never do you make these small and large instruments, according to those that you will bring. Therefore, those that you should arm yourself with in the care of children and those who are weak and in pain, are small.
Therefore, those that you should arm yourself with in the care of children and those who are weak and in pain, are small. The shape of this ointment is above wide, or the belly is bound according to this way:
And if there is a discharge or the belly is tied, as you see, and the wound is inside, then pierce.
And if there are two perforations on one side and one on the other.
And if the belly is filled with medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment, and you pierce all around with small perforations, and there is one inch of space between each perforation, then insert a strong thread through each perforation, twist it around ten times, and tie the belly as if it were a goat. And when the medicine is inside, if the leg has an instrument in front of a strong thread, then cleanse.
And it is in the form of a circle.
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the cleanser with oil or a similar substance, then gently press it in. Then the minister holds the patient's hands together until it is all visible, then remove the cleanser, and relieve the pain in their legs by holding them parallel, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it come out as much as possible. And if he sleeps a whole night, it is a greater help.
And if you apply the poultice in the case of diarrhea, and the patient wants to come out, let him come out as much as possible; and if he is healthy again, continue.
And if the wound is on the base or an abscess, then the poultice should be as gentle as for a child.
And this is the form of the gentle poultice over which the skin is stretched:
We have said in the division the treatment of wounds.
Or we will tell you the remedies for hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are different according to how they are made, and according to the limbs or wounds that are made, and from what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are from piercing with a stone, and cutting with a sword or dagger, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar things.
when they are done according to the laws of the body, such as wounds that bleed above the neck, or above the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the remembrance will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then be careful if it is from piercing or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and is large, and you slightly doubt an abscess forming: if the patient is immediately healthy from the cerebral itself if he comes little of blood from the wound, and let the healing be on the opposite side of the wounded part.
and avoid the hairs from being replenished with wine and large meats.
And if he does not want to heal, let his food be made mild, and he should not drink wine, nor change his char.
and put on the wound, if abscesses come, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in vinegar stiptic.
and if there is no abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh and full of blood, and it is not moved by air, powder that I will say a little later.
And if the arm has been moved, put some splints on it until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be closed by tents, then sew them together as I will say in wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
If the wound is exposed to bone, and can be moved, but only holds at one point, then suture it. Then treat the wound with medicine, and replace hard charcoal in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat less fatty foods, such as meat and cooked grains, like chicken, and similar things.
And if you find decayed skin or rotten flesh that does not touch the bone, then cut it all away, and pour vinegar on it, then treat it.
If he has an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting it, and he cannot stop the bleeding with medicines, then tie the artery, and if you remove the tube, then bind it with a thread. And if it does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you put in this powder that sours as soon as the wound has moved.
And the way of the powder is: take incense a part; blood of dragon two parts; Live charcoal in three parts, and the powder finely, and fill the wound, and let it form a scab, until it heals well and joins to all its sinew.
And then tie it firmly, and leave it undisturbed unless it swells; for the medicine should not be removed until it is healed.
And never use only chalk, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but that the art has moved the wound.
And if the wound moves again immediately, then do not put any of this powder;
but put some digestible ointments or poultices made of barley flour and honey, until it weeps. Then treat other ailments until they are healed.
And if the fractured bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then use fine forceps to extract it;
and I will tell you about the main fractures afterwards.
of the wound of the neck
If the wound comes from the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and the previous one, but if the wound of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is a nerve, there is no other method than to let the wound heal, and not put anything restricting, because it harms nerves and causes them to retract; and do not put anything flat on the wound, because the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuity is with the brain, which is one of the highest members;
but if the medicine is wet, like chalk washed in sharp sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and the cloth washed similarly in sharp sweet water, and other stones in this manner, and moistened with warm water.
And if the wound is large, then use bandages to bind it, and treat it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and she is hairy and full of flesh, then prick or lower the limb.
and if the artery is cut and there comes out blood, then drain, wash, and cauterize as necessary.
and if the arrow is cut from the throat or the wound, and the conduct is kept, by which the meat goes, then cut the arrow above the back of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. and then gradually release it, and let it rest for some time, then treat the wounds until they are healed;
if the wound has made an impression on the bone, if necessary; and if there are pieces of bone, try to remove them all if possible, and those you cannot remove, leave until the wound heals, and then disinfect and align the fracture;
and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder that I have mentioned. And if he has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then the treatment as I have described in his chapter.
If it is a spear or dagger wound, and the wound is deep, look to see if there is any whiteness or foul smell coming from the wound: Then immediately apply bandages to stop the bleeding, as if the wound is mortal.
And if it is not deep and fresh with blood throughout the wound, do not apply powder or bandage immediately for the first hour, so that it does not stick to the wound and prevent healing from occurring. But apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
And if you do not have an ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb excess moisture, and keep it quiet for three days, or four, or more. If no spasm occurs, nor does trembling of the heart prevent it from being strained. And when you see good positions, if you cut that the wound is saved. Treat the wounds and other treatments, until they are healed.
And if it cannot heal, and work, then cut that there is a fistula;
if the treatment as one should. And if the wound is of incision by sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse or at the back, then treat what is in front. If it is large, of sewing;
And if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and if it has chipped off pieces, if the wound requires them, and the remaining shards, if they are suitable. And if they are not suitable, leave the wound to fester, so that it aligns with the extraction.
And for other wounds on other limbs, it is up to judgment as we have said.
abdominal hernia
The ruptures of the belly are large and medium and small;
Of the great wound, none of the intestines ever jumps out, or the nerves of the intestines, because of their insertion into them.
And the sutures are more painful, and it is never worse than a small wound because if one does not put the intestines back in properly, they will not heal properly.
Because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the heat, and they are put back in properly, and it is better to have a minor wound because one can easily rotate the intestines back into place as with other limbs.
And there are four ways to treat a wound in the abdomen:
The two common sutures are in the abdominal wound suture, and the suture of other body wounds and two other proprietary sutures are common to other wounds.
And all ways they are cleaner with the stitching of the belly, and I will say one by one and explain.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is protruding, and it is a good thing to put back, this is by one of the two methods: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen by the heat.
And when it is hot, warm it in this way: soak a sponge or a piece of clean cloth in cold water only, or boil in cold water with vinegar and pepper and salt, and steam the intestine until it is swollen is softened;
and never made this wine with restraining, and it is muddled that one soul for dissolution.
And when you see the inflammation disappear, if the intestines are moist or alkaline and misaligned, for this is aligned with the entrance of the disease.
and if it cannot enter, then make a little hole in the wound with the tool used to remove tumors.
and the first care is to muddle that the cut, that we should not cut without great necessity.
and this is the tool for the cutting:
if you cut into the wound and do not find it, and see its shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, put them back in their natural form according to their own place, if you can, for this is good.
When the wound is wide and in the lower abdomen, then it is necessary to place the injured limb on its back, and raise its legs higher than its head; and if it is in the lower abdomen, then place the head and the foot higher than the other parts, and also if the wound breaks through the belly, place the injured side higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to follow what I say in large and moderate wounds.
For small wounds, apply what is at hand that has been previously prepared, then put between your hands the healing ointment that covers the entire wound and brings together the lips.
And this is the common method of stitching, and it is that you pinch an needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave some space from the edge of the wound, and if it has good thread, sew with a needle. And pierce the two needles through the two pieces of leather, which is outside the leather on that side, until you make it pierced from that part, and bring together the two ends of the needle four times.
Then the thread of a doubled string around the needle of half a span, then assemble the two parts of the wound evenly, and then leave one span of space, and there make another stitch.
Then tie the thread with a doubled string as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you know about needles until the whole wound is closed.
And let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, for thin needles cover the whole wound, and too thick ones cannot enter well. Therefore it is necessary that they be medium-sized.
and it does not matter to put the needles too far from the back of the skin and leather, so they do not puncture and open the wound before the stitching.
and then cover the wounded by the needles, so they do not cause the pain at night, and put bandages or cloths on the wounded by the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
and this method of stitching needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it only requires one or two needles.
The second method of stitching is common, and it is that you gather the two pieces of leather and the two pieces of silk together with one needle with a medium-strength thread.
And when you have perceived these joints all together, then reset the needle at the part where you began, in the manner that one does with drills.
And put a space between each stitch the thickness of a thread.
This stitch goes through the man, and I sewed a wound that someone had in his belly, which was cut with a knife, and was the wound more than one inch wide, and it extended into the intestines by two inches, and was the wound inside the belly.
I brought back the intestine after it had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was dressed with a poultice after 15 hours, and it was treated, and it healed.
And the man had been judged that he would die, and it was a miracle.
and did not heal it from burning, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicine. and I placed moss twice a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or I will tell you the two main methods of sewing:
take the needle, and the thread from the part in front just inside.
when it has pierced the heart of the wound in a straight line, then insert the needle at the top or where you put the thread, and make it pierce from the other side of the part inside just outside.
and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as the tailor makes the fur, and you leave once the needle of one part, and the repeat of another, until the stitch is completely finished.
The second way of stitching, which Galen properly calls, is that they assemble the two parts naturally together, and apply one end of the needle to the other end, in this manner:
fashion a needle or head of the marrow close, and make it pierce that part alone, and leave the two ends of the thread. then turn the needle, and make it pierce from that part before this within, the two ends of the thread.
then pierce both the upper and lower parts of the affected area from below upwards, in two other points called the miracles on the other side.
And this is the most common method of sewing and repairing it.
Those who know this saying, and no one testifies to it, you should sew the belly with two needles, or have thread in each.
And one needle should be inserted from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew lace.
And it is more difficult to sew where the tear is in the belly than other parts of the belly.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you clean the fresh wound of all its blood, as soon as the wound has moved, if you reset the intestine and the cost;
then put on the powder of healing charcoal, and if the wound has moved, then apply any ointment that is present until the wound closes. and bandage the wound, and let the sage and marjoram be present; then treat the wound as with the others until it is healed.
If you do not have any medicine, place it on top of the wound as soon as it begins to bleed, and apply a soft cloth, and shake it twice a day until it is healed.
For you should not use any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not cause communication with the principal members, then it is necessary to apply a light bandage in oil of warm chamomile or rose oil, and place it inside the angles, and remove it from the joints;
and if it feels pain or burning in the bowels, and often occurs, then enema of black wine and immediately if the burning comes to the intestines;
For the puncturing of the intestines, and such things as when it is the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is raw, and this is due to the smallness of the veins that are in it, and due to the subtlety of all the body, and its proximity to nerve nature.
And if the splinter jumps from the wound, and it is put back in place as the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and turned black, then you must tie the limb that has turned black, for blood does not come, as there are veins and arteries.
Then cut open the belly that is between the limbs, and put the two pins hanging from the part away from the wound, to align the extraction when the splinter breaks, and the wound closes.
of the breakage of the pot
When the internal organ is pierced, and the wound is small, if it can be put back into some people, because I saw that some men were impaled through the belly by a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it was prolapsed and became a fistula, and in this way there was excrement and vomiting;
I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to subtly treat it until it was healed, and the wound sounded.
And when I saw it healing, I doubted that there was no evil in his belly; and there was no harm, but it remained in better conditions, and changed and hydrated.
and they said no experimenters that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he should be tied in such a manner: take large needles, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the needle has opened the mouth, if it puts it above the two lips, so that it holds its mouth above.
and then cover the needle, and hold it so that it cannot slip, then put the other needle after in such a manner as before, until the wound is completely closed. and treat the wound.
If the arrow pierces into the intestines, and no harm comes to the patient, and it can be tied with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in such a way:
take the tip of this intestinal thread that is very sharp, and then tie it to the tip of this thread with a thin silk thread, then pull the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it back into the wound;
and this way of sewing is not far from the way of faith and hope;
If the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal organs, there is no treatment or health, because of its subtlety.
of fistula or that it is all wounds or abscesses, when they are covered, are universally called "fistulas," and specifically when they are cut and opened up.
And a fistula is along the spine, a hard and white sore, where there is no pain, and it is as sharp as the quill of an owl;
and never in a clear archway, and sometimes thick; never too little, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no scar, it is only because of one of the EIGHT causes: For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. or for its evil; or because there is hard charcoal inside, and on the lips, which does not allow fire to come out; or it has too much blood. or the bones are broken, and the matter is of bad quality. or the medicine is not good in the cure. or because the corruption is like a plague. or because the property in the region is late in digestion, and late in health, and blown away by nature. when there are openings or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicines in that section.
It is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas that are made by manual work.
Fistulas can occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the face, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the costes, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes from the principal property of the member, and similar limbs.
And all wounds of this kind are of great suffering, and there is only labor and ignorance.
And if there is no wound that does not come immediately to the place that I have said, and you are confident of the cure, and you know how to do it, then take a tent of tin or iron, if the wound is straight, if it is crooked.
And if the wound is twisted, then circle it with a thin tent of cloth, because the cloths bend around the twist.
And if the wound is perforated and you cannot well encircle it with tents, then cauterize one of the perforations, because the moisture goes from one perforation to another, and cleanses it.
then carefully examine your patient, whether there is bone or tendon, and if it is broken in two pieces, and ask well of the patient about the pain he feels when you press on his hand, and where he feels it.
and when you know truly where the bone is, and if it is far from joint, or tendon, or artery, or vein, or in any of the limbs that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the fractured piece and the corrupted parts that are inside.
and then the cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is well deeply in the right place, then you must cut across, as much as you can, then put soft sponges in medicine ague, and press them against the mouth of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluous matter that remains at the bottom.
and then I apply a warm, clean cloth to the wound until it is clean.
and if it is not clean by this method, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the sinus, then drill it.
If veins or nerves are not injured or principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then scrape away the corruption until it is all bone, then apply a warm, clean cloth to the wound until it is clean.
and if it is not clean, and remains red as before, then be careful not to go too far with the treatment:
If you discover and wish to be at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb.
And if it is thus healthy, it is well. If not, seek that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot proceed; if there is no other means than to wait for nature;
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with pincers, if the instrument is suitable for that, and if there are many bones, then remove them all, do not leave any behind.
And if the moisture makes it opposite, and there is no error or fear, then heat and moisture and char, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place a warm poultice on the wound to reduce inflammation, and leave it until the flesh is softened around the bones, and then they will be more easily removed.
And if they are large bones, such as a leg or thigh, then cut through the flesh until the entire bone is exposed, then close the wound.
And if there is a large part of the corruption, and it comes to a mass around the bone; then it should be cut off all around the corruption, and then treat it until it is sound.
And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take example and help in your work.
He was a young man around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, so that the matter came to the leg and was filled with a large abscess, and there was no cause to open it.
But the wound healers over-opened it so much that the abscess opened, and they let out a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and there was a lot of pain that everyone was groaning and sweating from the body.
And many doctors and surgeons for more than two years, and there was no knowledge in the art of hands, until I was called, and saw her leg and the medicines with which they were treating it, and what was happening through the pores at great speed. and became red the veins of youth, and had the color yellow.
I pitched a tent in one of these openings, and then I searched all the openings, and found that one was coming against the other from all parts of the leg.
I therefore hurried, and took from one of the pores until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption was coming into the bone from within.
I thought what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption, but that which I had taken.
and began to heal the wound with herbs soaked in long time, and could not stick together;
and then re-examined, and found the bone as before, and discovered continuous corruption in the bone, and the flesh, and then removed it, and I could not heal the limb; but I could only remove as much as a palm of the bone, and treat it to its entirety, then heal it with herbs; and it was healed and stuck together quickly, but did not want to begin the work again except for the weakness of the pain, which could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had for him. For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but he was completely healed, and born in the place of the bone, a hard char, and was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction at all, neither to the other nor to the coming.
And if the tooth is broken in any part of the jaw, it should be treated in this way: take the root, and strain it at the top of the bone that opens, and command that it not be extended upwards; and put another thread of linen thicker than the first thread, and tie it above the bone that is outside the bone, and extend the top, so that you remove the rotten part from the outside, and cover the bone above the jaw where you see it should be, so that it does not become rotten;
and put a piece of cloth outside the bone to cover the rotten part;
and it should be as much silk as one can see and feel the corruption, and be another time.
And if the tooth is rotten and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then remove the whole char.
Then put the cotton on the other side of the corruption, and the silk from one part to the other, and let the silk be as long as possible near the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, then copper the corrupted joint, and let the silk be in the bone on the other side.
If its corruption is in the continuation of the second joints, there is no other remedy than to cut.
And if its corruption is at the tip of the finger or toe, this is very difficult, but nevertheless it is necessary to inquire about that corruption, how it opens. And cleanse it in all the ways you can, but do not let the vein or nerve make you contrary.
And scour that which the incisor and the silk for covering these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and the appearance of teeth, and their thickness and thinness, their size and smallness, and their hardness. And therefore, it is necessary to arrange each similar work's tool.
And the work will show you the tool that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases. If you have a tool according to what it needs.
The shoulders may become dislocated either due to within, or due to lack of.
And when you have treated that corrosion by the cure of medicines, and it does not improve, then it is necessary to cover that member until the place where the corrosion comes, so that the pain escapes by the death, or by the malice, which is greater, due to the lack of the member.
and the signs are such that the limb becomes black, so it seems as if it has been burned by fire, and it remains black afterwards, for then comes the corrosion of member upon member, and it takes hold throughout the body.
if you have a bite from a poisonous beast, such as scorpions of the sea and snakes, if the corrosion is at the center of the wound, and the copper, and do not give it any space to come near your hand.
and if it comes near your hand, and the copper is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come near your arm.
and if it comes to the arm, then place the cup at the elbow.
and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy other than the amount of its virtue.
and as soon as the cauterization comes or pain: if it comes to the first joint, then place the cup after the other joint.
and if it comes to pain, then place the cup over all the pain. and if it goes up the leg, then place the cup at the knee joint.
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the bad one die.
And the manner of the copper or the cloth that the limb is bound with is such that you bind it above and below, and extend some ministers on one side, and other ministers on the other side, and you soak the flesh that is between the two limbs to the width of a spatula, until the bone is exposed;
then the copper or cloth, and put a piece of linen from each part, so that the cloth does not touch the healthy limb, and comes to the other injury and abscess and boil;
And if blood comes out when you work, then cauterize the limb firmly, or put some stopping powders on it;
then return to your medical practice until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a bandage suitable for its condition, and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to the man in the same situation:
he suffered from a blackness that seemed like fire burning, and this corrosion first attacked his right side, spreading throughout the body;
and when the doctor saw the corrosion, he covered the body with ointment, and was healed.
and for many days afterward the corrosion returned to his right hand, and it came to me, and I put him on things that were reflected after washing the body, and could not stop the corrosion.
and he wishes that I hold his hand, and I do not want, unless I have hope of repeating the matter. and he also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the ointment was weak.
and he completely lost hope, and returned to his land, and began to cover his hand, and was healed.
and I did not count on anything further than for others to do something else, if they have the matter at hand.
An abscess never comes in a thin limb, and it lasts so long that it causes great swelling. and then pierce and puncture, and in its outlet the bowels, and let the joints remain as they were, like a vessel. and the skin that is above is also as thin as the cloth you remove, and does not corrode the bone, nor the nerve, and such diseases are called "sinew" and are not called "fistula";
but if it is so long that it reaches the bone from the front, it is called "fistula";
and the skin if it is that you cover that skin all around, and at the same time when it is thin, like a cloth; and does not stay in place for its corruption.
And if you have sworn that the skin does not stick, and the corruption is not yet in full bloom, and the skin is charred, then the cure of the ointment is as follows:
Look if the wound is large, and the belly that is in it has a foul odor, then the ointment of Egyptian medicine made as follows: Take garlic, oil, and lead, equally, and put to cook in a small pot over the fire until the medicine is red, and thickens as much as honey;
And then take it according to your need, and make it into a powder and a syrup, and apply it to the chest, and hold the pulse steady. And leave the medicine in for two hours, then expel it by squeezing.
Do this many times until the chest is clean and the pus is removed.
And never apply the powder of ash, when this medicine is not present, and you should squeeze ashes from grape vines, and pour boiling water on top, then let it cool, and apply it to the chest, until you see that the chest is clean.
If the patient cannot bear the pain, neither Egyptian medicine nor the burning powder will help, but rather the mustard plaster or honey poultice with a little laudanum. Or you apply the honey and wine poultice, where the honey has the property of healing and cleansing, and the wine makes the wound ferment.
And when you have done this, and you have confirmed that the wound is healed, then apply the mustard plaster that makes charcoal in it, and it is that you hold a definitive poultice, and they make with rose oil and wine.
and you cauterize the wound with some medicines and oil, of which I have spoken about their properties or treating burns;
and if the pus in the wound is small, and the opening of the wound cannot enter, then enlarge it with a needle a little, and put in an Egyptian tent of oil or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave it alone until the skin or wound can enter, and if the pus that flows is above, then cover or higher than where it is.
And if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bone is at the lowest point where it is, for when the bone is in place, do not let it become infected with char, and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a way: that the wound gently slopes downwards, and leave nothing of the wound.
that the wound gently slopes downwards, and leave nothing of the wound. and take consolidative remedies to put on the wound, and place them under the cloth that covers the entire wound. Then apply a compress to the wound in the place where it is slightly larger than the first, since it is often inflamed and swollen on the other cloth according to the size of the wound, and put it on the wound of the healthy part to align the bowels, and do not remove the large dressing until after several days once.
And the one that is on the wound of the healthy part often removes to remove the bowel, and checks what comes from the bowel, whether it is poison or a little or enough, or digested or undigested.
And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been spread in some way and you see the nature that jumps on the wound of the healthy part, if the breasts have already been raised, and approach the healthy one.
And then dislocate it in the morning, or at midday, and when you dislocate the wound, change the dressing, and renew the poultice.
And if the subtle poisons are cut after long waiting, do not despair of the patient's health, for health approaches.
For there are people who delay in applying char to their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and if they apply it undigested, a sudden jump of the breast after many hours, so that the breast does not move;
and if the breast is delayed in moving, and is distant, then apply medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as poultice definitive, for there is a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
Take a definitive grip, and make it with red oil, and the bandage of old wine even in substance.
Then cook and use it.
And this very thing is best cooked and thickened when a definitive grip is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and the powder on the honey as it is over the fire.
And then glue the cloth, and place it on the chest, and never administer aristologue along with long roots of heavenly lily, which is also like flour of times and hundred. and in the use of simple or compound remedies: grind them, and make powder from them, and put on top of the honey I have said, and use it;
and if the cure is long, and not cured by this cure, then scrape away that the corruption is removed, and make an impression in the bone, or on hard members, or on limbs; if the cure of the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that arises from outside the joint of the little finger of the hand, or the toe, or by chance arises in other places;
And when it is dislocated, and no care is taken, if an abscess comes, and it is covered and poured with boiling water until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps the whole hand.
And when it comes to the corrosion of the bone, until there is painful putrefaction, and the affected part is very swollen, and the color is red.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not improve, then you must remove all the remaining superfluity of the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is also healthy.
And if the nail is close to the bone and begins to poke, and the wound, it is necessary that you put the raw cautery outside of the nail so that it does not pierce, and bring the remaining char upwards, and cover this char subtly and lightly, and place above the remaining char medicines of fire and corrosives to remove everything. Then apply the remedy of ointments until they are healed.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, if it breaks and rots, because as much as the bone corrupts, it cannot heal.
And if you see the tooth rotting, if it breaks and rots, then apply the remedy until it is healed.
And if it is fierce, broken, and bleeding, and the patient feels great pain, then you must first heal it.
Then cut the gum apart in a crosswise direction, and guard that the cut does not reach the bone beneath, because the pain would be too great.
And if it happens, put something on top to soothe it.
The ones that give birth in the hands of some men are all charred, and sometimes they have teeth, and sometimes they have a hook, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in any of the two.
Those born without any joint do not move, and those born at the joint may move.
The belly of one who is chubby is lighter in some way: belly it is at its root of a wide space.
Those born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you have this copper.
In those who are born or must lie on their backs, it is necessary that you first cut the flesh around the bone roundly to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable silk according to this, then care for it until it is healed.
The same things that come together in this way come from birth, or from the wound, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
If it is appropriate that you cover that which is sour, so that they return according to their natural forms. Then put between two tents or moist cloths with rose oil, so that they do not stick. where you place between two pieces of soft cloth, until the bones are heard, as they should be.
If it comes to either of his two hands with the back of the hand, then apply the bandage as it should be done.
Veins are large and surrounded by excessive melancholy, which come from many members of the body.
and more often occur in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Therefore you should never administer any purgation of clay, and then the healthy one from the basilica.
The treatment of iron is according to two methods: one is to remove the rust, and then draw out the black blood. and the other method is that you open the vein, and draw it all out.
The cut is made in this way: The first leg of sharp hot heat was very strong, until the large one was not subtly removed, then the leg with the bad joint was stretched down from above the knee to the part below the groin.
Then cut the vein in the arm, or in the second or third, of a wide size, then lift and pull out the black blood with your hand, from one to the other, as much as the virtues of the bad joint can bear.
And then bind it, and command that he be shaved with a black charcoal.
And then restart the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are empty and the joint is exposed.
The application of this method is as follows: If the leg is dislocated, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath, and the leg is heated with hot water until it turns red, and swells the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, then heat it at the fire, and then cover the vein long at the top of the thigh, or in the part below the knee;
then open the skin at the bottom, and scrape the vein from every part, until it appears when touched;
and one can see it red and black, and when it enters or skin seems to resemble a white cord.
then press the ray of dislocation, as long as it is away from the skin, and then one can lift it lightly, then the other joint in the same way for three days.
then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it to the wrist, as you have done, and one can lift it at another lighter place, as you have done first.
then cut another size, or if you have skill for it, then lift it, and one can lift it to the second joint of the finger, then remove it and lift it to the second size.
Then extract it from shoulder to shoulder, as far as it is fully extended, then bind it.
And if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a needle into the thread strongly doubled, and tie it and pull it, and move away from the other side, and turn your hand from one side to the other, as far as it can be pulled. And beware that it does not bind, for if it binds, then you cannot pull or lift it, and it will cause harm to the patient.
And when you have treated it completely, put soft cloth soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound. and the care as long as they are healthy.
And if the joint is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must forcefully untwist it, but do not cover it. and treat it as we have previously mentioned.
The form of iron that covers the joint, if it is curved and does not cut through, then it should not cover the vein.
And it is of large curvature, because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is the form:
This vein is injected into the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in land where there is no moisture;
and by chance arises in another part than the legs, and this has the property of causing the pus that comes out of the skin, as it comes from within the body, serpents and worms, inject between skin and flesh.
And if there are signs of the beginning of this wound, such as a very large inflammation in the leg, then the limb changes, and the wound begins to open, like the root of a plant.
When the wound is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth from one and a half to two inches wide, and the cloth, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it is not there, if you wrap the cloth around the cloth, and the cloth;
and if it is too long, cut off a part, wrap it around, and do not cover it at its root until it is completely out. for if you cut it off, it will enter into the bone and cause abscess and infection or damage to the limb, and severe illness.
therefore it is necessary that it be treated carefully and gently at the head, and nothing remains or cuts.
and there is never this vein when it is treated from the length of one palm, or ten, and sometimes it comes to me, which issues from ten palms in length, and when you cut it, it bursts or pierces, and cuts through to the bottom, so that all is inside.
and empty out the matter that is inside, and apply to the patient medicines infused with garlic juice on any day, then treat as abscesses.
And never again to this vein, and especially when it opens at the joint of the finger, or toe, and much blood comes out, and it is difficult to stop;
then treat as we have said before.
of verses that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often affects cattle, and is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body, going up and down, and is felt well from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it was, and jumps out;
and is caused by the accumulation of certain humors, such as those that come out and wriggle and worms and ascarids or intestines;
and one doubts its harm, for as it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the brain, perhaps it enters, and destroys the brain; and this has often happened.
When you see it to cure and draw out, then one cannot do otherwise than when it goes:
so it is necessary that you tie the limb above and below a very tightly bound bandage, then cut across and draw it out, and if it turns back into the body, and you do not retrieve it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies;
and the greatest harm it does is that it consumes oil, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold it firmly away from it, then cut it off and remove it.
and it is necessary to use the mundificament of corpses of medicines dissolved for the evil humors by poisoning. And if it becomes infected with bad meat, it will cause putrefaction.
of pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from member to member;
I saw what I told you. I was called to a sick woman, and she revealed to me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and soon after, I saw it rise as high as the shoulder, faster than anything, as if alive when cut from the limb;
the pain separated from the limb and settled in the shoulder, then after a while it corrupted throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
then she told me that she had turned around in circles around the body, as I saw.
I greatly marveled at how it moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease move in such a way. However, I wanted to move the pain from one limb to another, but I could not, as I saw in the woman;
And I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed, and because that appearance of that constraint of breath.
And they do not reveal themselves according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins covered.
And when you see how to cure this disease, and the pain feels as we have said, if it opens as we have described, then hold the limb above and below firmly, and then cover it with a cloth until that constraint of breath is relieved. and cauterize the limb.
and if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat the cause of that constraint of breath, such as foul-smelling pills, and serpent pills, and similar others.
Arrows are various, according to their similarities and according to the types of bodies they pierce.
The varieties of them are such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and curved, and smooth. And of those that have the angle, and of those that have tongues, and of those that have pieces.
And that which penetrates into any member if it penetrates according to the ways: Or in a principal member, such as the neck, head, heart, lungs, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it penetrates therefore into any part of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you hereafter appears to you: If it is necessary for you to perform the extraction of this arrow, for many die afterwards in various positions. And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully embedded, remove it, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the skull when the arrow pierces and penetrates the bone, and the facial nerve that is above the skull, is when there is scotomy and sode, and esvertin and roujor ens, and inflammation and roujor of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; and by chance it is without force of the nostrils, or of the ears. and by chance it is the speech and voice. and white matter like pus leaks from the wound, and also boils out like broth of cheese.
and if this sign appears to you, then take care of the treatment, and remove the arrow if it is not already out.
The sign of the arrow when it pierces or enters, is that it is near the right breast, and also feels like it was stuck in something hard, not empty. and by chance the arrow moves like boils, and also cuts through black blood, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and syncope. Therefore, without doubt, the dead will rise.
And the sign of a wound that does not heal is that without any pain, bubbles rise from the wound, and the throat swells, and the limb changes color, and it gasps for breath and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrowhead is stuck in the roof, it is below the small ribs; and there is great blood and great pain and breathing. And all the members of the shoulders move.
And if the arrowhead is stuck in the stomach, by chance if anything of undigested meat jumps from the wound.
And if the arrowhead is stuck in the belly, and nothing comes out of it through the intestines, there is no hope of cure or extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrowhead is stuck in the bladder, and the urine shoots out and comes out afterwards, and the pain is very great. Therefore, it is a mortal wound.
The other member, such as the hand and neck and throat and shoulder and elbow and spine of the back and forearm and wrist and fingers and legs, and similar members, are safe according to many arrangements. When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of what you were doing otherwise.
It happened to the man that an arrow hit him in the knee at its base: I tried it, and it was taken out from another side, away from the ear grease, and it was healed without a trace.
And in a game, there is an arrow that pierces the grease of oil outside the paper outside, and the arrow is recovered, and it can only reach the tip towards the fist, and it is a large arrow of a Turkish bow, all the iron light without ears;
the game was safe, and no bad accidents came to him.
And in a game, there is an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it is an Arabic arrow with ears;
I sought the arrows, and subtly I found it, and it was safe for the Christians.
And I inserted an arrow into a man, which was in his head or stomach, and thought he would die.
and then after thirty days, he did not change his condition; I cut into the arrow, and pulled it out, and inserted it again, and there was no bad outcome.
And if you want to a man who has an arrow that has fallen out or back, and the wound is sealed over;
and remains inside him, and does not change his natural condition, nor find harm in any of his natural works.
And if you want to another man, who has an arrow that has fallen out into his face, and the wound is sealed over; and prolongs thus without great pain;
and many similar things.
And a arrow was stuck in the man of the king, which was his neck in the middle, and it was somewhat inclined to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded.
I was called for healing after it had been there for three days. If the wound is very narrow.
I found it all in a very thin tent, and I did not feel anything; and he felt sharp pain and pain on his right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I put above his head a poultice of digestive attractant, because the wounds did not swell; and to me appeared the head of the arrow.
and to me appeared the head of the arrow. I immediately applied the ointment on it, and soothed the wound directly, and waited until the pain subsided for a long time, as he felt the arrowhead inside his nostril.
and he told me. I applied the corrosive medicine on the wound immediately, as long as it was open, and I tested it, and felt the head of the arrow sticking to the skin.
then I pushed it into the opening of the wound with that medicine until the head of the arrow appeared clearly.
And it passed well the ends within four months, and then ulcerated the wound that I had sown the stitches, and one from one side and the other, and could not come out.
Therefore, I continued to subtly and ingeniously manipulate tools, until I took it on the next day with well-made stitches, according to how its form would come at the end of this chapter, as I do, and restored the wound.
And the doctor judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I restored it then, and it was healed the wound, and was completely cured of all pain.
I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, because the books cannot comprehend everything.
But the wise masters know well very little, and what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, for the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not issue from members unless they are pierced for two reasons: or by the limb where they enter, or by another part.
And that which comes out by the way where it enters, is an arrow entering through the muscles, and never comes out now.
And if she does not jump now, let her remain until the charcoal is ready to be placed around it, and also to make an opening for the release.
And if she is stuck in the bone, and cannot be released, let her remain thus for several days, and move it every day.
And then she jumps, and if she does not jump, pierce all around with a thin needle, until the surrounding tissue is expanded, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is placed back in the body but cannot be seen, then cover it with the entire tent. and if you feel it, then pull it out with any suitable tool.
and if you cannot pull it out due to the narrowness of the wound, and because the arrow is deeply embedded, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins, then leave it until the wound becomes large.
and retrieve the arrow if you can, and if it has ears in the arrow that it holds, then break the char that is stuck on two parts to the muscle that you can, and then break or pierce the ears of the arrow, until you can retrieve it;
and carefully remove the arrow, so that you do not break the arrow when removing it.
And if you cannot do it once, then pull the limb towards the shoulder, as the extraction is alleviated. And if blood flows from the wound, follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and guard the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put care as you can muscle to remove the arrow without danger, or soon or late, or firmly or weakly;
and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow left, as this is the greatest help that can be, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs show.
The arrow that comes from another part, where it does not open anything of its own, or where the skin is inflamed in some place so that one can see or feel it apparantly:
then cut across, as much as the needles can take, and then extract it. if it jumps now.
And if it is held in the bone, round your hand and push it into the bone, until it enters the bone, and expands the bone, then remove it.
and if it cannot come out, then leave it and then restart the extraction until it comes out.
and if it is from an arrow and it is still in, if it is stuck at all;
and if it is stuck in the flesh, and you see administer gently, if you administer the instrument straight, so that the arrowhead enters the hair of the instrument;
then pull out, and if the arrow is stuck, if you pull out the instrument at an angle, to alleviate the extraction.
And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh around where the poison is, if possible, then treat the wound as appropriate.
and if the arrow is stuck in the belly or bladder or side, and it is close, and you can cover it over, if you can;
and guard yourself from covering the vein and artery, and then extract it, and then cut into the wound, if necessary; and the treatment until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
And there are many ways to do this: Great, medium, and small, depending on the amount of blood.
The shape of the arrowhead is like the beak of a bird, to stick at the point of the arrow, as in this way:
Of the veins that are opened, there are 31, of which it has or head 16, that is to say: 2 beans that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbech". and the 2 arteries that are in the 2 temples appearing. and the 2 veins that are in the 2 arm pits of the 2 eyes, which are called "aspires". and the vein that is located in the forehead and the vein that is located at the back of the head and the two temples that are located on the sides and the two veins that are located above the lips, and these are the veins that are called "augerich and the two veins that are outside the tongue
The veins that are commonly bled are five in each arm
one is the cephalic, and is on the right side, and is called by the common people "vein of the head And the common one is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilar, and they call it the lay people "vein of the heart". And the basilar is on the right side, and they call it the lay people "vein of the belly", and it is above the fossa, and it is that one from which one bleeds, which opens clearly above the pouch.
And the subclavian is the vein that is between the brachial and radial, and it has two branches.
And in the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: The first is outside the pouch of the sinister side rib, and the second one is above the knee of the dexter side. et the vein which is called «nesse», which is in the elbow of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins above those.
The purging of the veins that are after the ears helps with ancient catarrhs, and migraine;
and the quality of the purger, as I told you, and it is that you reset the head of the pain, and rub the limb where the veins are with a rough cloth; then strain the pains on its neck to a ligature, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two loops depending from the head: where you feel the bone out of your joint, and if you sense the pulsation from your joint, it is dislocated;
then take the lancet, and place it outside the vein next to the bone, then lift your hand all around the vein, and cut and scrape the skin and the vein well, so that you can see through it twice;
then strain and tie it until it is healed;
and I have already mentioned the incision and cauterization in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples, which is worth avoiding, and sodden, and accustomed to being covered with tears;
and the qualities of a good surgeon are as I say: and he knows his own neck, so that the two veins appear clearly; and he feels the hairs on the other's back, and then inspects it;
then lift the skin over the vein at the back of your hand, and pierce it with a lancet from outside, and lift the vein upwards, and tie it off, as you have done in the other two veins, and draw out the blood according to your need;
then release the hairs, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put gauze over it; and then the bandage is formed, and it is left until it is healed.
and we have spoken about them and their treatment and removal, as the beginning of this book.
The healing of the facial vein is as valuable as the healing of the cerebral diseases of the face, and migraine, and rheumatism.
and the quality is such that the pain is felt in twisting the neck, until the vein appears. then take the instrument called "fosser", which has this form:
and place the point on the vein, and hold it firmly with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount you see; Then release the neck from its dislocation, and tie the vein until it is healed and never again with a wide flame.
However, the fire should not be too hot; and the iron should be straight, because the teeth are close, and by chance it may break the flame when it is thin.
The use of the two veins that are in the two arms helps with the eyes, and the jaw, and the jawbone, and the cheek, and the face;
and the quality of their vein is such that the pain dislocates its neck by twisting from any joint, as before.
Then, the healthy one, and let the health pass through the wound, a little long with the flame, a little wide, for there is no hair. And if the flames are too delicate, perhaps it will break;
Then apply pressure to the blood, as much as you have skill, and then tie with cotton, and bind it well.
The health of the vein from the neck is good against fever, and for sweating, and for diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that comes to the face, and always when it is old;
and the quality of the health is such that the pain strains its neck, then strain its neck to your right hand, and take the delicate flame long, and put it under the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the saint will begin to bleed now.
and do not move too much in the meantime, and draw out the blood according to your need, then tie it up for a night, as it is quickly restored.
The sainfoin of the second kind helps to narrow the aloe, and at the beginning of mesmerism, and for many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosions, and herpes, and stomatitis;
And the quality of the sainfoin is such that the diseases avoid its neck from one and the other, as we have said;
and let the masters be above the head of the dislocated part, and the dislocated part below the seat, then gently lift the limb with a long, slightly wide, and then drain the blood frequently, as much as necessary for the matter.
then repeat on the other vein, then release the limb, and hold the veins steady, so that the dislocated part does not strangle. and let it rest until morning, so that the wound is healed.
of the health of livers The health of the lips above helps in the mouth, and in the corruption of teeth, and fissures of lips, and soreness and around.
And the quality of the healing is to make the dislocated part sit in front of you, and hold its neck as I have said. Then turn the eyelid, and look at the two veins, one on the right eyelid and the other on the left, which are known by their black color and by the small black veins around them.
Then cut both of them, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, cut the largest one from each part, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same method.
of the tongue's disease The veins that are below the tongue help after the sainie of the cephalic, and it is at the narrowness of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth.
and the qualities of a good physician are that the hairs between your hands before the sun, and the tongue is relieved, and look down each side a black vein:
therefore healthy both and not move too far away, for from there are the arteries.
The veins that are commonly cured are cured in two ways:
either by pressing all the fire wide, or by oil-like, as if cutting through, and is called "anesel"; and are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the fire cautery is very famous, and is as wide as you see.
And it is necessary to open veins that have been sewn closed with thick blood that is clotted and disturbed; and this is the form of a flaming torch:
And it is more delicate and pointed, and is for opening veins that are delicate, where there is delicate clotted blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are outside the neck, and where the collarbone, and where the shoulder, and where the stomach;
And it is necessary for the vein to be opened carefully, and that it be separated from the artery that is outside. And if he cuts the artery, and blood clots come out, then it is necessary to cool it as I have said; and it should not be pricking the fire, but cutting as with a knife.
And if the basilisk does not open clearly, then it is necessary to restrain and change another. or you want any blood from it, or you clean in its place the vein with your arm: it opens clearly. and the copper to the fire as we have said.
And if you see that you know the vein of the sinew, then it is necessary to restrain the arm and touch the vein until you know the pulse. then signal the elbow, and then tie the arm, and cover the wound with a flame afterward. and watch that you do not pierce into the artery when you see the elbow swell, for it is the artery. then move away from it.
And if you see it spouting out as high as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, then it is not from the artery. then quickly move away from it, and put your finger on the length of it, then remove your finger when it is not stained, as it often does. tie the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the hairs;
and if there is fear, do not move it until it is healed.
and if the pain is not alleviated, and it hurts, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it is open, for the main part of the remedy is to stop the bleeding; and relieve the pain.
Take a piece of cloth, and cut it, and take one part and tie it well to the other side;
if the pain is relieved, that is good. if not, then the doctor, as we have said, applies powders that stop bleeding.
and the stoppage is not always effective in many positions of the small wound of the limb, and the position of the arm.
The cleaning of the vein in the middle helps because it treats blood from the top and the body, as it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said.
and it is necessary for the cleaner to move for the vein that is outside, and if not too far from the front, and he finds the vein, and it swells and the santez is not stopped.
and this nerve is often open, and if it does not open in any men due to its subtlety, then you must use the instrument accordingly. shield the nerve from your power.
And if he has veins between the two nerves, make it long.
The remedy for the cerebral headache helps, that it draws blood from the head, and helps with the eyes.
and it is recommended to use the remedy by applying a garlic or mint oil fire, because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not affect any nerve or artery. Nevertheless, it is recommended to use the lighter limb, and do not harm anything if it does not work the first time, and then start again. And by chance, some men's arms swell to others, but it does not harm them the first time.
The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
The first thing you need to know about healing is that healing is only intended for the purpose of maintaining health and preventing diseases from coming.
And whether the healing is done in one of the three veins that are either open: That is to say, cephalic, fasciculic, and basilic. And it should be healed at the beginning of the first hour, and in the afternoon and in the evening after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
And it should be cleansed on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
The cleansing that is administered to diseases does not have a determined time, but it is best to do it in the morning or at night, every hour and at all times;
And it is not necessary to cleanse children under the age of fourteen, nor a pregnant woman except for the first three months after conception. Do not let those who have passed sixty years old become physicians.
And when anyone wants to cleanse, in whatever way it is done, it is necessary that he empty the intestines of a light enema, if he has much feces retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous waste harmful to the principal members;
Do not trust those who are too fond of meats, nor those who are overfed, so much that they are full of humors;
and if one becomes ill after colic, vomiting, diarrhea, and frequent menstruation, and of living with a woman, and of travel, and of watching and fasting, and all the virtue, or by any other cause of the arm or body;
then subtly remove the humors, if they are not too thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power;
then enter or take a bath, if nothing prevents, to subtly remove the blood, and save the vein from the third hour, as we have said;
and guard yourself from that day of work, and point, and luxury, and similar things;
and be bound and joyful, and let the physicians be higher than those who heal, and friction the arm II or III times, then restrain the joint above slight movement, for if it is too stiff or weak, it cannot correct itself;
and then friction the limb with hands, until the veins swell, and feel them to be full;
then milk the physicians the flame of a small amount of old oil, then place their thumb on the vein nearest to the limb where they want to heal, that the vein does not burst and fail to heal;
Because there are veins that flee as quickly as strings to the surgeon, and some that are plain of thinness, so that when one puts above the flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those. And if the surgeon opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeon be aware of these things.
And if the first time he opens the vein, it is good; But if not, he should restart a little below that vein or above carefully, if the vein is not inflamed.
And if the joint is inflamed, and the pain subsides, leave it for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: by chance it may come abscesses.
do not enter or bathe, then restart the cleaning if it suits him.
and if the wound is small, or you rub it gently and doubt that it will not bleed as much as you saw, then trust that wound itself directly to all the fire.
and work it gently, if the joint is inflamed. for this often happens, when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swelling, do not start again with the same salve, and put on a little oil, for it soothes the blood in the wound, and is better in this limb than the salve.
And thus administer the oil salve in each wound that you cleanse the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
And this very thing makes a triangle and a bow of the herb, when it is put on the limb. If subtly draw out the wound and separate it when it is too thick.
And if some large abscesses come, which often happen, exactly when it is not cleaned except at this time or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and put on the limb sponge moist in hot water and a little salt, and hold it an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place for some time without any discoloration or greenish tint, then it is not harmful. and if you see, place on top of anything with aloe or mustard mixed with honey, ointment, or similar.
And often there is an abscess and appearance of the pus from the church.
and therefore place your hand on top, and if you feel the swelling soft with the pressure of your hand, then it is the bad appearance. Therefore do not place anything that we have said on top, because by chance without the artery.
but apply a dry bandage to strengthen the joint, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And apply each bleeding according to the amount of its virtue and the color of the blood.
For if it is not black, let it remain out until it turns red; and if you see it swollen, let it remain out until it becomes thinned. And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is suitable for one who is lame and disabled, and has the skill of arrow extraction, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and let him heal quickly and often, and it should be treated by cutting across, not by pinching.
This method of healing is safe from the corrosion of blood and the straining of tendons, and it is better than healing by a long or wide wound.
And to those who have a bleeding wound, it is appropriate to give bread mush in the juice of green apples. If it is hot-blooded, then apply blood three times or four times. And if it is of cold complexion, then before the healing give bread mush in muscat syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and strong-smelling syrup.
And if he has a fever after the evacuation of much blood, it is necessary to give him a broth of meat, and an odorous syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the chapter or section on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wishes to drain some arm and bleed again, it is necessary that when he is weakened by much bleeding, he should do so little by little, according to the quantity of its power continuously.
And if he wishes to drain some arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong pulse, he should bleed again seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And those who wish to heal on another side, they must heal at the second hour or the third.
Because he has much blood within his body that is already heated, and causes fever. if it is necessary to draw a large amount, and widen the vein until it pierces into the flesh. then you should meet all conditions of health, and place your hand on the wound as it heals, so that the patient does not die from bleeding, which has often happened when the healer is negligent.
and do not draw when you see the arm weakening, and make blood flow out a second time, and the vein is closed, that you press strongly on. If it is curved, he should extend his arm quickly, for this would be bad.
but let it rest until it heals the second time. or you do not point to the tip of the flame, until the blood that is frozen from the vein is softened, and put on a cloth soaked in oil, and press it lightly.
And if the pus is seen to be flowing, let it flow and do not press it, until the abscess is calmed.
And if it is necessary to draw blood the second time, draw it from the same vein, or another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins in the arm are sound because they are composed.
And the method of healing is that the hairs bring their hand in sharp hot, until the pain is red.
then tie it gently, so that the vein appears well, then heal it across, not too narrow or too long.
And let the pores be wide, and clean well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the hot water, until you have enough.
And if it is already in this state, do not turn the hand again in hot water, for it is put more in ice than in hot water.
And the bleeding of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no artery or nerve.
The bleeding of the wrist vein on the right side is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
Strain the hand, and apply hot and sharp, until the vein is punctured, if possible. And if the vein is crossed, and if you manage to catch it all at once, without causing any harm.
And do not move too much in the beginning, for the veins are all over the body, and then put the hand back in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
And when you have treated the arrow as much as is necessary, if you put oil and thread over the vein to sew quickly, and thus do for each rain.
The salve for the hand on the right side is good for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you to the left.
The salve for the breast is good for all diseases that are not of the body, such as diseases of the marsh, and retention of flowers, and disease of the rain, and of the coxes and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its blood is such that the hairs boil in hot water, and rub on the vein until it stops, and tie above the joint. and if the vein is at the elbow, and from above the wrist there are many raindrops;
then use the larger rain, or at the elbow, which is more suitable.
And if you use it above the wrist, then guard against the nerves that are displaced, and apply it as if in scraping.
and let the flames be equal.
And if it cannot issue from the sinew, then reset the knee in the high position, and let the vein fully drain.
And if the first application does not work, then start again from above a little, because the veins are salty.
and do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus apply the same soporific to the other wrist.
The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the knee of the thigh, and its sinew is worth the pain of the hip, when it is for an arrow wound.
And the quality of his health is such that the hairs between or in the bath, and strange above the ankle four times in twisting, because otherwise it does not open the vein.
and if it opens, then the healthy one in all ways that you can, and across; and it is worthwhile to cover it, because the limbs are sore, and it is very painful for men.
and it is worthwhile to cover it, because the limbs are sore, and it is very painful for men. And if you do not relieve it, then the healthy one of any that opens or falls from a piece of cloth, and towards the small toe, and it keeps the nerves;
and make so much correction of the blood that you see, and then release the ligament, and put on cotton and hold it; It is now healed.
Vacuum devices are made of horns, or of brass, or of glass;
And suction is done in two ways: Either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
And this suction without pricking is done in two ways: Either it is at all heat, or without heat;
And the suction done by pricking and drawing blood is done in twelve places on the body, of which one is entirely at the top of the chest; and the others are at the neck; and two others in the second rib of the neck; and the suction from the chin; and the suction from the two shoulders; and the suction from the hips; and the suction from the two arms; and the suction from the two legs; and the suction from the two knees;
and the suction does not treat blood, but only the small veins that are scattered in the body, and for this reason it does not weaken anyone, as is done with venipuncture. and it should not be administered except in cases of extreme heat or cold, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
And if necessary for illnesses, it is advisable to ventilate, or by custom, to uncover each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every ten days.
for there are some who, when they have the task of ventilating, have heavy heads;
and some who feel pressure and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness before their eyes;
and some who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and have extended their tongue, and spit blood. and some who faint, and see black spots and pale faces and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is at the end of the month, we command them to fast for three hours after midday.
The saliva of the mouth helps to ease the pain of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it should only be after the evacuation of all the blood from the body.
And this ventilation is in place of the saliva of the head, and it should only be used by those of cold constitution or who have diarrhea, as this does great harm.
And for this reason it should not be used by those who are watchful or who have cold diseases.
And those who often heal themselves, if they become forgetful, and for this reason, it is necessary to place the vacuum a little lower due to the uncertainty of forgetfulness.
The ventilation of the neck is in place of the saliva of the head and the basilicon, and because it is good for the narrowing of the throat, and for the opening of the pomegranate, and for all, and for replenishment.
And it should not be placed too tightly, for if it is held too firmly, it will cause the spine or stomach and heart to twist.
The ventilation of the second costal cartilage of the neck alleviates head pain, obtunds and eliminates migraines, prevents strangulation, and relieves pain in the roots of the teeth, and is in the place of the health of the basilica;
And it is necessary to command the healer that he press his hand when placing it, so that he does not compress the artery, and does not cause bleeding of blood.
The ventilation of the lower jaw relieves mouth disease, and decay of teeth, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the joint of the second lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders is for diseases that come from heat and swelling.
The incisions of the shoulders are just as valuable as three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins.
And the healer instructs the patient not to fear too much pain, for the bones are bare of flesh, and can be seen through nerves and arteries.
The suction cup placed on the back is just as valuable for drawing out morbid matter from the foundation, and for diseases that are not visible, and it should be large and made of metal, so it can effectively draw. And by chance, if it is too thin, it will break. and I make great wounds.
The bandages of the legs open wounds widely, for they draw out blood from all over the body, and cause ancient pains of rain, and of marsh, and of the bladder, and remove the flowers.
and they are in the place of the second phalanges, and of the second metatarsals, and always they weaken the body after long use, and cause pain in many positions.
The way to put the bandage is that you first place it empty, and suck quickly, and apply firmly, and move evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the affected part red and swollen, and open the wound of the blood.
then apply heat, and replace the bandages, and take care of the body's position, for there are some who have sores and clear pores. if it is necessary to make a single cut, and it is necessary to make large wounds and deep ones; and clean lightly.
And if the wound is not large, then it is necessary to make two cuts: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
And if the wound is not very deep, then it is necessary to make the third cut;
and when we want to draw out the blood a little and a little, then we should only clean once. And if we want much blood, then we recommend often.
And if the blood is not let out, then we apply heat, and the end is that the wound should be cleaned thoroughly, and it is suitable for those who have thick skin and are tough, and who have hard pores, that you use the legs of the oil suction cups, which are appetizing and dissolving: if it is in this state, of oil violet, or of almond sweet oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in the ivy state, of lettuce oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar one.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or balm oil, or oil of anise, and similar things.
And if that person who is to have a wide and large opening, should not put any oil, but it should be washed after venting with hot rosewater, or hot cold water, or water of elderflower, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or other similar things.
And those who have much moisture, if they rise from the ashes of silphium, or hot water of mint, and of similar things.
And those who have excessive flesh rise from old wine, or from sour wine, or from the decoction of anise or chamomile, or from other similar things;
and they should not immediately apply suction after the bath, but an hour or two afterwards;
and they should not sleep immediately after the suction, and it is good that they warm themselves, when they should be sucked and when they are sucked.
And if those who are suctioned are cold, and if they are not enough and inflamed; if it is good that they take cold things, such as large apples and endives and lettuces at the mouth, and similar things; and put on poultices, and bread of mustard, and moist meats.
and put on poultices, and bread of mustard, and moist meats. And those who have a cold complexion, take honey syrup, and aromatic wine between old and new, and put on poultices, and poultices of mustard, and moist meats; and small birds and pigeons.
and the day that he will move around, he should drink more than eat.
And it is appropriate to give some men ginger or muscat wine before or after movement, to strengthen the main limbs. And let them subtly give the water, but it is not appropriate for everyone to drink it.
The suction cups that are placed to cause pain are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mouse, and podagra, and on the belly and the buttocks and the legs and the thighs, because these members do not suffer pain in those places, and no one does it except to draw blood from member to member, as we place them on the breasts when the baby is born;
to overcome the viscosity that is in the member, as we place suction cups on the belly and on the buttocks to ease the member;
and remove the pain, when there is a bone or stone, by its attractive power perhaps removing the bone, or dislodging the stone from its place;
and thus she does when placed over the liver and over the stomach when there is wind retention, and these vacuums are administered empty for suction only. and never administered together with fire, and sometimes plain hot tea, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the vacuum with hot boiling water, or hot water in which he has cooked poisonous herbs for this purpose.
The shape of the pneumatic administered by fire is as follows:
And it has two large and half-palm-wide openings and is surrounded by a small perforation, just like to put a needle, and if it is of tin, sulfur before so that it does not burn the pain when placing it on the limb;
and in the middle of it, a rod of iron or wood, to put a splint, and they are both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them.
for the suction cups of children are different from the old, and thin ones from fat ones.
And one should put this suction cup on the limb:
with a wax splint or linen, and put it in the suction cup at the end of the rod that is in the suction cup, so that it clears both the back and front of the suction cup that it does not burn the hairs.
And then place it on the limb, and you should put it on the perforation that we have said, so that when one wants, it goes through the vapor, and one removes the suction.
And grasp the line as before, and restart it often, if you have skill.
In the suction that is administered in disease of pleurisy, at all acute, does not have a probe or perforation, and is not administered until it is full of acute, and is placed on the limb alone.
And this is the form:
Noses are not administered until in limbs where one cannot place suction for their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar ones. and when removing a horse's shoe, as with two or three nails, and similar things;
and the quality of the user is such that when you cut through them without any obstruction, take them.
and place them in fresh water, as long as they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies. and then clean them with blood and a syringe, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the nails on top.
and when they are flat and ready, if it is possible to put a syringe there, place it, as it is very useful afterwards.
If not, then lift the arm gently, first from the shoulder, then from the elbow, very well, and then wipe it.
and if it is too sore after the course of the sinews, then rub the linen cloth in cold water, and put on it, until the wound is cleansed.
and if the wounds multiply, then put on it broken glass, or salt, and similar things, until it is cleansed.
or you put half of the crushed beans on the arm, and leave them until they dry on the arm, it will stop now.
and if you have more serious cases, take other remedies.
And if the remedies do not want to take effect, rub the wound with fresh blood, or you make a needle until it enters the wound, and then place them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will stick.
And when you see that they are biting, powder them with a little aloe and ground silk, or ash, they will now bite.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Listen, foolish child, that the evil fate may not befall this chapter, that they have never seen any of the ancient books, nor lettered them.
And for this reason, the knowledge of this art is lacking in our land, for I have not found any good one.
And I know nothing of it, except by the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the habit of my life.
And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that will be brought, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say or prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the wise man places his understanding, and delay over the truth, so that those who are experienced find and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or wound comes to any one, it is necessary for you to quickly clean the dirty part on one side and on the other, if nothing stops you, such as weakness of body, or children, or old people; when he does not hold him tightly or too cold;
and uses cold charcoal, that is to say, cooling juices, and oil of eye and of cartilage, and does not drink wine, and does not use any heavy meats, and does not fill himself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of an abscess forming, or spreading of matter to the member;
if the pain returns again under his former management that he used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to apply a moistening remedy that causes swelling, such as cooked wheat, and rice, and tests, and beans, and piez, and fish, and wine, and similar things. For the moistening remedy may cause pain and more quickly the breakage.
And know that the bones of the old and infirm cannot be well put back together or healed according to their nature because of the corruption of the members, nor also those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but do not care, reset it over the broken bone and large thick rods that support and join the limb together, as long as it holds as it did before. and do not touch it at all in its work, and because it needs to be fed with large amounts of food, as we have said.
And there are various ways to break bones in many different manners.
For the breaking of the shoulder is different from the breaking of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of breaks. For there is a break that goes through the arm, and another in soaking, like the tip of a quill for writing.
For there is a break that goes through the arm, and another in soaking, like the tip of a quill for writing. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break all in a small cut.
And in every way it has its intention, and its proper tool in the restoration, according to what memory comes in its joint;
and it is known the breaking of the bone because the joint is twisted, and open widely by default, and its at the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twisting at the joint, and the limb does not feel great pain, there is no fracture.
but it can still have twisting, or a wound, or a small fracture. You should not move it by hand, but put on the remedies that come after, and then gently hold it now.
And if the fracture that goes through the arm, and both parts are disjointed, then you must now set them evenly, as well as abscesses which come.
and if abscesses come, if you leave no pus, until the abscess is soothed.
then set it evenly in the muscle that you can lightly and safely, and if the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of that which has pieces.
Then reset it as it should be done afterwards.
And if it is a bone broken into pieces, then reset it in two parts, if it is a hand or foot, or at your hand if it is small members, or at two strings, or at one string and at your hand;
and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken bone are aligned, then reset all the additions in their places with care that by your work no injury or pain comes.
and well support the two bones according to the best shapes.
And if it feels good to the hand when it seems not to be quite right:
if it is stretched well and not restrained too much, and does not press as those who bring it through their work abscess and contraction of the limb, as we have often seen.
And when the limb is in place, well restrain the bad that it does not move, neither while awake nor while sleeping, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and guard well that the limb is so assured that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not quite in place, and the limb should be placed in proper position so that it feels no pain;
and guard well that the limb is so assured that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not quite in place, and the limb should be placed in proper position so that it feels no pain; and ensure it is set correctly, as twisting can occur when it is restored.
and the quality of the broken member depends on what I tell you.
The qualities of the member broken are different in size and in greatness and in form.
For there are small members, such as bones and fingers and similar things: so it is appropriate to wrap them in soft and thin linen cloths; and those that are large, such as the ribs and legs:
so it is appropriate to wrap them in a wide and sturdy bandage, because the large limbs envelop the whole member, and they hold it equally from all parts, so that there is no gap.
Then lightly lifts the limbs, three or four times according to the limb, and holds the hand a little at every joint, then goes above the fracture and holds it less, than the fracture is gradually moved away.
and gradually softens the limb a little and a little, until you grip a large part of the healthy limb, then take another limb and return around directly above the broken limb.
Then return to the part away from the fracture, and holds it gently, not too hard or too forcefully, as we have said in the first section above.
Then place between the limbs wet linen or cloths, until they are evenly aligned, then tie everything together with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or an abscess, then place something soothing on top of the abscess, and what removes the inflammation, and leave it like that for some time.
Then strain over your splints, and they should be half of a wide bandage, or of buckskin that is properly cut, or of palm leaves, and they should be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the nail that one puts over the break be a little bigger and wider than the others.
and it should also be as long as it needs to be for the limb of small or great size; then stretched over the nails as you have done in the first layer, then tied with a thread evenly, as in the first layer over the broken part; the tighter it is, the less;
and it should be that the thread is medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and of soft linen.
for if the thread is thick, like what I have seen in the works of those who make laces with linen ropes, and that is great error, because the layer cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should only have between each nail about two finger widths of space.
And if the wounds are closed by the needles of the stitches after straightening them in their places, put some discharge of linen or other clean cloth, so that it does not become infected.
When the wound is with the splint, and the bandages are broken, I will tell you the treatment later.
And it is not necessary to straighten all the broken bones on the first day. When the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put stitches immediately, but after five days or seven, or more depending on the safety of preventing an abscess from forming.
and here is the method of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
and you take flour that is kept in the walls of the mill, and mix it with an abundance of egg, and use this mixture, which is not too clear or too thick, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring fractures to many positions, and specifically to women and small children, for it is not too hard nor too soft.
Another way to apply plaster for healing fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take equal parts of beeswax, gum Arabic, resin, and pitch, and boil them together; then add mastic and frankincense, in the same proportion. Add myrrh and aloe, in the same proportion. Add a little oil of lavender. Grind it into a powder and mix it with egg yolk. If the patient's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it quickly heals broken bones, and is beneficial to many people.
Another method of splinting that is useful for sprains: Take a cloth and soak it in cold water, then apply it to the affected area. Mix equal parts of honey and aloe vera, then apply it to the affected area. Apply a cold compress to the affected area for six minutes. Grind ten grams of bole armencian and mix it with either vinegar or an equal amount of egg yolk, then apply it to the affected area.
Another method of splinting for joints and bones that have been dislocated from their sockets, and to relieve the pain, and to support the weight of the bone, and to prevent further breakage. Take a new cloth, and soak it in oil and cooked lard, and place it on the joint.
These bandages do not heal immediately, but they are good for easing abscesses and properly treating pain.
Another way to set broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and earthworms, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Another way to treat the healing of broken bones and to ease the remaining pain of the abscess. Take valerian root, chamomile, violet flowers, and flour of each one in equal parts;
grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is hot, apply the mixture with fresh coriander juice or vinegar, and use it.
Another method of applying the plaster more strongly than the first, when an abscess is resistant to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of wormwood, and seeds of linen, balm, melilot, and saffron, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; and grind, and preserve with vinegar sharp or sweet, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put on a broken limb to restore it, for the reason that a cerote made of wax and oil was used, and nothing else, and he said that it should be between two things, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galen said that one should put on a broken limb to restore it, with dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to treat wounds and pain: Take mallow and horsehair, or feathers of an owl, and wormwood, and silk equally, and grind them, and make a plaster and apply it to the affected area.
And then release it a little later, and be careful if the hairs do not feel any pain, nor has the bone of its joint moved; if it does not move by itself after that. And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, whether at rest or swelling, then hurry, and release it, and apply the dressing now;
and take light bandage, and wet sponge with salt water, and immerse in hot, and lift the limb, until the itching stops, and ease the pain; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, boil in hot or rose oil, and tie with a bandage, until you are sure of no abscess;
and rest the inflamed member, and relieve the pain, then begin the subtle binding, and a little plaster, and do not strain it too much as before. as gently as it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is filled with pus and redness and pain and swelling, and you have the skill of plastering and bandaging, then treat it evenly as you did before.
And if the member does not come back to its place as we have said within three days or four or five or seven. and never leave it more than twenty days, according to what we see, until the breaker is healed and approaches the position of the char above.
then the strain more than before, and it increases its flesh, as I have said before.
and if you see the limb stiffer than is usual, it is not possible for numbness to come. then apply hot and sharp needles every time you remove it, and this should be done for each day, and release a little the ligament.
then cut through the numbness in the limb, and change the position of the limb frequently as the foolish ones do, to relieve the pain.
it is evil, and this work is not safe, and I see nothing else but fatigue and doing it correctly.
Many ways of breaking are, and various shapes, and the causes are distinguished;
because it has breaks that are made by the percussion of a spear, and the collarbone is completely broken through to the shoulder blade which is outside the bone, as if it were broken or fractured; and therefore this type of break is called "fracture".
or the spear pierces the bone from above and penetrates through it, and this type of break is called "absolute";
and this is the wound of these two breaks, which are either large or small.
And if there is percussion from above, or a cut or from the fall of a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
And if he has a broken bone that protrudes, which approaches the skin that is outside the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if the wound is placed in the bone as delicately as a hair, and the fracture is small, and therefore this break is called "hairline";
and if the wound that is made by being struck with an arrow, or falling, or by something similar, and allows the piece of bone to enter, and is fixed in place like the cauldron when it is placed on the cauldrons. if the arrow enters inside.
And there is more to those who have or wet bones, like that of a child;
and they have in all these ways of breaking that small pieces are removed as these. and I will speak about it in its place.
And we know all ways of fractures by the withdrawal above them, and inquiry with tenting, and by the corrupted flesh that is above.
The appearance of hair is known because when the bone is exposed and rubbed with something, if there is an open fracture, it is black.
In the treatment of fracture, beware of bad accidents, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes coming out and reddening, and other similar things in many conditions, it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see any obvious injury, and you hope for healing, then begin treatment.
And when the broken bone comes first to you, and it is in the leg, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day, so that you can.
And if it is in the arm, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, provided that the skin around the bone is not decayed, and the injuries that we have mentioned occur.
And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the cloth that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut the broken part in this way:
and that you hold the head of the painful joint, and uncover it over the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound as softly as you can, and if blood comes out when opening the bone, or an abscess forms, help it with what is necessary, and that you fill the joint with cloths moistened in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and be sure of the opening of blood; then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to the two ways of work:
The one way is that you copy the narrow cut in front of it, and this is the form:
Then make another cut larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have many different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are sharp and made of iron.
And in working lightly, so as not to wound the head.
And if the tooth is stuck and hard, it is necessary to drill around it, as you administer cuts with tapers, not piercing beyond the tooth's root, and it should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the tooth;
and you should have several, so that each time it comes back into its place from the edge of the bone, so that you have marks for all tests.
And this is the form of the three ways of marking:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one mark on the bone, and turn your fingers to both sides until you feel that the bone is pierced;
then put the mark on another part of the bone slightly later, and thus do all around, then cut the distance between the bones of the bone that is between the joints, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take the bone in your hand, or any of the tools you have such as pliers, pincers;
and be careful not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is advisable to reset the open part that remains of the bone with all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other incisor.
and if nothing remains of the small bones or scales, do not remove them lightly with any instrument. then treat the wound with bandages and ointments that we have mentioned.
And the other method of work is this one that the Gauls describe, which is safer; And the pain is very strong, and that is its word. First, you must remove a part of the bone where the fracture is open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you can insert the lens-shaped piece of this surgical instrument into it:
And do not cut from one part, and it is the affected part in the second rib, so that the cutter is towards the bone.
Then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly cut the bone all around, and be careful of the thread that is outside.
If it is attached to the bone, then lightly cut the bone, because one should not cut harmfully or without fear.
And if the bone's fracture does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only broken from above, and there are small pieces, then you should smooth out that roughness, and remove the scales with the delicate scraper that you should have various quantities of, to manage each limb according to its convenience, following the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you use great scrapers first, and then more delicate ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
In each of the other hair-splitting and delicate cuts, it is necessary that you mitigate according to its advancement.
And this is something that cannot be answered by one who has studied in this art.
And if the wound is discovered, then it is necessary to take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another piece of cloth doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first piece of cloth. And do this more gently than you can, so as not to aggravate the wound, then administer by pouring over another piece of cloth, and do not strain it unless it stains the wound only.
and let it remain there for one or two days until the abscess is soothed, then dislodge it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, wheat flour, frankincense powder, aristolochia, and similar things;
and make powders from these things, and put on the wound, and administer medicines such as mustard, without causing irritation;
and ensure that the wound is kept clean, do not leave any pus, and do not allow any pus to collect, for when pus collects on the brain's surface, it causes great harm;
For when one places a sharp object above the wound, do not prick it from above. Take precaution then, for if no accidents come to the patient, as we have said, it is uncertain without doubt.
And if no other remedy comes to hand except the one you have placed above it, then it is necessary that you apply a piece of honey, and three parts of rose oil and one cloth, and put it on top of the wound. Then apply the appropriate methods of treatment until it is healed.
Be careful not to break both parts of the nose above, or one by itself, as there are two bones.
And that one is cartilaginous and does not break easily, so it does not cause deformity or twisting, and then it heals.
If one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you bend your little finger or thumb into the break in your index finger, and set it inside the break until the finger regains its natural shape. and do this gently, so that the pain does not increase because of your work.
And if the break is in the part above the nail, and cannot reach the finger to the bone, then it is necessary that you place it inside the head of a pin or needle, slightly larger.
And if the break is in two parts, do the other side as well, and hurry to restore the first joint if you can.
If not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the swelling of the abscess has subsided, then bend the tip of the finger towards the palm of the hand with pieces of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Where you put another bone, if the fracture is there. and they are so large that they fill the holes of the nose.
And they said no restorer should moisten the tents in the morning, and kill each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it should be ground in the making of an ointment with egg yolk and flour; then leave the bone, until the bone is iron and the cartilages are hardened.
And never use goose feathers in place of bones, and if the sore is wrapped, and the fracture is held, and blows the pain away. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And if an abscess comes to the nose while you are working, put cotton or milled cloth soaked in red oil or a drop of iodine into it.
And if there are no abscesses, put on plaster made from mustard flour and powdered incense, mixed with honey, then place light bandages, and do not tie the nose tightly.
And if the broken piece of the nose is small and in many pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments, then clean the wound, and care for the injured parts with charcoal and sutures, as appropriate for plasters and ointments.
And if there is no wound in the nose, then treat with tents and apply cold compresses until healed.
When the mandible is fractured, and there is no wound elsewhere, and the fracture is only slight, and not completely broken into two pieces, because of the teeth inside, if one knows it lightly.
It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, to break your right index finger in the patient's mouth. And if the fracture is in the left mandible, break your right index finger with the right hand, and gently break the fracture inside, and fix it with the other hand by default, and make even.
And if the fracture of the mandible is in two parts, it is necessary that you administer extension of two parts, until it is even.
And if movements of the teeth occur, or breakage, then strain with a gold or silver or silk thread, then place above the broken jaw, and place on the double cloth. And place on the cloth a well-made large stick, or a piece of leather even and long according to the mandible, and tie it above the mouth that you can, and command the patient to rest, and feed him light foods.
And if you see that the position changes, then release it to the animal, and then put it back as it was changed. And place a poultice on top, of powder from the mill with plenty of honey or flour of mustard, after you have removed the crust.
And place another light poultice on top, and if the poultice becomes hard, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it until he is healed. Many times are healed in three weeks.
And if abscesses come to the face, then follow what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, do not apply any piece of the bone that is broken. If it is applied too closely to the skin, it may cause infection.
If the wound is narrow, then expand it according to your necessity.
When you have removed all these pieces, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, and it has been cleaned, then apply ointments to it, to draw out pus until it is healed.
The forearm breaks several times before, behind the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways:
or it is broken and displaced in two, and there are pieces, and it is the least heavy to restore;
or there is fracture with wound.
And the work is that if the fracture is near the wound, you should have two assistants, so that one can hold the injured forearm that is broken; and the others stretch the neck towards the affected part;
then make the fracture even at both ends, so that it forms as it should, and there is no appearance or movement.
And if you have the skill to extend further, place a rounded, flat cloth or linen ball on the shoulder, as large as your need. and extend and pull the lever, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you make the fracture even as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the shoulder of the arm from behind, because it comes out in front, then it is necessary that the hairs of the armpit be pulled evenly over their surface, and the assistant holds the shoulder back, and pushes the shoulder down, until the bone of the arm is raised.
Then bring the fracture together at both ends, and if the bones are broken, it is necessary to cut through.
and get light pieces, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, then use one of the knives you have. but put the forceps on this instrument to hold the gum:
and it looks like a spoon, and is not fixed, and should be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the work:
and it should have two prongs, like you see, and one wide and the other narrow, as is the edge of the wound that you made when you cut the bones:
and when you are sure of the abscess, cut the wound, and if the edge is small, or you doubt the abscess, then fill the wound with bandages and poultices according to its amount.
And if it is an abscess that comes, then soak the bandage in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put it on.
The setting of a bone, when it is in pain and when it is cut, is that you place above the bone the plaster from the mill powder and some egg, and put light dressings on, and place a sphere outside the wound, if you have skill. Then take a very large bandage of a palm's width, then place the cloth double above the dressings and the plaster. Then take a thin splint of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the head of the bandage hangs down. And place the splint on the fractured part, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and outside the wound, healthy and unhealthy. and reset each part, and when you see that the bone is broken evenly, and you clearly see that the dislocated joint does not move over the broken bone, reward it every day, and when the bones are aligned, hold them in place.
and make the dislocated joint rest on its back, and place the small splint below the joint to lift the dislocation up. if the broken bone aligns with the shoulder alignment, or you tie the arm to the neck, and it does not dislocate for 20 days.
then reapply the plaster if you see that there is a need for it, and hold it in place until it is restored.
and it is restored within 28 days, and less to some people.
of the shoulder fracture
There are cases where the shoulder is broken or dislocated in the middle of the arm, and it does not stay in place except by touch.
if the splint according to the shape of the fracture, and the limb is realigned according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
then apply the powder from the mill with an abundance of urine, and light bandages, and put it on top of the bandage. Then place a wide and thin spatula, slightly larger than the shoulder span, under the shoulder, and if it does not hold in any part of the shoulder, use a cloth of linen to support it evenly.
And then hold it firmly with a great bend, so that the spatula does not move from its place, and watch the joint each day.
And every time it collapses, hold it firmly and if it is out of its place, support it evenly and grind the hairs on its ribs.
And the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25.
And when this number is completed, if it dislocates, and you are sure, for it is not bone that can be put back forcefully.
And if a piece of the bone is sticking out before, and not completely outside, then cut it off, and the bone, and do as we have said in the fracture of the forearm to alleviate an abscess.
of the fracture of the pinky
The pain is never broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the back.
And when it is broken in the middle, it bends outwards, and the patient feels great pain, and loss of all function, and possibly vomiting blood, and open the veins in the broken bone, and the patient feels well.
And the restoration is such that the hairs grow out over their back, and the arrowhead is placed between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulders, and gather the ribs of both sides in your hands, and subtly put it back in all the ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
Then place bandages and swabs above the thin skin of salt, or another light one, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move. And turn the bandage around the back, and tighten it evenly, and rub the wound every hour, and if it dislocates again, tighten it.
And if it is necessary to release it, for corrosion or for itching that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, then hurry and release it, and change the bandage, and apply what has come from various methods of treatment.
Then apply the splint, and hold it steady until it is healed.
of the rib fractures
That the rib fracturer comes only from great force after the back, and at the top of the chest, and does not fracture for any other reason than that they are brittle. and the pain is felt at the inquiry as it should be.
And the treatment is that you set the fracture as it should be. Then apply the plaster and the bandage with a splint if you know how to do it.
And if the rib fracture is inclined inward, it feels great pain and tenderness, as if of a wound, because the ribs do not knit together. and there is a gap, and all the rest is filled with great blood, and it is a difficult healing, and the ancients had much concern.
And if there are those who say that it should be administered foods that cause the stomach to swell, to push the broken bone out of place.
Let us not do this, unless there is a case where it does not come, if it has not come. And if it has come, then heal it.
And they said of those who put suction cups on the limb, to draw out formally, and this is similar to reason; Nevertheless, doubt and the fact that the suction cup does not draw out the excess from the limb due to its weak position.
And they say that none of those who should cover the limb with wool smeared in oil high, and put tents between the ribs to equal the liquid inside, then heal the care of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
And if the limb pains greatly that it cannot bear the weight of the bone which points to the sling, and doubt is at the limb, then it is necessary to cut across the limb from the broken side, and it is necessary to place a restraining instrument for the wound.
And then one must drill the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with ointments, until they are healed.
And if abscesses come out, put soft cloths soaked in red oil on the wound;
and treat the wound as it is necessary for the abscess, and let it lie flat on the side where it should be, until it is healed.
and also in the spine of the back.
And when this happens to anyone, and you see whether they will be healthy or not, if you take note if their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend, and when you touch them with a needle, they do not feel.
Know that it is often fatal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when you hold them and not, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the pains are healed, if you put care.
And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, take note whether the feet are soft, and if the accidents that are in hand are present, and there is movement on the back and egestion without volition;
and when placed on their back, they void involuntarily. And when it lies on its back and wants to sit up, it cannot. It is deadly: if not treated properly.
And if this accident does not come to them, it is the lighter of the two.
And the treatment is that you should rub it with red wine or egg yolk oil until it is calmed;
then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest. and do not sleep on that side where they feel the pain until they are healed.
And if any bone is dislocated, it must be covered with a bandage; and break the bone, then gather the two edges of the wound, if it is large, at a seam, then apply the healing ointment with charcoal, as long as they are clean.
and if the bone is broken, which is called the "bone of the elbow", then take your right hand and place it on the other hand at your wrist, then apply the plaster and the bandage above, if you have the skill.
then strap it, and if there is bone decay, then above, and the bone, and heal the wound until it is clean.
of the fracture of the ribs of the back
It rarely happens that the ribs of the back are broken, and if it does, it is not from a slight blow to the head; and if they are broken, they extend long and decline to the spine, causing great pain, swelling, and bruising at the site of the break.
And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over, as high as you can above the broken rib; and carefully examine where the break and the shape of the bone are.
and if the break is only at the top, then align it with the natural shape of the bone.
And if the fracture is long and it declines inwards, place the limb above its belly until the restoration of this fracture is complete. And when you have put it back in place, apply the ointment, then apply a splint of wood or cloth, and hold the broken part still so it does not move.
and place the limb outside the ribs, until the joint is even. And instruct the patient to sleep on their sound side or back.
And if it swells and hurts, do not touch it until the abscess is calmed, and apply what we have already said. and then proceed with the treatment, and hold it in place as necessary, unless there is no bad consequence.
of the shoulder joint fracture
The assistants are those located between the neck and the shoulder blade, and if they are broken, one should restore them according to one of the two methods:
one is that you take a single thick needle, in this form:
and tie the two ends together, and let them rise up, and cut the painful part above the seat;
then pour the broken arm over the needle, until it reaches ease, and has half an inch of needle, then let it go over any heavy thing or the nurse extends it down;
then put the broken piece of bone together with your hands, until the broken piece returns as it should.
And the other method is that one pricks the sore above its base, and places the hand on his collar, then commands two ministers to prick the vein that is above the breaker at his hands, and the others prick everywhere around it, and stretches each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too far, then hold the eye away from the breaker, above the breaker, and stretch each of the ministers to its part.
And if the fractured bone is close to the top of the shoulder, it is necessary to put a median line of splints on one side of the shoulder, and the other towards the back, away from the fracture.
Similarly, if the fractured bone is towards the back, it is necessary to put a light line of splints slightly downwards until the fracture is aligned with the shoulder and the back.
Then align the fracture as it should be, and hold it steady, if there are no abscesses that come.
And if there are abscesses that come, do not hold it steady for the next seven days, and put on a soft bandage in oil and rosemary, until the abscess is soothed.
then the strain, and the method of straining is that you place the splint on the fractured part, then bring the arm up with the aid, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest.
and put the bandage, and strain with the aid, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, use splints, and place on the fracture a stronger and wider splint than the others, and have between each splint two inches of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three fingers from each side;
Then strain them over the stones, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less when moving away.
And if you see the sitting of the stones and the pressure, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is healed, leave it to lie for seven days, as we have said;
Then look at each three days the joint, that the itching does not spread and come to the limb, or the inflammations do not come to the limb because it is too stiff. If the direction, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, it should not be removed until after three days or more, and the pain should lie on his back, and he should have his hands on his stomach;
and apply a bandage to the dislocation in a plain cloth equally, and look every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken member does not move, or that the tendons are not softened;
if the pain is reduced by the power of medicine, and give him the meat that we have put before, in such a way that the meat is at the first subtle; and when he begins to eat again, it should be soft.
And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset within 40 days of the injury. And then one should apply poultices and give baths to the limb to promote healing.
If its structure is crooked and swollen, it may take forty days or two months to reset.
of the broken arm
The arm is composed of two bones, called the "humerus", one of which is smaller and is the one that forms the elbow joint.
And the other is large and is the one that is outside, next to the small one.
Possibly the larger humerus or the smaller one is broken alone, or both together.
When the smaller humerus is broken, the recovery and healing are easy.
And when the large bones are broken, the healing is poor, and more painful than when they were broken together.
If the small bones are broken alone, then it is best to slightly extend and align them.
And if it is a large fracture, then it must be pulled more forcefully.
And extend it up to the cushion of the hand, and the small fingers higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and the thumbs cross over themselves, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the fingers do not suffer any labor.
Then extend the ministers of the arm to the part outside of his hand, or to the elbow, and others to the other above.
And then put the mirror evenly, according to its best form.
And if it breaks into pieces, put each in its place, and if there is no need to hold the bone in place, and you cannot restore it to its original position, then do as we have said before.
And if with the bone breaker there is a wound, I have spoken about it to the chapter scribe; if you take care of it.
And if in the beginning of the restoration there are abscesses, then glue the cloth of a poultice made of rose oil and white wax, which is not too hard nor too soft; and tie the cloth by lifting it slightly, until the abscesses are relieved.
Then remove the poultice, and put on the plaster of the powder from the mill with abundant honey, then place the splints, and let the splint of the bone breaker stick out more, and a little wider than the others;
and make sure he has six or more arms in various positions: whether the fracturer is in one of the bones or in two;
and holds it above the fracturer and keeps pulling, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. and let the cloths that are on the fracturer be soft and moist, and not too hard or sharp;
and let the cloths that are on the fracturer be soft and moist, and not too hard or sharp; and let the thread that is being pulled be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Reward the member and the limb after some time. And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should raise the limb in hot water, until those itches are calmed;
Let the limb remain at ease and not be constricted.
Then continue the strapping, and if the joint is dislocated and the bones are displaced, similarly, then address it.
And if the tendons cannot come to the member, because it is too tight, then you must slacken it slightly, and let it rest for some time, until the tendons are corrected, and then strap it.
If none of these things we have said come to harm, it will not be necessary to look at them for twenty years.
Or ask them to lean back, then place their hands on their neck, and keep their neck even, and avoid movement and disturbance, and sleep on their back.
And wash that fracture in 30 days or 50 days, and perhaps in 20 days, depending on the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the breakage of the hand
Then let it be at the back of the hand and we have few breakages, and only bleeding many times.
And when the bone of the hand is broken or crushed, it is necessary that the hairs be cut short and evenly, and be straight in front of him equally.
Then place his hand on the extended board, and extend the bones that are broken, and put them evenly in the bones, until they are well joined.
And apply the plaster and cloths, if there are no abscesses, then put an ointment according to the amount of the limb. and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the fractured bone is in the arch of the foot, then make a roll of cloth, and instruct the patient to bend it against his broken foot. and then strain it with a long cloth, and let the ointment be as large as the sole of the hand, and apply it as needed.
And if the fracture is in the forearm, it is necessary to place a splint above and another below the wrist, so that the hand is open and straight, then wrap the entire arm around the hand, and bind the injured part between the two.
And if the fractured bone comes to any of the above joints, if it is the wrist, then put it evenly, as needed. and hold it with a plant, and if you see that you put a straight small stake to lift the broken piece, and do not move.
and if the broken piece is like the others, such as in the index or another one, if it is aligned, and tie it with the healthy joint that comes after. or you tie them all by holding them, as long as they are worth, or you put a stake on top, such as a pouch.
and take care in the restoration and disposition of abscesses, and treat what comes to it, as I have said.
The teeth of the jaw are often broken, and well seen when it turns in front and behind.
and the restoration is when one side of the bone above the fracture is connected to the other side below the fracture. And the broken bones are then arranged on their face, and each of the attendants stretches out their ligament to their equal part.
and it is when the fracture is put back into the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the chest, then one of the lines should be towards the base of the rib, and the other lines away from the fractured rib.
And also if it is close to the knee, and then the ligaments above the knee are stretched out, and the extension below.
then put the splint on the bone with both hands, as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, if there are no abscesses.
If there is an abscess, let it calm down first, then return to your work and care. The litter is made in this manner.
It is necessary that you wrap the fractured bone with a bandage doubled in two or three layers, and let the excess hang down, then bend the leg until the toes reach the root of the heel, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee joint, and bring the end of the thread upwards.
Then bend over the leg and the thigh, then place the splint on the fractured bone, and place a splint on the bone of the leg.
then place the cloth that is soft between the leg and the thigh to equalize the pressure, then begin to bandage firmly three or four times above the fracture. and as you go higher than the fracture, and less the pressure.
then take two threads that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and bind three stitches that are above, then return to the outside at the top of the thread, until you come beyond the bone.
and the pressure, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then if there is no abscess or swelling of any other kind. And if there is, then release it, and direct it to where it comes, as we have said many times.
and if there are pieces of bone that can be felt, then remove them if possible. and if they cannot be removed, then cut the limb and draw out the splinters. and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And never break the rib in such a way that these are inserted, as in the dislocation and shoulder.
However, in this restoration, do not strike the hairs.
And wash the ribs when they are restored at the appropriate times, either a little sooner or a little later, according to the diversities of the conditions.
It is said that in the road of the gentleman, there is little breakage, but it rains many times.
And if it breaks, it is not but a cut, or a puncture, and it has to all wounds, and without wound, and it feels very well.
And the restoration is done by putting back together what is broken until it can be put back together as much as possible.
Then apply the ointment, and if you have skill, place a round bandage, and bind it as it should be, then warm up all the positions that we have mentioned in other broken things, such as abscesses and similar. And apply what is necessary for each accident until it is healed.
of the broken leg
It is said that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "canons" and the other "fibula".
And it breaks everything as it comes to the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is the same as that of the arm equally, and the work is all there. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg returns from all parts.
And if the delicate bones are broken, it returns in front.
And if the large bone is broken, then it feels great pain, and one can see it well; and it returns dislocated.
Then apply extension, and make it equal, and tie the splints equally;
but in any case, if the fracture is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and the physician according to his skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two strips of cloth that bind the leg on one side and the other, and be long from the knee to the groin.
Then wrap the two strips of cloth above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this point it should not be able to bend the leg to the right or left, and thus it is good.
And no one administers the long cloth of the leg, and it is from the cloth, and put the leg to prevent movement, and properly made, one puts it in the break or where it is wounded.
and shake each leg, to see if there is an abscess or other accident. if the patient is healthy until healed.
of the fracture of bones due to a fall
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but bones due to a fall never break and are only slightly displaced, and there is no injury in most cases.
And if he has broken bones that are slightly protruding, and you see these bones overlapping each other, if you put pressure on the bone above the ground, as if it wanted to walk, and then put your foot on the place where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their original position;
then apply the plaster and soak it above, and put a small cushion under the belly of the bone, then tie it to the bone evenly, then wrap it with cloths and other things you have at hand.
And when three or four days have passed, if the joint is released, you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the two broken, restore them as we have said about the two bones of the hand. Then place the broken bone along its length, and it should be slightly wider, then put the petal of the herb I mentioned on top, and apply pressure evenly.
And if there are two or three or more broken bones, place a splint on each according to its quantity, wrapped in a piece of linen, and apply pressure from outside the petal. And it should be placed on top of the back of the petal under the belly of the wound, so that it stains well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have mentioned. and treat each event as it should be.
of the breaking of the bone in the thumb
When the jaw of a woman is broken, if it has been displaced, then enlarge it, then tilt it towards the back of the neck, and hold it in place from behind.
then fill the hollow of the jaw with cotton, and put in as much as it is full.
then raise the woman, and gradually lift her back, and then slowly remove the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the jaw, and then return the bone with the cotton.
And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, return it, and thus do this every seven hours or so. If she is restored, and if you see, take a birch-bark vessel, and tie a rope around it, and fill the whole vessel with urine in its natural state. Then blow through the rope until the vessel is emptied inside. The natural state will return to the broken place.
Then it should be filled with cotton and left in this way for some time until it is healed.
And when the tooth of the little finger of the hand is broken, or of a woman, if it is reset as we have said in the bone of the shoulder;
and these broken bones are not hidden from him who puts his study and use to this book, and listen to my book.
For the break means in many positions the right way of restoration: Therefore, listen then.
In the tooth, when it is broken, take a goose beak and push the tooth; then wrap it with cloths around, and leave it three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
of break with wound
It is necessary for the one who has broken with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the ribs or shoulder or similar, that they be cleansed immediately, so that the cleansings that we have said bear witness.
And if the wound is clean, if the remaining vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the breaker in the same hour, or the next day, if pus does not come.
And if pus comes, leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the pus is calm, and do not touch it on the next day or the fourth, for you will bring about bad accidents.
And if the broken teeth appear above the gum line, then it is necessary to carefully place them gently in your hands and extend them slightly.
And if the extensions are not provided to make your hands even, then bend the arm with this iron instrument which is made of iron, which has seven or eight inches of length, and its width according to the size of the wound; and because it is necessary for the mirror to take three or four, according to how much it has in each case of fracture treatment;
and it should be round and a little thick, so that it does not slip when compressing on the limb at your work, and it should be narrow behind, and wide in the middle in front, thus:
And it is called "palainche", because it should be placed on the top of the head of the apparent bone; and it is struck once, as much as it returns, and they should be evenly placed against each other. And if the fracture is slight, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone until the instruments have hold.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, with the help of an appropriate instrument, such as a saw or a chisel, to your power;
then file off what is remaining in the bone of hardness and small scratches.
When the bone is returned, and the pain is great afterward, do not let it remain in its natural position.
If you do this until it is in its place, then wipe the wound with black vinegar wine, and if it is still in place; and do not place anything on the wound or apply any other thing where there is oil, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
then administer ointments when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover the dressing all around, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not squeezed with the fracture.
many times have done this foolish thing, and have caused the pain or death or corrosion of any part. and let the fractures be softer and more pliable than the others.
If the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that no harmful event has occurred, as we have said, and if you alleviate pain to the limb, then it does not matter to put on these bandages. But wrap it around, instead of these bandages, hard cloths, and tie them.
And when you see after one or two days that the wound is discharging pus, remove what you have placed on top of the wound, and put healing ointment on it, such as Tetraflamron and similar ointments.
And it is necessary to move the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is sound and healthy.
And it is necessary that the member be aligned in such a way that the bow can move freely.
And if they continue to move too much, and it cannot be set back in place, but rather moves like a bow, because of small pieces of bone, then you must first clean the wound with a tent, and remove all those unwanted pieces that cause this pain.
And if a fistula comes to the limb, or some other form of corruption, then you must treat it according to what is written in his chapter before.
And when the bone is broken, and open above the limb, as the bones of the jaw or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not pull it out, for many times it causes death, but leave it until it heals.
Perhaps it will fall off after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can.
and if you cannot, then leave it.
We often see after the health of the fractured bone, exactly where it is near the joint, and the ugly thing is to see the shape of the limb. and by chance cannot do its natural work.
Take then, since it is fresh: if you administer styptics such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar things, so that you do not use any of these, or all together, and mix them with stypic wine or with abundant blood or with vinegar; and place them on the nostrils, hold them tightly, and do not remove them from the hands for a long time.
and place them on the nostrils, hold them tightly, and do not remove them from the hands for a long time. then dislocate it again, and start another one until the headache is gone;
or hold tightly a piece of wet clay well-shaped; because the property of clay is that it removes all swellings from the limbs;
and if the dislocation has hardened like a stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut off the top layer and make the excess apparent; or you reset it with any tool until it is healed, and treat it until it is healthy.
a weak limb that is after the garment
When the fracture of the bone is healed, and it remains afterwards with weak and fine members, there are many reasons: because one is due to the fact that it was tied too tightly, and was not loosened as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and could not come to the bones of the member; or due to the multitude of swelling; or because of too great movements, and not enough rest in its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the pain less, and make the body supple, until the swelling is not multiplied in it; and the assistant bathes, and gives joy and relief;
then puts clay on the limb, so that the clay attracts to the great swelling, and the heat often from high heat, until the swelling goes down in the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
a deformed limb after healing When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is deformed, it does not at all keep its natural work:
if one does not believe the people who say that one should break the limb all at once, and many have done this in our land;
and this work is blamed, and it often causes great harm, and perhaps death.
Nevertheless, if the dislocations and torture are fresh, it is necessary that they be treated with hot water, or mollifying herbs cooked as follows: wormwood, roots, and meadowsweet, and similar things.
and the softening poultice, such as made with diluted honey, and take the mustard seed of wormwood, and cook it with chicken fat or sesame oil, and make a poultice from it.
or you take figs fat, and grind them with flour of coltsfoot, and similar medicines that soothe the pain.
And never is it necessary to apply continuous and prolonged pressure with wet hands to the dislocation. And allow movement to the limb every hour.
And if the twisting is awakened and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, if it is covered just above the bone, with a slight incision. and apply a bandage and rest in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, it must now be returned towards the shoulder.
For if it delays, if the joint swells, and perhaps if it is reset to the bone;
because then it does not matter that it moves at the time when it swells. many times it brings pain and other aches.
However, when it happens, if you make the dislocation straight, then let it be, until the abscesses are calmed.
Then raise the limb with hot and oiled cloths, then gently realign it, and treat each limb as it would be treated in its proper place.
And I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations of the shoulder down to the feet.
It often happens that the jaws are dislocated backwards, and the dislocation of both is in two ways: or they are slightly pushed out of their place and somewhat softened. or they are completely dislocated and hang down to the side, and the saliva from the mouth flows out that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and its tongue is wrapped with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns in many positions.
And if she is whole and complete, it is necessary that you reset her quickly, and do not delay.
And in such a way that the minister wipes the bad part of the head, and puts the mirror some close to one of her hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts. and the other hand should be free, to make it even.
and command the bad part to soften its mandibles, and move them from all sides. And when the joint is evenly aligned, it returns to its place.
And if it is difficult to reset, immediately if they are both mandibles together, then raise them with hot and oil, until they are reset lightly.
do not delay in bringing it back, as we have said.
And when they are returned evenly, and the jaw of the injury is well closed to soften, then place wet cloths made of a hardened mixture of red oil and wax on it, then lightly bandage it with moist bandages;
and let the injuries lie on their backs, and their heads be between two pillows, so that they do not move to the left or right, nor make any effort to speak, but take light food until the pains are removed, and the jaws are healed;
then gently clean what he wants lightly, and do not forcefully open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well cleaned and healed.
If the two jaws cannot be reset to their proper position within an hour and are not converted back to their original shape, then there comes fever and sweating as usual, and perhaps diarrhea, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then cut it off, as it is deadly; and often death occurs to those who have it, in seven days.
The forceps cannot be removed from the side of the body without cutting into it and the surrounding tissue, and it is not reset once dislocated, and one can feel it well.
And the restoration is that the hairs lie quietly on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the limb gently to your palm, and it will return.
then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place;
and the question of those who are next to the neck cannot evacuate; if not, and if it ever resets itself, then reset it as we have said.
then place the poultice and bandage on it, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until they are healed.
and thus the same is returned to its place when it is reset from its joint.
of the shoulder dislocation
There are three ways in which the shoulder is not dislocated:
one is that it dislocates at the part of the shoulder blade on the outside; and the second is at the worst part; and by chance dislocates to the upper part, and this happens rarely;
and does not dislocate much behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate much inward for the joints;
and often dislocates outwards towards the shoulder blade, especially to those who have little fat, for these it is difficult;
to those who have enough fat, it goes straight and enters straight.
And sometimes happens to some people, percussion or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with an abscess, and thinks it is dislocated by the bone.
Therefore, you must first examine to be sure; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocations occur when they are turned towards the shoulder, and they differ between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their difference manifest. And you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and dislocated towards the armpit, the top of the shoulder, as if it were an elbow. And it cannot move its arm to its side, nor move from any movement.
And similarly, if it is dislocated above, if it is not hidden, for you will see it clearly in the armpit.
And this manner of dislocation is not only to be reset, when it is new, or the pain is severe.
And the manner is that the ministrants lift the hand of the misaligned shoulder upwards, then places their fingers below the acromion process, and resets the joint upwards at the shoulder. And the ministrants lift the hand, and extend it upwards, then remove it. If it comes quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said earlier, then it is necessary that the misaligned shoulder be bathed in hot water. And the ministrants apply heat and moisture, as with a decoction of poppy, fenugreek, and melilot in hot water, and it is applied.
Then ensure the misaligned parts are on their backs, and place a cloth evenly across their buttocks, not too soft or too hard, then place the patient's foot on the cloth, and gently lift the shoulder with virtue, and pull the misaligned part.
and other ministers wash the head of the misaligned part, so it does not move back. The shoulder is now completely healed, and if you see that it is reset in this manner:
and make sure that there is a person who is larger than the misaligned part; and be on the right side of the ribs, and bring the shoulder away from the misaligned part, and lift it up, so that the misaligned part hangs in the arm. And other ministers draw the hand downwards towards the belly. And if the pain is too light, it can be moved with anything heavy, and the dislocation now returns.
And it is also reset in another way:
And it is done by placing a long, thin stick in the ground, which the patient should hold as if it were a spear, and it should not be too thick or too sharp; then it should be placed outside the injury, but with a soft cloth above, and the hairs of the forearm should be stretched out along the length of the arm;
then it should be extended downwards in the other direction, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if she does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: take a bandage of two arms in width and four fingers in length, which has the head facing downwards to enter through the opening behind the shoulder, in this form:
then tie the head of the soft cloth, which is not the cause of the bad pain, then put it away from the shoulder with the pain;
and extend the arm over the long cloth, and tie the dislocation over the cloth, and the arm at the top of the hand, then put the arm over one of the blades of a knife, and let it be extended with the hands down, and leave the body hanging on the other side: The joint is now open.
And when it is ready, in whatever way it is, then you must place a equal woolen ball away from the pain, then apply the poultice with flour from the mill, with incense and a little honey, over the whole shoulder and around, then remove the poultice away from the pain evenly, and return the limb to the poultice, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is best that he move slightly, until the limb is comfortable, as it will heal faster.
Then move it again after three or four days, and move it. And if it is stiff and not made soft, it is healed.
And if the joint is strong due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cautery at three points, as it is placed in front or in the chapter on cautery.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not stay in place, and cannot be raised above the arm, then cut or stretch or soften the nerve at the top of the shoulder. And cut so that the joint never again dislocates in its place.
The dislocation that occurs by the side of the hip and the buttocks, or behind, is caused by an impulse and extension of the hands, and it is treated with another ointment.
and treat until they are healed.
And if after healing the limb becomes swollen and moves slowly, then frequently apply the ointment until the swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
of the shoulder dislocation
Joints that are damaged at the shoulder return to their place and return.
And it is dislocated from all parts, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not repaired, as one can see and feel. It dislocates according to each shape. And when you join the misaligned ear with the healthy one, let the patient see clearly. For the joint is sawn off, and it cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as possible, because if it comes after the joint has moved, it would be painful to reset.
And by chance, it cannot be reset at all, even when it is in the back. It is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and may even cause death.
And the resetting, when it is possible to put it back, is that you extend your hand to your two hands; and its arms are spread wide, and the hands on either side of the wrist, in and out, and press the joint at its base together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and holds the root of the palm of the hand which is dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong extension;
and it is that two assistants extend the arm, and hold it with two assistants, so that it does not move during extension.
then turn the arm from each side, then that you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide;
and when the patient sees the joint at his hand, if there is no oil to soften the joint, then push the joint together, as much as it returns;
and when it is in place, put on a dry poultice with some egg, and hold it together, and let the arm against the bad side, and leave it for some time, then remove it.
And if its joint is firm in its place, release the bone and leave it.
And if you see that the joint does not hold well, restart the bandage and the bone, and leave it in this way for some time, until it is firmly placed. Then release it.
And if it feels gritty after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved. Or place a thick woolen cloth on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then open it and put in the bath. And when it pursues, rub the joint immediately, then put the limb back in place, and then give a warm bath. And do this twice or three times until it is healed.
And if you see, put above the wound a piece of warm, moist cloth with butter, and press it.
Then it will return to its proper position.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is easily dislocated, and its return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it should be returned to its place immediately, in the same moment that it is dislocated, provided that the veins are inflated, or if there is an abscess forming.
And when bringing back the shoulder, you place your hand on the table, and extend the minister's hand, and the mirror places it evenly, so that he places his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Nevertheless, you must check if it is properly set. Then place the hand on the table for extension and repositioning. If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's back of their hand on the table, and the practitioner places their hand over the appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, it is good. If not, apply analgesic plasters and let it rest before trying again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back after some time, the joint will remain twisted.
and do not apply force against the pain unless the hand is washed, and cannot hold anything at all: then cut the tendons or the artery;
if there is no other method but to burn with cauterization through the skin, and perhaps nothing else works.
And when the hand is dislocated, place the poultice that we have mentioned above, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no inflammation, then use hot vinegar, and rub it until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the two fingers
Never reset the two fingers of the hand at each part, never at the back of the palm or the belly;
therefore let the two fingers be, and push the dislocation into your pocket as long as it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend it to the part where it is disjointed;
and let him wait two days, then set it straight that day.
and apply a bandage as we have said, and remove the splint the next day, and move it, and reapply the bandage.
and do this often, until it is straight, and also do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed.
and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
back pain from a dislocation of the spine
When the spine or neck is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, as the patient dies from the pain.
And the signs are that the dislocation jumps out of its place without volition, and cannot be held, and many times the member is softened, or both shoulders or the two arms or one.
And often the jaw moves at four parts;
that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez".
The cure is that you reward if the gilbositez comes from childhood. If there is no cure or healing until then.
And that which comes from falling or from blows or similar things, the old methods of treatment by great words, or it does not have much benefit at all.
But I have abbreviated according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gilbosity that comes from the worst before, there is no skill or health;
and also that which comes straight in the second rib, and one cannot cure it except by that proper one which comes from the back, as I said;
and it is that the wounds should be stretched over its face in one even leg, and have some strain away from him, so that he does not bleed.
then put one bandage at the head in a firm way, and the other at the feet, and tie a bandage outside the wounds, and the other at the hips, and the other at the knees, and the other at the ankles.
and two ministers seek the bonds, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two ties.
and they should be well tied, the rope as we have said, and the mirror places its palms on the spine until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a table of three long arms, and bend it away from the pain, and the hairs should be on the side, and push the head of the table away from the pain, then place the middle of the table on the spine; and places the mirror its feet on the other head of the table, and presses well, until it returns to the place.
and if you see, do it to the one who returns to the hand. And place two bandages at the head of the misaligned arm, and on the other side of the feet, and between each bandage, outwards and inwards, a length of palm.
and have in each bandage one hole, where the twisted part corrects, and the bandages are firmly pressed against the ground, so that they do not move.
and between each two bandages, have one bandage turning, along the direction of the twisted part, and have in the two turns two small bandages of a length of palm, to straighten the twisted part.
Then tie the ligament that is among the tendons towards the neck of the shoulder, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other end, and each minister turns their tendon to all the limb, and the masters put the spine evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, put above the drying plaster with abundant sulfur, then the stoope, and then the steel of a tablet of three fingers in length, which prevents the shoulder from gangrene and the part of the spine healthy, then the ligament of a ligament, as we have said, and use the subtle remedies of traction until they are healed;
and if nothing comes at the end of health, then one must administer remedies that are softening and soothing, with the aforementioned steel. and one never administers a piece of lead, and it never appears in the back spine, and one is careful that this is not dislocation. and it is the bones that open, which is why one should not have any presumption. by chance it would bring death.
It is known that the joints of the waist and the joints of the shoulder come only from dislocations alone, not like other joints.
and the joint of the waist is dislocated according to FOUR parts: downward and backward, and front and back.
and more downward than before, and slightly dislocated in the front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation downward is such that when the crooked leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and more open than the healthy ones, and cannot bend the knee at the fire. and is the one that is on top inflamed with abscess, because the one who has the back comes down.
And the sign of the one who comes after is that this accident is opposite to those before.
And the signs of the one who has in front are that he is well aligned with the completion; always, do not double the genu sens dolor, and if one wants to make it move, if it cannot go forward, and retains its urine, and swells the pain, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of the one who comes after are that he cannot spread his groin, nor double over, and the other leg is more twisted than the other, and the anger is softened, and the head is dislocated from the neck outside the ribs.
The return of this similar dislocation is that you wait for the dislocation to settle in its place, and it lasts according to its nature, if there is no treatment. and it does not matter if it has pride.
And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of four kinds of dislocation, you must hurry to return the joint, and extend it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left. If by chance it returns, and there is no need for other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply strong ministration, and strongly extend the leg at two joints, or at one joint that is connected to the thigh. And other ministrations extend its hand above in a similar manner that it bites its hands from its shoulders, then strangle it with a soft rope connected to the neck. And other ministrations tie the head of the limb.
And extend above and below all at once, until the pain is lifted from the ground once and for all, and remains suspended.
This method of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned as we have said, it is good.
If not, then you must put care to its appearance.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder, then you must support the misaligned part on its chest, then put the arm over the root of the armpit, and the arm that is out of the socket, then extend the arm upwards towards the shoulder, and towards the neck;
then take other assistants to hold his arms, and grasp the large arm of the misaligned shoulder, and extend it behind in a proper form: if it returns to its place now.
and this method of dislocation is less severe than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary to tie the two affected feet together with a strong rope above the two heels, and above the two ankles, and let the affected leg be stretched out two fingers more than the other.
Then it should be hung from the top of a stick, and let the two arms hang down two feet long.
Then command the assistant to grasp the neck of the chicken, and let another assistants hang with the affected one, who grasps the neck firmly, for the joint is now beginning to heal.
When the dislocation is present, prick the hairs, as we have said in the case of gout, and stretch the joint properly above the affected leg, and also on the foot.
Then put two bandages, one at the head and the other at the foot, then fold the bandage between the thighs over the affected area in shape. And place wet cloths around it, so that it does not dry out, then stretch each bandage towards him, and the hand puts the dislocation evenly in his hand.
If it returns, it is good.
If not, place it on the flat surface, and press it as we have described in the previous chapter, and cut off the hairs on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the affected leg firmly, as I have said. and places the fingers in pain above the bad joint, then presses with the other hand, and stretches it down towards the chin.
And if the dislocation is in the shoulder, it does not need to be stretched downwards, nor lifted up towards the ground, but should be as it was when it was reset incorrectly before, as we have said about the position of the two shoulders; and should be above its face, and the arm stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table; and will be straight when the shoulders are stretched, and they will be even; Then, apply compresses to the elbows, and put on the ointment, and bind it with a bandage, so that it does not move. And rest it for three days or four, then reset it, and put on the ointment.
And if you see that they are even, then bind it again as before, and leave it for three days.
Then reset it, and make the limb move well, until the limb is comfortable.
of the shoulder dislocation
The knees are dislocated in three ways: That is to say, from the inside and outside, and behind.
and do not dislocate again before.
And the sign is that you command the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if they cannot do so at the knee, then it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg if they can, and put your back against their face, and put their foot on your feet.
Then take their thigh in your palms, and pull it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the thigh well. And other assistants extend their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that they can lightly bend their knee.
and apply the plaster on top, and heat the leg at the thigh for three or four hours, then release it.
and do not work with the painful parts until the limb is comfortable.
If the limb is not properly aligned, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the back, until it is healed.
of the ankle dislocation
The ankles are never sprained and never fully dislocated, inside and outside.
And the signs are that the joint is dislocated, and test first at the part where it is displaced:
the return is slight, and one should gently extend it to its hands when it is only slightly warmed.
And when it is displaced quickly, one should then make the joint straight, and hold it with one hand above the leg, above the knee;
Then grab the bone with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and strongly hit the bone upwards.
Do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the bone;
If it returns, it is good.
If not, start the work again, for it will return.
And if it cannot return thus, lay the limb on its back on the ground, and firmly fix one needle between its thighs, and wrap bandages around it, so that it does not bleed.
then the surgeons tie the wrist, and other surgeons extend the arm to its length or to the elbow, that they tie above the wrist. then each surgeon extends equally, and the splints are placed between the fingers to hold the dislocated finger when extending it.
then the surgeons place the splints evenly on the dislocated joint, and other surgeons tie the sound leg at the ankle, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it has not returned, apply the plaster and pour water over it, and let the bandage form, and tie the wrist to the leg, and hold the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the ligaments are not too tight.
then leave it for two or three days, and if its joints are not healed, strain it.
then reset it on the third or fourth day, and let it heal for four days. and if it goes before that time, then it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes, it is necessary to treat it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
For the fire cautery, instruct When the shoulders are dislocated, if they need to be extended, it is a simple matter.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the body, it is necessary that you make the patient sit with the injured limb straight out or on a table, and put your hand on what opens up from these joints, then press firmly on your hand until it returns;
and when it is even and there is nothing open, put the back of your hand on a table at two fingers' breadth, then reset it firmly, and leave it for three days, then reset it. and let him rest until he is healthy.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often times the pain kills:
if not very presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and slow, do not be harsh:
and at the beginning of things, use calming methods for abscesses, and leave the pain in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health: and when you see hope, then reset the member to its place, as soon as the abscesses are gone:
When the limb is set, administer things that soothe abscesses and cleanse the wound, as it should be, with dry dressings.
And if the dislocation is fractured, and small bones are crushed, then remove the bones, and do as we have said in simple diseases.
And guard against entering the path of fear, as I have said, for it is better for you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your armor and your body.
