Oh, most noble sons, I have completed this book which is the aftermath of the science of medicine, and have filled it with its contents, and have made the end by its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is held together by all things, it has perished along with the science and decayed, and nothing remains but the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this comes the error and the vanity, and the minds are closed and the knowledge is distant.
It seems to me that I can revive it together with the order of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation. And I will bring together the forms of cauterizing irons and other tools of the work with the explanation and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
And because of this reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged. And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of all, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and the number of joints, and the movement and veins moving and resting, and the origin of their issue.
And because, as Hippocrates says, "the nail is not much good, and with the work is little. And even in the art of manual dexterity.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not acquainted with the things mentioned above, if they attempt to do it, may make a mistake and harm people.
so that I have often wanted many times more of those who engage in this science and if they abandon themselves to science and experiment.
For I saw a foolish person who lanced an abscess of scrofula from the breast of a woman, and lanced the arteries of the breast; so that so much blood issued out that the woman died in her hands.
And I saw another foolish person who removed a stone from an old man's eye, and the stone was large; so that he took with it a piece of the bladder, and died the next three days.
I had already been called for the extraction, and saw the position of the misalignment and the size of the stone, and if it was cut well, it would die.
And another miracle that took place in our care, the Duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the broken piece he had a wound.
and the miracle-worker kept the broken piece above the wound, keeping it steady with great care, and did not let the wound be left open, and thus he brought it to an end.
and he ordered that it not be displaced.
and thus it remained until the leg was completely healed and the foot and came back to life.
I was called to come to him, and he urged me to come to dislocate the leg; And when I felt it dislocated, it was in a place and did not feel any pain.
But all ways of the corruption were already confirmed or the member, and it could not be healed.
And the corruption did not cease to move through the member until the member was completely lost.
And I saw another method that would crush the abscess and become infected, and then inflame due to the evil of its lord.
For a pustule, when it is free of melancholic humor, does not require that one touch it with iron if it is not in a limb where one can remove everything that is corrupted.
Therefore, very dear son, I advise you to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is to say, where it has been performed in many positions;
and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
For it is better that you keep this to yourself, so that the foolish do not speak ill of you.
If you take up your weapons firmly and steadily, and use the best method, then by God's grace you will come to safety and be healed.
and leave behind contagious diseases of poor health;
and take up your weapons from the one that makes you doubt, and be in peace so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: Do not take on sick patients unless you are called a foolish doctor.
I have divided this treatment into three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cautery and medical cautery for the sick, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
and the forms of instruments, and the irons of cautery, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and of wounds and incisions, and of arrow extraction, and similar things.
and the chapters are ordered and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and is ordered by the head of the bed, and the forms of instruments.
As we remember from the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of each assistant and their harmful or helpful nature.
I say that the qualities of aid, and the lack thereof, are the longest speech and most subtle science and the secrets kept.
and many wise men spoke of this, and agreed to it;
and I do not speak much about it, because I keep the length.
I say that fire cauterization helps universally in all matters where there is matter, whether the matter is: This is to know hot humid nature without matter, and dry nature without matter.
In hot and dry nature together with matter, they devised none and said that the fire cauterization is great help; and the other said the opposite: that cauterization does not help disease that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured by heat from disease by heat, nor dryness;
and those who said the opposite that cauterization does great help to hot and dry disease that comes in the bodies of men. When you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the composition of fire, you stir the body flat.
And I agree with this word. For I have never found it once by experiment.
And in all cases, do not interfere except for those who have experienced it and know the chapter on cautery from long use, and the diversity of human constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the symptoms and the space of time.
We have no fear of other constitutions, even in cold and moist diseases. And all the hairs gathered together and aligned with the cauterization.
And know, children, that fire cauterization is a secret of healing and greater good than cauterizing medicine.
For the fire is simple, and it only comes to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members unless named.
The heating medicines come from one member to another by removing them, and bring diseases of relief to the sick member. And perhaps it may cause harm.
The fever does not hurt for its heat and for the goodness of its substance, if there is no excess.
And I have found this through experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it has been above the truth of things.
And because I excuse the length of the word, for I do not like to give you the secret that is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, how it breaks diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating. or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they should be done at what time the cautery is to be applied, and then they should be prayed for.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the harms coming from it are removed by the help of cauterization. And even when it is cauterized, it is for necessary pain, rather than waiting for the tension that could cause greater harm to the limb.
Do not think like a foolish child, as they do. for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no recurrence. and he says so.
and he says so. But he is not as they think, because cauterization is only a medicine that moves the complexion, and dries the humors that cause pain, and it is more effective than other medicine for its swiftness of value, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
And it is possible that the disease comes at any time according to the humor of the patient and the part of the disease and its nature.
And they are assembled in him the excesses by the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless if you administer cauteries to the part where there is excess and moisture, as cauteries for dense pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return. But this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the back of medicine, and this is so.
but they do not believe that cauterization works after medicine, but rather misunderstandings, and it is cauterization of the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of healing in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it is better.
Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of those who misunderstand.
The ancients said that gold cautery instruments are more beneficial than iron, and they did not say what else except for the quality of gold and its high substance.
and they said that the wounds of cauterization do not make putrefaction, but it is not to see because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is to see in some people.
And gold cautery is better than iron, as they say. And whenever you heat a gold instrument, do not touch it when it is hot due to the color of gold, and let it cool first.
And if it is heated too much; then they do at the fire. and then there is enough prevention.
Or you have ordered this chapter about the shoulder joint from the foot, because it is lighter to find.
This cauterization is good for moisture and cold on the head, and it is done for two reasons: because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the joint to the eyes, and to the ears, and due to many dreams and tooth pain, and throat pain, and even for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the hairs should be removed by soluble medicine changing the chief III or IV, according to the virtues and age and custom of the hair, which it can bear. Then, repeat the process of the bad joint.
And then make it sit crossed between your hands, and put its hands on top of its feet;
After, place the root of your palm above the root of its nose between its two eyes; And let your fingers come to me, if it bleeds from the wound then heat the cauterizing agent called "olivare", of which this is the shape: And put it on the limb at the sign of ink, and make by descending and stretching your hand little by little in returning; Then lift your hand gently, and reward the limb if you see the small bone of the shoulder; and if you do not see it, restart the cauterization until you see the bone as I have told you.
then take a little piece of silk, and place it softly inside, and put it on the limb, and let it stay for three hours.
then place a soft cloth on top. and let it stay until the burn is healed. then treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges. and for this reason, use this method.
And none of these said that one should cool the cauterization so much that a part of the bone is burned, and then one should remove what is burned from the bone, and it should be healed.
And the other method is to apply the cauterizing iron as lightly as possible, and push it in as far as you can lower the bone as wide as a vermilion that women put in their hair because the humors are pushed out by moisture.
and one should leave the wound open for a long time. Afterwards, one should cure and bandage it.
And these two methods of cauterizing do not seem to be good for everyone, except in some men where there is a view of fear.
And it seems to me that I should leave it.
because the joints are weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other members;
and even when the joint with the injury is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more suitable and gentle for me, and from this use I work accordingly in an appropriate manner for healing.
When in general the joint comes with chronic pain that lasts a long time, one should use herbs and pills called "cochie", and cleansing of the head and eyes and plasters. and if one does the cauterization that we have already mentioned, and it does not help. Take a warm cloth for the patient who is suffering from a severe illness, and that it not too hot. Then apply the fire cauterization as we have mentioned above. After applying the cauterization on each of the horn-like protrusions of the bone, as we have mentioned before, and apply the cauterization called "vasserelz". And place them in the places where suction cups are used. And raise your hand so that you do not press too hard on the bone: The hairs feel much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak about that later.
and it is necessary that the cauterizers of the horns be more skilled than those who cauterize the median part of the head, and this is the form:
for the fire cauterization When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease is spread to the eye, and the patient is purged by medicines that are not changed, and the other cures that I have mentioned in the division of diseases have been done, and yet nothing helps: then the cauterizers do it in two ways, that is to say by medicine and by fire.
The cauterizers by medicine are such that you grasp a hot iron, and remove the scab and place it on the eye of the patient, and then make the temple in such a way that you can replace the iron outside the skin;
And when it is reset, if the bone and the joint are well aligned and left like this for twelve hours; then the dislocation is released and treated with the decoction of garlic, and leave the wound like this for two or three days; then apply a poultice soaked in butter until the pain subsides.
After the treatment with ointment, as long as they are healed;
and if you see that some burning medicines that I have written or advised to treat with, are causing harm.
The iron cautery is done in this way. Heat the iron cauterizer of which this is the form:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cloak or has a small hook at one end, and in the middle has a small appearance;
And place it on the painful joint, and hold your hand and gently press the bone slightly, until half of the broken bone is back in place.
And relieve your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is below, and there is an abundance of blood flowing.
After putting cotton in a cloth, and place it on the joint for three days; then put moistened cotton in butter, and then cure the joint with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing iron called "cultellare", at all points, and be careful not to cover the artery in this wound which is not ancient.
of the wound
When you treat emigration headaches as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries before mentioned do not suffice with the medicine and the heat does not relieve it somewhat, then it is necessary to remove the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white.
and if the limb is in pain along a line of half an inch long, and you take your hand once, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and that it does not come close to the bone.
and watch the jaw that moves when it is moved, and the nerves should not regard anything except the move and that spasms do not cause pain, and watch for the discharge of blood from the artery when it is cut, or when it is cut with great fear and immediately to that one who does not know, and which is not studied and experienced. and leave the work in its place;
but I will tell you how to stop blood flow when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it in the same way as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
and if you see that the cauterizing agent that we have said or in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cauterizing agent that has two prongs; And this method of fire cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from cold
When the ear has pain from cold, and medicines have been applied and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then heat this cautery called "pointed", of which is the form:
After pricking all around the ear wound, or wherever the pain is felt on both sides, and then remove it a little distance from the root of the ear, as soon as you have found the bone of the jaw. and make ten pricks around each ear.
after curing the bone as long as it is healthy.
of the torture of the mouth
This pain must be treated by cauterization is no more than those that move from the flux, as we have said in the division of diseases.
and do not use cauterization like those that come from pus and mucus of wounds.
When you cure this appearance of torture that moves from a stream of urine and spitting, and it does not cease, then it is necessary to cauterize the pain with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little later the temple, and the third in the corner of the mouth;
and put the cauterie in the part that opens healthy, and make the cauterie at the head of the ear above a little out of the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a pin; and leave the cauterie so high that half of the face is burned;
and this is the form of the fire cauterization:
And it is similar to the cauterizing iron that we have placed before, but it is a bit more delicate and it is necessary that the knife be a bit larger;
After healing the limb as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the pain does not have fever, then make four cauterizations: Two above the two corners of the head, and one under the head, and one on the part called "vassals" as we have said before, and the back cauterization through the mouth of the stomach;
And treat them as we have said before.
of laziness
For this disease, one should give the patient large doses of mandrake and mineral-altering drugs to the brain.
After removing all of the head of the patient, and placing the mustard plaster on the back of the neck, as written or prescribed for the plasters.
And this is the method of the fire cauterization: If you do as I have said.
If he is thus healed, then it is good. And if he is not thus healed, then perform three fire cauterizations on the head, descending from the forehead to the neck, and leave a space of one inch between each cauterization.
and the cure as with others, and if you have seen it stuck, and the pains are great, then apply the fire cauterization in the middle. and if the job is, the other two on the two horns, and the cure until it is healed.
and let the cauterizing agent be called "olivare", as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleaned with leeks and garlic, as we have said before.
after removing the pus from the head, then apply the cauterization on the head and on each horn, and behind and three times on the spine of the neck.
and if you have more skill, and the back is wet and the hairs are suffering, and the disease is far, then apply four cautery burns on the spine of the back. and leave it until the most gentle one is done, and relieve your hand. after the treatment until they are healed, and those cautery called "olivare" that we have already mentioned.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cauterization except for those that are fleaming, and it is first necessary to modify the brain from years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the pain is great and suffering from penetration of medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot suffer, then give them gargle and chewing, often changing the brain with good meats.
after the child's head is in the middle, and apply one cautery as we have mentioned before, and the cauteries on the vessel, and on each horn. And if the pain and suffering is outside and inside, if you apply cautery as I said to those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine and neck, and let the cautery be olive oil according to the method that I have said.
If the pain is sharp, then apply the delicate cauterization as follows:
When due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture is great, then use the cauterization of parts as we have said to those who have paralysis.
And if due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture is declining towards melancholy, and the pain is caused by wetness, then give something to drink that the mind may be cleansed, according to what it is before in the division.
After removing the main cause of the pain; After making a well-made bandage, like a circle, and put it on the head;
and if the pain increases, and let it be held tightly from all sides;
After applying the liniment, and use ointment made of fresh butter; and the heat of fire should be applied gently, so that he can bear it without suffering. after removing the circle by inserting the head, and let it cool down;
and do this to each joint once a week with different governance until they are healed.
Where you have seen the fire cauterization done by making many pricks all over the cautery.
This method of cauterization moistens the brain and increases it.
and then place a soft cloth on it with butter and chicken fat.
of the eye's When the eye comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient the remedy that I have mentioned, keeping the head dry and washing it or bathing it several times a day while fasting.
After that, he commands to turn his head, and then perform the cauterization by inserting the head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples, simultaneously with both eyes together, or if one eye is turned down, then one.
And cover all the cauterized areas and veins that are not under the skin, and they should be the cauterizer long along the length of the temple.
And watch for the extraction of arrows, and if you see too much blood coming out, then soak it with cloth as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of veins and the incision of the cautery how you would soak it.
And never cauterize or heat anything outside the two lower bones.
and we see that it is excessive cold flu-like symptoms, therefore the fire cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter should be applied to those. I apply the fire cautery to the forehead, and II cauterize above the two temples, and II cauterize where the jawbone meets the two jaws. and if there is more, then cauterize it thoroughly above the ear with every small fire cautery.
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give him to drink three decoctions of badger's teeth. After the king's head, and the fire cautery or the middle of the fire cautery olive. And make two cautery burns with the cautery that is called "clavilis" above the two horns, a little below the ears.
And guard the artery so it does not close.
And this is the form of the cauterization called «clavilis»:
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cauterization called «olivare». For this form:
And if you see that make two cautery burns above the two horns as long as the horns are.
And do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that does not touch the oil Never does it happen that the hairs of the head are converted to the pardon, and prick the eye, and then make two cautery burns in the following manner: This is to know of fire, or burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a safe place; after seeing above the eyes a drawing that is as such as the face of the moon, and is the beginning of the sign below the hairs;
then put cotton moistened in egg yolk and musk powder on the oil, then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
After cauterizing the area you have marked a few times but not too much, where the wound is located.
and the signs of health in the work are that you see the paper recede, and the hairs stand upright like oil.
Therefore, lightly place your hand, and leave it in this way for three hours, then put cotton moistened in oil until the burn is healed. After the treatment of onion, until it is healed.
And if after this the hairs come back, and the paper is softened, then begin the cauterization on the same area again, as you did first.
And if the hairs are missing, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and is even, and do not prick at the base of the hair.
The cauterizing medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a piece of parchment in the shape of a mint leaf.
Then take French soap and live chalk, each one, and grind them together well. And make it into a paste, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you have made like a mint leaf, and put it on the paper of the eyes. and if the disease holds in one joint only, then one must open it in one place, and similarly in another. and put a piece of moistened cotton cloth inside the joint.
and the one with the bad joint should be in a healthy position and place the second finger on the medicine, and press the tip and move it every time the pain of the medicine is felt, for it feels painful as if from fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then take the medicine at your own discretion. And when the pain has passed, lift the limb from its position, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision. If it is so, then it is good.
If not, then reset the joint above or below where the medicine has not worked, until your work is equal and your eyes are steady.
Then put on moistened cotton above the wound until the curved arrows are cut off, then heal the wounded part called "diaphragm" and others, until they are healed.
And if you are in need of knowing, be well-versed in your work by great care that it does not cut into the medicine with those.
And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then start the medicine above the joint that has become soft from the paper properly, as you did before. after the treatment until they are healed;
and this is the form of the fuller's mallet:
And since the bones of men are different in size and smallness, and according to what your constraints are;
and not be replaced the right way for those who have studied this art.
of the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
When you treat fistulas as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work, then it is necessary for you to cauterize them in this way.
instruct the patient to put his head in your clean; and wash the instruments on his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor remove his head;
after put cotton wool on the side of the eye or in the juice of parsley over the oil;
After heating the cauterizing tool.
And secure it at the tip of the tongue, as if it were a pen of lead, and the cauterizing tool.
If you see, it is pointed from one tip to the other, and if you see, it is also like a tent.
But in any case, this that is secured is better for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, and in taking the pus, and drying it. And if it is closed, if you open it, and take out the foreign bodies.
After putting the cautery on the skin well, and holding your hand on the cautery at the part above the bone, so that your hand does not make a mistake. And put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good. If not, if you must restart the cautery again, and if you have skill, let it stay for three days.
Afterwards, put on a cotton pad in butter, and the ointment of the desiccating wound until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed. and the king according to what he would come into his chapter.
And there is a method of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. To fistula, and fix the limb. After putting in the fisture, insert the subtle probe of this shape: and they make with the quantity of one finger's breadth; and hold the hand or probe firmly, and the hairs do not move, that the plugs do not stick to their oil.
and it is appropriate to put on top of the oil, soft cotton wool in abundance or less.
the plug if the limb of the fistula, and the healthy by miraculous healing.
And if the sinus is healed by the cauterization that we have said, it is good. If not, then you must administer a puncture to the nose, and return the sinus to the nasal cavity according to what is proper for that limb.
of fissures in the lips Many times there are fissures in the lips that are called "hair", and simultaneously in the lips of children.
When you treat these fissures as we have said in divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing iron according to this form:
And put him in those cracks until he comes just short of the font.
After curing the limb of cautery until it is healed.
When an abscess comes at the root of the tongue or in the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it is pierced and drained and swells and becomes a fistula. And you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not improve. Therefore, it is necessary that you use cauterization according to the quantity of the fistula. After boiling or puncturing the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron comes to the end of the limb.
And do thus once or twice, after the care that we have said in cures, until they are healed.
And if they are cured thus, it is good. And if not, then you must discover the limb and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
When the teeth are softened by moisture and the dens move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put the head of the bad tooth in your healthy one. After heating the cautery with which its form will come out later in some manner, put a cane on the tooth.
and place the fire cautery deeply, and hold your hand steady so the hairs feel the heat coming to their root.
then remove your hand and restart the fire cautery as you wish;
then fill the hairs with salt and let them soak for an hour and then rinse.
And in a similar manner, the tooth that was moving is stabilized, and the gum softened, held back, and the moisture corrupted dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When pain from the tooth comes from cold, or there is cold or wind, and medical treatments do not help, then it is necessary to use fire cautery in two ways: and fire cautery with butter and fire cautery with fire.
Fire cauterization is such that you hold butter with a spoonful of fat or water. Then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, dip it in the melted butter, and place it on the painful tooth firmly and hold until it is cooled.
And then do it often enough until its effect reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that dipping wool and cotton in melted butter does not help, then place a hot iron on the aching tooth and hold until the pain goes away.
Fire cauterization is such that you hold a red-hot iron or needle, and it should be large enough that the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
After heating the cautery, from which the form will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer is cooled.
Do this often, for the pain will be as great on that very day or the next.
And it is necessary that the hairs fill their mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cauterizer, and then wipe it off.
And this is the form of the cauterizer:
And make the cauterizer as you wish, and according to what you have.
And this is the form of the needle:
of scrofula When the scrofula is of a mucous and cold nature, and is not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the hair cauterization with which comes after, and have two openings for the fumes to escape to the other side of the cauterization;
and place the cauterization on top of the abscess once, or as often as necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, place cauterization according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and place on top of it a soft cloth dipped in butter until the burn is healed.
After healing from burns and wounds, the limb is to be treated until it is healthy.
When moisture overflows the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the pains be relieved first by soluble medicines.
After the cauterization at the root of the throat, and be careful not to bring the heat too close to the throat, and do not burn too much but just a little.
After the other cauterization at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cauterizations that are called "clavi" because of the shape we have in front.
And treat the limb as we have previously mentioned until it is healed.
When all and the disease of pormon are from cold moisture, and the pains have no fever or inflammation, and the disease is ancient, then apply two cautery burns on the forehead in their sight. and another cautery burn between the breasts.
and let the cautery burns be called "clavile" according to the form that has been mentioned before.
And if you see, apply cautery by holding the entire cautery that is called "points" because of the form it has in the disease of the ears.
and they are to be applied at least thirty times, or more frequently.
After treatment, the patient according to what has been said before, and let the burns heal in three stages according to this form:
And because the burns are lighter, because you make three times as much.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, prick the hairs on their back and on their ribs. Afterwards, hold the curved part of the bone with your right hand.
and if the joint is misaligned inside, then heat the cautery that has two prongs at the end, in the shape of:
and cauterize the bone until it pierces through the ribs, and then bring four burners together.
because the cautery is made with the cautery that has three prongs, because the shape of cauterization is these four burners.
and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the fire cautery that has three needles:
And never are they placed on this one nerve because it has eight burning irons.
After putting the cautery on, place the needles perpendicularly and hold them with silk; After letting the patient rest, do not move the limbs for a long time until it is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, this thing happens rarely, then make fire above the thick edge of the cauterizer, or many of the cauterizers in pinching.
For the joint is closed, and it is bound with moisture and is free from pain.
When cold and much moisture come into the stomach until it is at its condition, and they multiply the diarrhea in him, and are usual methods of cures and he does not improve, then it is necessary that the pain be soothed above his back, and he extends his legs and his hands. After this, make three cauteries with the spoon, one at the worst place for the quantity of a drop, and all the cautery with the claviere, and two cauteries before the two ribs until the figure of the cautery is at three angles, and has equal space between them so they are not joined together as they go through;
and let the burning instruments be such that they do not burn more than the two parts of the face, and let the shape of the cauterizing instruments be according to this form without jerking:
and if you see cauterizing with a large burning instrument in the stomach according to this form;
and the one who has fear of this burning instrument, cauterize by pricking and holding steady above the stomach, but not according to the quantity that you see in the chest. then cauterize with the entire burning instrument called "point".
After the care of the cure that we have had before, as long as they are healthy.
When the liver has pain from heat and moisture and excessive swelling, as long as it is forced out of its natural condition by excesses; and the pains are treated as we have said in the divisions, and it does not help them much, so it is necessary that the pains be removed from their base. and the sign of three cautery according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, under the hypochondres, where the neck of the ox comes.
and there should be space between each cautery the thickness of a finger. and let the cautery be long as the body, and do not press much with your hand on the whole cautery.
and let it be red as much only as half of the cure, and let the pains be straight up on its feet.
and if he cannot, then lie down and stretch out his legs, and relieve his arms.
And if you wish, then cauterize these wounds with a surgical tool, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn too much of the body, for you would make it drier all over. and that it does not come to boiling, for the wounds are very delicate there, and the salves to see.
When he has an abscess in the liver, and you know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the tissue: If he is in a cart, he does not feel much pain from the misalignment.
And if he is on a bed, he feels great pain.
And when this treatment is done, it is necessary that the misaligned joint be straightened above his head;
and then bend the limb where the abscess is, and then heat the cauterizing iron which is shaped like a thistle, of which this is the form: And cauterize with the iron until the curing is complete, and it comes just short of touching the skin, until the pain is completely gone;
After the treatment according to the treatment of bandages until they are healed;
and it should only be used by those who have long studied in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never been corrupted.
Therefore, it can be boldly overcome, and in all ways, it seems to me that it is worth leaving it alone.
The fire cautery of the chest
The ancients said that one should do the following with fire cautery of aristolochia roots: Take a long aristolochia root, the longest you can find, and let it dry, and let it be as thick and long as your finger; and grind it in oil, and take it to the fire, and cauterize the fire cautery between the eyebrow and the eye, and II small cauteries a little bit below where the hair is not;
and two cautery needles between the fifth rib and the sixth, in declining backward a little. and one cautery needle at the lowest point, and the other above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the ribs just in front of the cautery between the shoulders.
and do not press your hand, but open it as if smelling something.
And they said that no man used fire cautery like the razor, and they sharpened it and put it between the ribs until it came to the abscess. and it jumped out of the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this work, there is fear or the pain kills now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then they resort to three methods of cauterization that are good.
When one method is such that you make three cauteries, or four, lining up according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cauterization that we have mentioned before;
and do not press your hand too much on the whole cauterization, and let the hairs be on its back;
and another method of cauterization is such that you heat the cauterization that has two needles, as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation;
and lift the chest that is in the place of the mouse, or where the hairs of the pain come from the left, and let the elevations that you lift the chest according to its curve, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization be according to the width of the body.
After boiling the two needles until the threads are perceived from the other side, then draw out the cauterizing iron, and thus you will have four.
And if you see that it is all cauterized with three needles.
After treatment when the patient has gotten pus by long tension, and it is worthwhile to do the other treatments mentioned before.
Cauterization is not useful for hydrops, except in the manner called "ascites".
When you treat it according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the wound, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the kidneys, and one behind the back above the spine, and one at the worst place. and let the cauterizations be close to the surface of the skin.
After leaving the cauterizer overnight for healing, do not let the care of the wound after the cauterization be neglected. And healing will proceed swiftly, and both intentions will be achieved with God's help.
The shape of the cauterizer for the belly is shown in the drawing that we have before us. And this one for the back is oval-shaped, as it is shown above.
When the feet are swollen to the one who is hydropathic, and they are plain of awake citron, it is necessary that you cauterize above the back between the auricular and the annular. Lightly touch the skin with the cauterizing tool, moving towards the wound.
And do not enter too deeply, thus avoiding the yellowish part, and let the cauteries be done according to this form:
After performing two cautery treatments on each leg at the tip of the sharp needle; Either the cautery is long, one from behind and the other from in front, within the leg;
and leave the cautery above for a longer time to heal, which is in its place.
After the other treatments that we have mentioned.
When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive powers that are in the stomach and in the intestines are blocked, and cannot be treated by other means of treatment. and you see the patient suffering greatly and of great virtue, then make a large cauterization across the stomach according to what he has spoken before about the cauterization of the stomach, in the cauterization circles. and IV cauterizations around the belly subtly at all the cauterization clavile subtle, and II cauterizations above the buttocks.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the pain suffering, then perform the fire cautery above the knuckle, and I cautery above each rib, and two small cauteries below the stomach, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
of the treatment of worms
When the tumors are at their base or one or more, and are old and are large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not improve, then make cauterizations. Above the spine of the back, which is all before unprotected a little and a little in triangular, and with the fire cauterization outside the belly two doses.
And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swells, then the face is given a great cauterization above the stomach, as it is previously said, and the other above the liver, and the other above the lungs with all the cauterization. And let the cauterization remain long. After treatment, the limb as long as it is healthy.
When you cut the skin, if it is burned like a razor, and then put it all burned above the skin that was cut. and let your hand move towards the base of the wound as the cautery approaches, to prevent it from burning.
Do this once or twice, and if there is much althelul, then cauterize each one as we have said. after the healing of the wounds, as long as they are healthy.
and if you cauterize with a large cautery above the alchatim, it will have greater help.
When the wound cannot be treated by a surgeon or opened, as we will tell you in its place, then comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When any comes fistula, and it is alerted and given purgatives and corrupted moisture, then you must provide for the whole of a thin tent, and guard that you cleanse the tent as much as it has of preparation.
After the cautery seems sharp like a razor, and the probe is inserted into the fistula according to the amount that enters, and then restart the cautery until the corrupted tissue is removed, once, or twice, or three times, depending on the amount of tissue that needs to be removed.
and guard against fire the veins that are within, and great veins.
if the fistula goes to the center of the bladder and intestine, then guard against these, and do not make any other cuts except in the place where it is needed, and think that it is not healed.
after healing the wound as long as it is healthy, and if the wound is not clean, and the matter is removed along with the scab, then clean that the wound is completely healed.
and if the matter is not removed, clean that the wound is infected, and corrode the bone at the source. And thus, as one of those that we will say in its place.
When pain from cold and great moisture comes to rain, and does not take the form of a woman, then it is necessary that you make the fire cauterization on both sides of the rain with the clavile cauterizer that we have already mentioned.
And if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have three cauterizations in a row, and they will be greater help.
of the bladder When the bladder is small and weak from cold and moisture, and the hairs retain the urine, then make the fire cauterization in the part before the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow, and on both sides, and let each cauterization be as long as a pin.
and if you have a back cauterization, or if you have a fear of it.
and the cauterizer should be shaped according to what has been mentioned before.
When the wound is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their termination is late; and when they come, it causes great pain: therefore it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the wound, as we have said of the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back;
and the cauterizer should be shaped as mentioned before.
When the thick, viscous moisture descends to the buttocks of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
and is found in the lower parts of the thigh, so it is necessary to cauterize the injury above the buttocks at the hip, similar to a circle, and sign before the limb around the buttock as it returns, so that the buttock is within the circle;
and if the cauterization is such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cauterization is not present, make three cauterizations of large olive oil, and let the cauterizations be similar to all the wounds;
and the healer as long as they are healthy.
of the pain in the loins When pain comes in the side of the waist, and it is from cold and moisture, and the misalignments are cured by what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient: then it is necessary that you purge the misalignments of large humors from foul pills or other good-like pills. After he does cauterization;
and the manner of cauterization is according to the second method: that is to say, together with burning medicines and fire cauterization.
Fire cauterization is done in many ways, such as:
that you cauterize on the back of the hipbone III triangular cauterizations in this form, and it has good depth and great, and there is between each cauterization a space the size of a thumb, and let the cauterization be olive oil.
Never cauterize in the middle of the backbone, because it has four in this form:
And if you see, if you cauterize with the cauterization of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hipbone;
However, make it in such a way that the circle contains the entire chest, and all the spines are straight.
And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or leg.
And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations where the hairs are, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers, on the right side a little bit.
and let the cauteries be sharp, and straighten the spine.
and if the hairs feel that the pain extends to two fingers or near the knee, cauterize where it feels the pain three or four times with the cauterizing iron called "points". And if the profession is, then make more of it;
And if the pain is on the side of the thigh towards the groin, then cauterize with a pointed or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery for too long, burning nerves and large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have cauterized above the ankle of the foot, and left it too long that the leg was completely bent, and the foot also, and all the bones were perforated and corrupted. After a stomach purge resulting in death.
And if the pain is in both parts together, apply cauterization to one and the other, in this manner.
And the wise say in the cauterization of the loins, because of this method, make such a needle and it should be at the top as large as a naval of a digit, or somewhat less, and it should be placed between the ribs and one prick after another at a distance equal to the quantity of a new pence;
and let there be pliers over two parts, and they should also be like pliers, and there should be one good iron tongs.
and this is the form:
and let it be heated until it is completely red and smells like metal, and then put it on the board of the back of the misaligned shoulder, and turn it over to the healthy side.
and the cauterization should be done once the burning iron is removed and left for three days. and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time. after the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says that we use this cauterization little due to its frightful appearance, and few see those who use it;
and all the time this is a good cauterization, which can bear suffering, and where it becomes effective.
The cauterizing instruments of medicine are such that you make an instrument with cuts on the edge of the door, and it is either of brass or iron at one end, and in the high part it has II us, and between each quantity of the size of a finger; and they are open underneath and above, and they join together according to this form:
After placing the board on the patient's back lying on their side, and quickly placing your hand on the board of the back; then pour between the two circles of the hot water which is heated by the fire I pot, and let it stand for an hour with the heat, and suffer the hairs the heat and the burning of it.
For it truly has the same effect as fire;
and when the burning has passed, hold the instrument with your hand and lift the back gently, and let it stand for three hours, and put on butter until the black part of the scar is removed. and let it lie for three days so that putrefaction may pass;
and this would be the final help after the treatment of burns until they are healed.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or leg, use the same tool that you used in the groin to increase it.
and this is the method of the hot bath, and I have written about it in the treatment of medicine. Take quicklime and live chalk, as much of one as the other, and crush them together, and put them in a new earthenware pot. or if he has a small puncture except for the point of a razor that can be closed;
or if he has a small puncture except for the point of a razor that can be closed; and put that one in the other, and well pounded, with alum and chalk and sweet oil until there are two of them above the powders that you will have well prepared in your hand;
and let it remain in this way until the water and blood descend, then take all of it, and pour it over the salt and over the alkali as before.
And if it is very watery, it should be administered in the form of drops or cauteries for other members.
Because it does this great work like fire, and if other medicines are cauterized in the same way as this, such as terisia and myrrh and salt with soap, all these things mixed together.
Galen tells us of a cure where some people were cured of the pain in the back and sciatica, and the louse was much, and he said that no other cure was made, and that they were cured once when this cure was made, and he bathed as it teaches afterwards.
And in this way tell the patient to apply a fresh and dry leaf of lime tree, and grind it well with a little grease, and put on the back and thighs and legs where the pain is, and tie it.
and he leaves it for three hours, by which time the pain has subsided.
Then make him enter a warm bath until the heart is slightly warmed, and then make him enter a bed, and the pain will disappear entirely and he will be healed.
And advise that no one should use such cauteries or medicines unless after the evacuation of blood.
And Dioscorides says that when the vein is cauterized with the heat of a goat's horn, it helps greatly.
and it must be done in this way with the cauteries. Take another and beat the old oil, and put it on the fossa that is between the thumb and the other one called foscile.
After taking dry goat's horn, and putting it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and then placing it on a cloth, and leaving it until it is cool.
and repeat this process, and do not stop until you think it is near the ribs, and that the pain has ceased.
And this method of cauterization is called "goat's-foot cauterization".
of the great pain of two
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from impact or from too great evacuation, or from similar matter spread coldly, none of these situations is worth cauterizing, because it is better for those who have recently been infused with cold matter.
It is necessary to apply foul-smelling pills or similar things on the affected area, three lines wide, where the pain is located, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to its virtue and quantity that the wound can bear.
And it should be made with cauterizations according to the cauterization called "spiked".
And if you see, make three or four cauterizations according to the cauterization called "claw-like" in this form.
Often this disease comes to small children, and the signs of onset are that they have stiffness in their neck when moving, and fear. and you tread on the last spinous process of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spinous processes.
When you see it and you see it healed, if you cauterize it with this fire cautery in this form. If the fire cautery grasps every part of the spinous process.
And if you see, if you cauterize around the spinous process with this fire cautery holding II lines or III, and they are close to each other.
After healing the limb as we have said, according to how it is healthy, and be careful not to apply the cauterization in a place that is swollen with nerves.
of the pain of the joints
When joint pain from moisture that is spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which they properly call «podagra», and when it is a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is treated by cauterization in this way:
make the most of cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and the cauterizing iron should be in this form:
And if there is a reason to hold the face down with the sharp instrument, then apply the entire cauterization process that is called "point". And if the pains come from the knees and other joints, and they often do, then apply the fire cautery over each joint three or four times on each part, with olive oil throughout.
And if you have more skill, then do more, but do not hold your hand too far unless the pain is already well-managed.
And if the pains descend to the jaw and back, then administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in this chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then apply it around the knuckle two lines deep;
and if there is still no pain, then apply it over each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come from the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and apply good management to the pain and appropriate medicines.
For if you provide good care and purge the humor, it will be healed with the help of God.
When a fracture occurs in anger, and the bowels descend to the groin, and this is newly, so it is necessary that when you see it to heal, that it does not move that day; and that he uses things that lower the abdomen, so that the bowels do not descend from his abdomen;
after the fracture is seated on his back between your hands, and he commands that he tinges his shoulder until the bowels are repaired, and he pulls it to his sides, and signs of this are similar to half a circle above the chest;
Then heat the cauterizing iron of this form:
so long as it is white and sheds senselessness. Then reset the dislocated joint; and the assistant wipes his hand over it so they do not return.
And work well on the thighs with the hairs, and put disinfectant on him on the muscle and on the skin above the thighs, and the other on the lowest part that cleans his hands.
Then place the cauterizing iron on the sign at all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then continue another until you come just to the bone. and you must guard carefully that the pus does not escape while you are performing the cauterization. that you do not burn it. and that by this means the hairs do not die, or any other harm.
And if you do not come to the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worthless.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be delicate according to their size, and for large people also large according to their size;
after three days, care for the wound of the cautery with butter until the scar is formed.
after the care of other remedies until it is healed, and grind the hairs 40 days on their back until the wound is well healed.
and it is necessary that its [the patient's] restraints be loosened long enough, so that the bile does not spill when he attempts to go into the chambers.
And after forty days, when he wishes to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and for another forty days.
and let him have good rest, that he works little and avoids too much overeating and drinking, and too much loud noise.
And when he does this teaching, if he is entirely healthy.
And I will say after the treatment of cutting into his chapter.
When wounds come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, let him have the fire cauterization according to its quantity, and let it be applied to the third part of the wound. After the treatment according to what we have said;
and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the fire cautery at three angles according to this form:
but the first sign is to bend and make a line across the width of the rip, and another one after, and keep your hand on all the cauterizing iron.
But the first cauteries are lighter and quieter.
of ancient pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, whether to fall or to pierce, and this pain lasts long, and the medical cure is not effective, then it must be cauterized with the cauterizing iron called "poins", and the cauteries should follow the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and pain.
if it is healthy after the first cauterization, it is good;
if not, begin another cauterization above the first one, for it is usually the case that it should be done to the member that is nearest, because it is necessary to do the cauterizations until the hairs are healed.
Mutilations are never treated with cauterization by great help, and even the disease that comes from the putrefaction of pus and melancholy.
If you see that it is not being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it has been treated according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the wound, then make five cauterizations above the head: I place the head to the north, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the temples. and II above the two horns, and I behind the hitterel.
and let your hand be so that the cautery comes close to the bone, and as much as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the large humors can escape.
and cauterize over the small one according to what it is in front.
And if the injury is scattered everywhere; and it is clearly present, then you must cauterize with these cautery that we have said or chief, and the cautery in the nose, and II cauterizes above the spine of the neck, and VI cauterizes above the spine of the back, and I large above the buttocks and I other below, and II above the two shoulders; and II above the ears, and II above the tendons of the worst kind, and I above each joint of the hands and feet, and above the wounds of the hands.
and guard against the nerves that are above the lower back, so you do not burn them.
and never make a fire cauterization above the bone of the thumb, and one on the other bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And it is said that the more you make a fire cauterization, the less you help, and move it away from the patient.
And it is said that the hairs do not feel pain as much as healthy people do, because the body is already corrupted.
It is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and the joints, according to what you will find in the ways of irons.
After curing the wound with flour and honey and other cures until it is healed.
When inflammation comes to any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should cauterize the member according to its size and smallness.
and either the cauterization goes deep into the flesh of the member; then the treatment of wounds until it is healed.
And never cauterize by hand and at the wrist and back, at the end of the member that makes the member immobile, and thus if it is ossified the inflammation;
and no one should interfere with it unless they know the members and the veins moving through the body.
When the disease known as «albaras» is awakened, and medical treatment does not help, then cauterize with a cautery a little in front, according to the amount of the skin that is affected, until the whiteness is removed, and it is moved its color;
then the cure of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of pigeon and blood of almond, of each one a part; and let it be mixed together, and let it be bound with a cloth, and let it be applied to the limb until it is healed.
the treatment of chancre by cauterization
When chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it stop spreading, then cauterize it with a cauterizing iron that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
And all the wise people said that one should also do a fire cauterization at the center of the chancre.
And this does not seem good to me, because I think it will not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen.
And the more important thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cauterizing iron called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to die or because of the excess that it causes or because of the age of the malady when they are old (that is, too old) and they have little blood, or for lack of tension; and you see it happening quickly: then cauterize around the wound with many small cauteries by pricking; after leaving it thus. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierce through the entire cauterization, then heat the cauterization from where this is the form:
And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have perforated the skin, and be such that the cauteries feel it beforehand in a similar manner as the course of the pus is alleviated.
After the treatment until they are completely healed.
Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and is nothing but a moisture in the member, as it corrupts the members like dry wood.
If you see this disease in the limb that can suffer cauteries and fire together, then heat the small and sharp cauteries greatly according to what is needed for the limb or the disease.
after cauterizing all parts until you eradicate all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, that everything that is corrupted be removed completely.
Then leave it three days, and apply the cauterized lead above the wounds, suffering great pain with oil until all the charred flesh is removed and all the corruption.
After the treatment of wounds, they generate pus.
And if you see after three days that healthy pus does not rise, it is good.
And if it does not, then restart the cauterization above the part that is remaining decayed.
And this wound has never been treated with medicine in place of fire cauterization;
But all fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the treatment of medicine in the division: Take it when you have the opportunity.
of the joints which come to the feet Many times it happens that at the feet by deficiency, a disease arises which is called "clubfoot" according to our understanding, and it is a great disfigurement which makes the foot look ugly.
And the cauteries of this disease are in two ways. That is to say, fire cautery, and ice-hot cauterization.
Fire cauterization is such that you heat it as if it were a pen of lead, and it should be made of good iron at the measure that it can penetrate the nail from all parts, and that it has narrow margins;
After you put everything on top of the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the end of the nail. and let it stay there for three days until it begins to rot. Then make a poultice of wild, crushed herbs with yarn, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be pulled out from its roots.
Then cure the limb of inflammation by applying warmth until it is healed.
And if they are converted by the wound, and often in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you reapply cauterization with very hot fire. and is in a similar manner: Take a needle of iron or steel, or a pen of quill, and place it over the nail and the wart, that is to say, prick the warts. And place the needle over it so that it pierces all around, then put a drop of hot wax, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the needle comes to the root of the nail, and find the hot wax penetrating deeply just at the root;
and bear the pain a little from the burning of the hot wax for an hour. then let it remain thus, and it will fall off at all its roots.
Then do another one, until you have checked all those that are in the body, then cure the wounds that cause harm to the heart.
When some tremble from cold or fever and chills or other, it is necessary that you make four burns or four above the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine. and one or two below the belly, and one above the stomach at the olive cauterization;
it will let the tremble, and hasten the health from the disease of cold.
No times have appeared from before with the body covered in wounds or pustules that come from large rotten substances.
if it is necessary at the first when they appear that one make cauterization above each head of the pustule: a thin cauterization of birch, of which the point should be held in the fire, or of the root of aristolochia long, or at the lens cauterization.
And never use cauterization at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it cannot grow more, but is destroyed by the excess from which they come, and are healed.
But it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surrounding parts, or to the incision of the abscess, or to the cauterization of the member, and similar things. And it is a very painful thing to stop.
And whenever it happens to anyone, you must quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press it very tightly until the bleeding stops from your finger, and no more comes out.
Then apply the fire cautery with various sizes of blistering olive oil beads, both small and large, until they are all red.
Then apply I, whether large or small depending on the wound and where the artery is located, and place the fire cautery above that vein where you hold your hand, and keep the fire cautery as long as the wound does not bleed too much.
And if the first one fails and you lift your other hand above the vein, and the cauterizer is extinguished, then quickly take the other cauterizers that are at the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after the other until the wound is completely healed.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes from the wound.
and it is said that when without cutting the artery, one cannot smell it immediately when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods that we have mentioned. or by fire cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong force of thread, or by medicines placed above that have the power to smell blood. and it should be tied and held firmly in place.
Whoever administers the tightening of ropes or other things overheated, or similar things, does not benefit unless not.
And if it has happened to anyone and they have no remedy present, then they should place their finger index above the wound of the vein as we have mentioned, and well strain until it is smelled over the wound and over the vein; and it should not be moved, but it should be massaged with cold frequently until it is very cold and the wound is frozen and filled and closed.
and make inquiries about the cause of which he should use cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cauteries or burning medicines, and the questions and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries;
and I have placed that chapter on the shoulder joints down to the feet, and I will go to this chapter by the same way because it is easier to find out what we want.
And therefore as I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For many ways of people come for treatment. if they come from such people who have become so with their disease that they die immediately due to the fear of their disease, and the greatness of its evil. and one must fear these.
And of these there are those who give you understanding, and say: Wait, I am a gardener. and the disease is difficult to treat.
It should only be granted to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your convenience, and do not open wildly but wisely of what you are certain and have taken and lost.
and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your diseases that health may be converted.
And this will help you to gain good reputation, and glory, and memory for the long time.
Very dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and straightness, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of His hand, indeed.
I have ordered you to read this chapter by examining other chapters, according to what is before or after the chapter on cauteries, which I have previously provided from head to foot, so that you can find it more easily.
Know that this disease often comes to infants at birth, and when the neck is held too tightly in the child;
And never is there a reason given that one might not be able to.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen died from it. Therefore, it seems to me that it is better to avoid this work in such treatments.
And I saw a child who was suffering from this disease, and the head became increasingly swollen each day until it could no longer support itself.
And it was believed that the moisture caused its death, and this moisture is gathered outside of the bone above the sinus, between the gum and the bone.
and the work is such that if moisture is between the bone and the joint, and abscesses are small, you should make an incision in the head of the bone wide;
and it should be as long as ours, until the moisture flows out;
and then in the shape of a space:
If the moisture is more extensive, and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form.
and if the moisture is outside the bone, and the signs that you see the commissures of the head open from each part, and the sharp pain when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not return to you: if it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head of the bone in this manner:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture. After applying bandages and powders to the wounds, and putting wine and oil on them, leave them like this until the fifth hour.
Then remove the bandages, and cure the wound with tents and poultices, and leave the shoulder equally strained, and feed the patient dried meat to relieve the moisture until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you look at the size of the abscess and the sharpness of the needle;
for it is never the same. never behind. no time on the right; and no time on the left.
Then cut open where the abscess is open, and fill the sore, and make it according to what you have the power to do;
and be careful not to cover the artery; and bring out blood, so that the hairs do not die from the separation of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When it happens to anyone with a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or in the pupil, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help much, then the cure is to cauterize with what they cover the two arteries.
Therefore, although you cover it, the hairs must do their own thing; then rub the sore with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then hold the hairs to all the cloth; Then look at the vein that is bleeding, and the vessels on both sides are behind the ears, and they are not yet stopped.
Then sign the vessels of the artery, then cut both with a sharp knife until the wound reaches the bone, and it should be through the wide part of the neck.
And if you see, push the adhesive away from the artery and cover it above, cutting as it should through the middle.
And when the vein is cut, if the blood flows continuously from above.
And if the artery does not open at first, then you must measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then sign the vessels and cut to the bone.
And it should be six centimeters if it is necessary to put the arrow out, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the wound can tolerate, and the closure of the artery.
then look at the wound if it remains above the bone point sharp, if the copper that is applied does not come out, then wash the wound and bind it, and the ointment treatment until it is healed.
of the shoulder When the ancient shoulder dislocation comes, and the cautery is old, due to the moisture of tears and chills in the temples and old age and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical cures and nothing else helps, then we should strain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have told.
And the method of extraction of them is that the hairs of his temples face backwards, and listen to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its pulsation, and is quickly restored afterward in all men who are too fat.
and if it is restored, then hold his neck with some cloths, then wipe the limb with any rough cloth, and soak the limb in hot water until the artery opens clearly. Then take the spatula of which this is the form: Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it upwards with pincers, and remove all the threads that are adhered to each part.
And if the artery is thin, then bend it to the tip of the needle, then cover that part according to the amount of the two joints. For if it is not covered, it will not heal completely.
And draw out some blood from the sixth vein, just enough to reach the third.
And if the artery is large, then it is necessary to tie it in two lengths of a strong silk thread, so that no blood comes before the suppuration of the wound, and comes out with the discharge of blood.
then remove the excess that is between the two bones in that same hour, and then, if you see, if he cauterizes with the cauterizing iron directly to the bone as long as the affected parts are removed.
and this is the difficult work, if the wounds do not have fever and he is of hot constitution. For the cauterizing is to finish the swellings: because it is of greater help against swellings.
or it is necessary for the extraction of veins that one fills the limb with old cotton and places on well-made bandages;
And when they are reset, if there are dry remedies that create heat and tents, until they are healed.
And if without cutting the artery as much as you work, then you must quickly apply heat with cauterization, or use the glass of vitriol and strain it in your hand that the wound is not soaked. And if you do not have this present, then put salt on the wound as much as you can until the wound is frozen, and raise the limb in cold water until it stops bleeding, and strain it as it should be.
And it should have between the two knives a space of about an inch, and then when you have marked the two lines, and you melt the hot iron above as far as it comes near to the bone, and cut the vein in two lines. and they should be separated between the two shoulder blades because it is not safe to use this cauterization at all times.
And this is the shape of the cauterization:
And what is more difficult and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterization of two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to last longer without heat. When instruments are too tightly fitted, they hold less heat.
tears When the tears of the eyes are flowing from the veins that are above the skin of the forehead, and it does not profit much from medical treatment, and you see the face of the patient becoming distorted, and it feels as if it is trembling. and they are kept oiled and moist so that the hair of the papers is burned, and the papers are charred, and scorched by the heat of the tears, if there is need for this care. And they call the ancient "curative contusion", and you should do for the back to the evil that has this disease the hairs that it has or front, then make three cuts or front equally according to the length of the front.
And they call the ancient "curative contusion", and you should do for the back to the evil that has this disease the hairs that it has or front, then make three cuts or front equally according to the length of the front. and it should be one of the cuts just like the second one completely to the front in raising down just above the neck, and the others two on the ribs by above the papers, and guard from the incision of the arteries that are at the two ribs by above the papers;
and keep your hand away from the continuation of the lower jaw, and let each wound have a quantity of three drops through the joints.
and have a sponge piece and wipe the blood off the arrow, then pour the acid of two parts of this is the form:
from the incision which is just above the second incision; and scrape all that is between the two wounds to the whole face which is above the bone, then make another part of the same incision just below the second, and then extract this acid. if you put the instrument called "curette" into the first cut, it is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and this is its shape:
and place the sharp edge of the instrument towards the wound and the blunt side towards the bone, and scrape until it reaches the other cut.
and cover all the vessels that descend from the head as much as the incision is continued just above the opening of the wound, and then make another part in the same wound just below the other.
and then strain out the blood equally, and express the wound for the blood taken;
then put in each wound a piece of old linen cloth, and put on bandages soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and keep away from abscesses.
and the patient takes off the linen, and is administered a large amount of salt, then the healing ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other remedies to cure wounds, until they are healed.
When anyone comes to cauterize as is customary, and you see the eyes tightened and small, and weakened vision, and burnt papers; and the hairs prick, and if they prick in the forehead, it causes great pain and the hairs are discharged. Therefore, treat these accidents with many incisions, and the bleeding that comes from it is like this.
And it is that you command the eyelid to turn back, then make a great cut across the eyelid, and another one wide at the edge of the eye. And begin with the cut on the right temple to the left, and the incision should be just to the bone; and avoid your hand from the nerves of the temples that move at the side;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood onto a sponge, and then clean between the two lips of the cut and put in thick cotton, and test with linen; Then place bandages soaked in wine and oil above it, and guard against abscess.
When it is broken, it is necessary that you rub the bone until charcoal begins to grow, then treat with things that cause vomiting, which make one vomit.
In a similar manner: Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of alum, and make a poultice. and administer it in these wounds to cause vomiting throughout.
of the stoppage of the ears
All that which drips into our ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beasts, or stones from the mine or similar things such as iron. For seed, as you say, peas, beans; or liquids that are clear and thin and similar things.
When it sticks in the ear stone or other kind of thing that does not fit well in the ear, do not let it grow in the ear, if you put the ear to the sunlight.
If you see the stone, if there is any drop of purple oil or mustard oil, then moisten extraction. and the patient spits out of condition, and the nose is stopped when the sneezing comes, and puts inside the ear pieces of cloth or wool. and the ear is raised up.
Many times it comes from this cure.
and if it does not come, then moisten extraction with thin prongs, of which this is the form:
If she jumps to the pins, it's good.
If not, then apply gentle traction at the subtle point of the pin.
And if she does not jump by that, then make a hole in the rain and blow her head into the hole or the opening of the ear very hard, and stop up the ear with soft wax so that the rain cannot enter. Then pull it out properly, for many times it comes out like we have said.
And if it does not come out in such a way, then take some glue and put it on the teeth, and put something sharp at a point to make it, and put a little cotton around. Then press the gland above the stone or whatever it is, and draw out.
And if she does not spring out of all these things that we have said, then quickly cut the ear as well as the abscess and pus, and spasm;
and the manner of the cut is that you first make a small incision in the painful part of the ear, and extract the pus according to its strength, then place the pus between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the grease or fat depends; and let the incision be as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then chip it according to your power, and suck it vigorously into your mouth.
and treat it until it is healed.
And if it is small and swells, administer extraction;
and if it cannot come out, administer the following subtle spatula form: and administer an incision of that small one.
But do not make it thin when you think the grain is wet due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces of it.
then extract it with thin forceps and the sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
In the case of earwax that falls into the ear, it is necessary to use nasal drops and clear the ear with a lot of old cotton. And let it lie across the very ear itself where the sharp is. If it jumps out because of the wind, that's good.
If not, take many needles according to the length of your thread and thin, and heat them a little in the fire; and insert the hairs one by one through the ear opening, and go up from the other foot, and prick with another needle on top of the one in the ear; and do not stop pricking with needle after needle until the sharp one breaks completely, and thus it will all break off;
and if you see, take the reed, and blow one of the needles into the ear, and the other head taken from the fire until the softest reed is burned;
then make another incision at other places until the sharp point is completely out, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small size, such as a mouse and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division.
but if it is of large size, where one can feel it, then prepare for the extraction of pins. and this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and if they do not improve, then look at the ear in the sunlight. If there are no openings, then use fine forceps to pry them apart; and if they do not open, then take the cannula of this shape:
And it should be tight below and wide above. And insert the finest needle into the ear according to the amount of pain, then it forms all over the canal; Do this often enough until all the pus comes out.
And if they do not obey to come out, then pack the canal with cotton as I have said in the stone;
and if they do not emerge as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have used in the opening of veins, and you will find them where treating distillations;
And if you drip your oils and your medicines into the ear of this instrument, as you see here: And if it is of silver or bronze, it should be made with small openings below and larger ones above to drip;
And to press during the distillation, use a well-made silver instrument for this, and if you see, take a razor and wrap it around the tip evenly with cotton; Then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the can, and the can should be in the ear;
Then push the oil or juice through the razor and around the cotton, and press your hand tightly until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear; and the patient feels the pain within, and sometimes the distilled water is not well heated in the fire as it is poured into the ear. and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
of the stoppage of the ears
No child is born without some kind of ear problem.
This also happens to adults due to ear wax buildup inside the ear, and this blockage never comes from within the ear if one cannot see it.
And never does the blockage come from within the ear, and one can see it well.
That which comes from the front, if one cannot see it, is a painful sensation in many positions, and in this one where one sees, you must put the ear of the bad eye to the sun. and look inside: if you see the opacification apparent, if the work has this entire space of from which this is the form:
And let it be both and grinding in front and behind all flat, so that it does not blind the ear;
if the opacification is of black or of the ear, if you have fine needles, and the coping lightly, until that char is completely crushed.
And if the plug is in the ear, take a thin, light razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it on the leather of the ear.
If you feel the pressure from which the pains are causing pain to hear, lightly pierce, and make sure you do not injure the nerves of the ear;
then put a tent according to the width of the puncture, and tie it in the Egyptian knot. Do not do anything until the wound is dry, or take a tent and tie it in a tight rose, and pour powder on top of broken glass.
and if you see the ear swelling, it is advisable to remove the tent and move another tent tied in a hard shell made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed. then the healer as long as they are healthy.
And if blood comes out, soak an sponge and wet it with cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the flow of blood which are either treating the distillations.
This is the book that comes in papers of the eyes when they are wet and are dry, if you must extend them with forceps and pins, and the cope of a span of their roots; then put it on the broken glass leg.
And if without peeling, then cauterize with the fine lens burner, and the cauterizer after the incision is good for use;
and often they are repaired, but nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return again.
of the gravel Frequently arrive in papers things that seem to be crumbled in their form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail", and it is a collection of large moisture above and below the paper. The work is such as:
The work is such as: If the hail moves from one side to another, and it is a light thing to know.
Then make the wound wide, then scrape each part lightly, then take them with pincers, and cover.
If you do not cover it without pricking a little the paper, it will not hurt the patient.
and if its tear is large, it gathers at a seam, and the treatment until it is healed.
and if it is small, do not apply force, for the swelling will restore it soon and cause pain.
And if the grain is falling down into the inner part of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and place the grain in some tweezers, and cover and press from one side and the other;
and if the paper is displaced by the incision, it does not matter.
and when the grain is covered, pour warm salted oil on the wound and treat the limb of what causes pain until the injuries are healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a grease that is smeared on strips of paper and placed above the eyes, and it has more effect on children than adults, and it causes great pain to their eyes, and they have diarrhea in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears flow to their eyes.
And because of this, they lie on their faces and sleep on them, and their papers are placed outside their eyelids, which become moist and swell with the exinach that opens in the oil. And when you press the joint to your touch and feel the extrusion among all.
And the manner of the work is such that the painful one puts his head in your hand;
and then take a piece of linen, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount that contains each part, then put it on him. and press from both sides, so that the contents are gathered in the circle;
then cut in the middle of the moisture with a sharp knife, a wide incision, and not larger than the wound made at the opening of the vein;
and cut the skin until you reach the contents; and in many positions comes the contents of the incision, in the shape of a white fat piece.
Extract the honeycombs from all one piece of cloth between your two hands, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out.
And be careful not to push into the folds, that you do not bring all the spanwise to the oil, that you do not harm it.
And if it does not open at the beginning of the fold, then slightly twist the fold until it opens.
Then extract it as we have said, then gently rub the cloth in hot and cold water, and put on the limb, and spread it out well.
And if there are such men who bruise the cloth and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then the healer as long as he is healthy.
And if the patient comes to the healer with an abscess that is not drained, then the healer should apply moistening poultices until he is healthy.
hairs of papers When hairs are artificially placed in papers other than their natural position, and are awakened, they harm the eyes, and bring about diseases such as tears and softening of the papers and cornea, until it is caused by the destruction of the eyes.
And there are four ways to treat it: or by cauterization with fire together, or by medicine called "ague" according to what is before or in the chapter of cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
It is necessary for you to place the head of the evil in your right hand, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand;
If she is converted, it is good; if not, then prick her with a needle all along the thread above; and let it be on the edge of the paper or where the hair grows from these hairs, and pull the thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor;
then cut in the part outside the paper, outside the hairs adjusted, all the length covering, from the great arm to the little one;
then pull the thread, and put outside the paper a small cotton and linen tent, then on top of the paper a figure of an envelope, like the belly of a mite, and all around it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you saw raise the paper which is divided into two.
And if you have a tile that requires a lot of paper, according to how the paper is softened;
then make all the space between the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large shoulder joint to the small; and let one of the cuts near the hairs in the larger part of the root, then lift the skin in one of the two corners of the wound, then scrape all;
then assemble the two lips to one seam of a needle with all the thread of fine silk, and suck the blood, and let the excess hairs above the two edges at any thing gluing, if you see it done.
And if not, then do not worry about it, leave the stitches and the threads for three days or four.
Then treat the wound on the side of the stitches with dry and constricting things, for the paper will stick to the suppuration of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitches are slowly (as they say) dissolving, and this is work without fear. And if there is another way:
And if there is another way: and you should shape the paper into a form that is as similar to the gauze of myrtle, as we have told you, into three layers according to the form that is here:
Then apply this remedy which is above in equal parts according to the form that is here:
And if you cannot hold the needles, and the thing is not even, take a needle or one with a thread, and place it in the shape. And put another thread below the large arm, and the second thread below the small one, and tie them evenly between your two hands.
Then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above where you have sewn, as we have said, then gather the two edges of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed.
And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with a poultice and other soothing ointments.
and never occurs that the hair of the paper is converted:
if you must use what we have said about incision;
but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is as follows: and you convert the paper and make incisions inside according to what I have said, then make two wounds by art, and two stitches as thin as the paper and the width of the space is; and tie them with the two threads where you hold the thread;
then assemble them subtly above what surmounts the paper of the oil, and strain the two wounds from the two parts formed; and let it remain thus for several days, and the skin that is stretched will die, rot, and putrefy, until it falls off by itself.
If it takes too long, then if the skin has some strength, then heal it until it is healthy.
And when the wound is covered, and if it is lifted up, the hairs will not grow back.
And this is the form of the two needles that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The needles are such that you hold a thin needle, and pull the silk thread soft and thin; Then gently gather the bones and pull them apart slightly, and let the long hairs grow a span long.
Then order in the hunt another thin silk thread quickly, and pull the main thread tightly.
Then place the misaligned joints on your healthy side.
Then place it in the sun so that the work is straight and even, then gently push the needle through the entire hunt at the base of the pricked hair, and pierce into the paper firmly until you remove it above the natural hair.
Then pull the hair up to the hunt, and push in the hunt that hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then strain your hand until the hairs grow out far enough to cover the entire fur with natural hair.
And if the fur is treated and the hairs do not grow out far enough, then treat the fur with the discharge above until it is completely dry and you can see through the oil.
Therefore, treat the fur and the thread, close the oil and leave it to dry for two or three days until the hair is in its natural place and grows again.
And if the hairs are small, accompany them with long hair from wild animals, and stretch them out with the one you leave until they are stretched and then tie them.
of the preparation of the oil When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the "porridge", comes in the eye, there are two methods:
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it occurs by the wound, or by the barber or the cauterization, and by similar things.
And the method of the work is that you cut out that stitching, and dry the lips from it, and put in tents of linen, and bind it until it is healed;
and you should only use things that dry and restrict in its care. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
but I work with things that are softening, such as fenugreek; and the herbs of high or high and seed of linen be cooked, and ointments of yellow sulfur melted in any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a tent, and the cure for this.
And the treasures of your cure are such that you must be careful that it does not soil itself according to the form it was before;
and these works that we have said are not other than in order to prevent this disease from returning according to the form it was before.
This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
The accidents come from wound and cutting and cauterization and similar things;
And the method of the work in this way is that you hold a needle, in which it has one thread doubled, and the thread in the needle, and you make it pierce from the right arm to the left, so that the thread comes out in two pieces from the needle;
then the needle is above all the thread, and the coping is at one span wide. And if the shape of the paper returns according to what it should be, it is good;
if not, take the razor and put it in the groove, and turn the paper, and make two cuts where it costs inside the paper;
and let the two cuts of the two angles of the incision that you have made be such that when they are assembled, the figure is as if it were the figure of a letter with no "Greek".
then remove that char, according to the amount that its cost is damaged from what it should be, from which the paper is made, then add the two parts that are missing, and the cuts of a thread of linen.
then apply the care of what we have said about the softening medicines and tents, until it is healed.
And if the illness comes from a cut or a stitch or a cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a plain cut outside of the hairs of the papers, and according to what is above. Then deviate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said.
Then deviate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said. And one should perform the operation according to the form of the disease, as it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters compare all possible methods to how they can make the figure return to its natural shape.
And the wounds themselves, according to what is needed for operation and tools in many different positions.
When this sewing is done by hand in a certain way that the paper above is smeared with the white of oil, and cannot move or make its natural operations, then it is necessary to bring the tip of a razor outside the paper, and lift it up.
and it is set with pins, until you copy what is airt to the subtle space, which is not too sharp nor too sharp, so that the pain cannot suffer that the subtle space is too sharp and does not burn the oil.
and let your incision, of which you scrape that assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form;
and it is healed all that assembly, and never in the sharp salty oil, and lift it from the sharp sweet and with colloid;
then put between the paper and the oil a linen tent, and put on the oil wool fleece in abundance of urine; and after the third day, use a poultice and dirty things until he is healed.
There are two ways to treat the joint: The first is nerve-related and resembles a hard, dry wound, and the other is not nerve-related but resembles a frozen, white moisture, so that when touched with iron and heated with pincers, it cannot be removed.
Both of them begin near the large bone, and gradually grow larger and larger until they cover the entire eye and all the light and the movement of the oil.
And the manner of incision is such that the hairs put their heads in your hand, then you work the eyes. and lightly hold the paper to your hand, then bend the angle with small tweezers, and stretch it upwards. then take a needle, and put the hair of a horse, or of a sheep, or of a cow, and thread it tightly. and double the point of the needle a little and push it into the angle, and push the needle through the whole, and tie the angle with a thread and stretch it upwards, and scrape all the hair along the side of the needle which leads to the pearl and silk to the hair just above, then cut the remaining in the root of the arm at every subtle thickness and with small forces, and leave the natural skin or the arm, so that by the incision no tears usually come out;
And never has the bone stayed at the joint alone, and over time, as we have said. Then the skin is all the soft tissue that gives this shape:
And be careful that the soft tissue does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the blood is not pierced.
And after the incision, pour in a little bit of bruised silk oil, and make a poultice of charcoal, and leave it just above the other joint. Then the treatment that is necessary until he is healed.
And if the bone is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the joints cannot enter, often this resemblance of a bone of medicines is cured.
and they grow like I have described in the previous section, and if you see it covered, then work on the bad part, and take a sharp knife lightly according to this form: and you scrape the edge slightly, and if you see that it does not soften and the skin is close, then blow into the oil made of pitch, red wax, and silk thread, and stop the oil on the other side;
If nothing is contrary in the oil, as with an abscess, then milk it, and cure the abscess thoroughly until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is completely healed.
then start the other work according to this same work, until it is completely hardened.
and if the appearance of the flesh of the arm is in the oil by great harm, then skim it off and take a part and not all at once, so that no tears come to it;
Then pour the red oil of colloquy, which is made of litargire.
Some men are born with no red hair at all, and cover the pearl and hold it above the papers and turn it back, and it seems like a balduster rose.
And the work is such that the hairs put their head in your hand, then they work the hairs, and hold all that hair with suitable bends for this, and support it with strength.
Then cut the first hair, and go all cutting to the razor just at the end, and guard that you do not blister the oil in the work.
and let the incision of the spaniel that we have mentioned in the incision of the nail and with small forces of why we remove the skin, as it forms after this chapter demonstrates.
and when the incision is completed and all the char is removed, use silk oil or distilled red vinegar and similar corrosive medicines, and put it on top of the oil with a cotton pad with a cloth soaked in urine, so that it is certain to prevent an abscess from forming.
and if nothing remains and the swelling does not subside, and you doubt an abscess is forming, leave the oil and treat the abscess with things that calm it down.
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make charms cast in oil by this similarity.
But it is necessary that you strengthen the cure of each weak vein by its natural way; and of the accidental way, in ironwork.
and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
Red veins that are covered over the eye, and take away from the view their work and weaken the eye always.
Therefore, the first thing you should look for in that oil is whether it is hot or cold, and there is no other disease besides the first one. then the joint should be moved in this way:
instruct the patient to put his head in your safe place, then gently move the joints all around according to your wisdom, and make the thin bones double according to this form:
And let there be two times per degree in the body according to this form:
then move those thin bones gently, and squeeze the blood out hour after hour until you can remove them from the joint:
and be careful not to pierce the joint with sharp points of spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not cause harm to those thin bones:
And when you have done this, if you have green and red oil of wormwood to corrupt the humor that remains in the belly.
And if you cannot collect all the bile in that hour, then make an ointment with the oil of calming things to ease the pain of the eyes, and let it stay on for some time until the pain is eased and the risk of abscess is assured, then resume according to this method until they are healed;
And that is the form of forces:
The mirror is called "arissati" fistula:
When you cure it with fire and medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then make an incision over the abscess where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is revealed.
And when the bone is discovered, and you see the decay and the blackness, if the tool of this is in the form;
and it is called "rough chisel", and it is made of iron from the sharp end to the chisel, and it is pointed as a lime if it is in the present form:
And place it on the end of the bone that is decayed, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that decay is removed;
and do not do it again, then restore the bone with drying remedies.
if the bone is sound, and flesh has grown, and the body of the wound is sound, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not return and is not postponed, and no bad accident happens, then it is healed.
If not, there is no other method than to bring the fistula to the opening of the throat according to this form: and you should dislocate the bone the second time with iron and with medicines, and when it is discovered, take the forehead according to this form, and the patient's head of iron at three angles, and the fast should be attenuated just above as you see here:
then put it above the bone of the arm, and keep your hand away from the oil at that point, then turn the whole forehead until it pierces the bone and the patient feels the pain because if he holds his hand over his neck;
and if the bone of medicines is dry as I have indicated, and when the child is born and the bones harden, then the matter goes to the knee; it is a lighter thing for the joint.
when the eyes are widely open and do not close due to disturbance or relaxation, then it is necessary to hold the joint.
then the healthy one, then put suction cups or hatches to draw blood, then put on oil made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocollis, and then strain the oil, and apply the plaster with bandages and cloths.
and the manner of the cloths is such that you grasp cloths that are sufficiently soft, and double each one into four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the wound requires.
then apply pressure from above with a hard bandage, and restart the suctions to draw out without causing injury.
then remove the suctions and leave the oil-soaked bandage on day and night, and if the wound breaks down, it is necessary that you reapply it firmly.
then remove the bandage after day and night, and if the oil reappears, it is good.
if not; and the plasters and bandages and the linen and the leeches until they are healed.
the tearing of a vein When disruptions come in the woven cloth, then it is opened, and comes from far away, like the grain of resin, and is easily seen.
Therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you put a needle into the root of the part desoz jusc’a celi desus, then put another needle where the arm has the double thread of the part. and let it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position;
then take the limb and fold a double thickness of cloth around it, and tie it tightly, then remove the needle and place some soft oil on the wound.
and leave it there until the thread heals with the wound, then care for the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed.
and never bind the wound with a piece of cloth from each part of a circle, until it is healed.
And if they appear to be too large, then pierce the thin sponge that comes with the oil, and wipe away the moisture and dry the wound, and place it immediately.
then extracted until it is sound.
This disease, which is called "alcunnati", is nothing more than boil that is gathered in the oil, resembling an acute downward spike, and this is not an acute spike.
And the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit with the bad side elevated and straight, then take the chief between your hands from the two sides, and move it until you see the boil come out above to your eyes; then it should be carefully removed, and not let down and dismantled the light, and see the bad things as they should be.
and if they do not set it back in place, it is very painful, and if they do not treat it as we have said,
if you place the painful part between your hands, then take a fine spatula and make it pass under the transparent skin and the eyelid, until the bone is dislocated.
and when it is out, pour hot honey mixed with melted honey or honey and fenugreek that has been boiled and melted into the eye, then treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
of the hot oils We have seen similar cases in the division, and what is needed to pierce it. if in work according to health.
It is necessary that you place the misaligned bone between your crossed hands, away from the light for the sun, and with the sound oil firmly stretched.
Then place the paper of the oil on your left hand if the bones are on the left, or on your right hand if the bones are on the right.
Then take in your right hand if the bones are on the left, or in your left hand if the bones are on the right, the instrument called "almagda".
Then place the point of the instrument above the crown by the thickness of a grain in the thinnest part of the oil on the part of the elbow, then strike the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and stretch your hand as long as it pierces through the oil, and feel that almagda is about to reach the empty thing.
The width of the main vein should be measured from the forehead to the end of the nose. And it is the crown of the oil.
If you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the canvas, then put the instrument above it where the sharp is, and press out one after another.
If he is now sharp-sighted, he will see the hairs before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting a little, and if the sharp rises again, put the forceps with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not rise, gently turn around your hand back and forth.
and then place a small needle with a gem, and leave it in the eye until the oil is inside. Then put by default the eye is cleaned with a soft cloth soaked in rose oil and plenty of water, and bind it with clean oil.
We, and those who are of our household, put on top of the wound with plenty of water.
And if it cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are men who have very hard eyes, then you must use the tool called "alberit", which has this shape:
And then pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not move it too much, but make the eye subtle, then push almage, as we have said;
and at the completion of the work, compare it to the pain and sleep that occurs, in which it lies on its back in the dark eye;
and let it be moved in all movements, and take light foods, and do not move its head to the right or left, and let it be tied according to its position just as it is;
then reset it in the same dark house, and prove its sight, and let it see some things, and then put the joint back just before sunset.
but it is only necessary to do this at the beginning of the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary to gradually increase the height because of the sharp pain.
if abscesses come, then reset the joint before sunset, and give it the food that alleviates the abscess.
and when it is calm, then reset the sight and put it on its face in an orange peel to cover any light, and let it stay in that dark house.
Then slowly go home little by little, and convert yourself to your case;
and remove that no disciples should interfere in this case. And some came to us who was of the Iraq, who told us that in some countries they make all people circumcised, because of the acute pain, but never have I seen anyone in our land, nor have I read anywhere in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of circumcision, because those who do not know them see them;
and are of pure rain properly: And they have the same thinness in their heads and the backs in three angles.
Never born or not issued charred varieties, because there are some that seem like scorpions with many legs;
and if there are such and the char is enhanced with a dark color, and if the char has a good color. In such cases of these chars that are good, and not enhanced, it is appropriate to make the pain between your hands against the sun;
In such cases of these chars that are good, and not enhanced, it is appropriate to make the pain between your hands against the sun; and work its nostrils, and pour the oil onto those chars, and the tracks there; then hold it in the delicate space under the sharp edge of a part, until you know that that char is completely hardened.
And if there remains any thing that cannot be covered, open it with all the instruments subtly and lightly, so that nothing remains. and if without causing harm, an abscess forms, treat it as it should be.
and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize them until the wound is clean and all the pus is removed, then pour or inject hot and sour wine. If the wound does not open, and moisture comes to the brain, treat it as if it is healthy.
and if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, treat it as if there is bone underneath, because the instruments do not come to cut.
then you should go and get a piece of thin linen cloth, and be careful not to tear it with your hands, and have between each thread some space or less. and put the hairs of the one you are treating into the linen cloth at the mouth, and pull it out until it comes through the throat.
and often do this with children in schools, and it is an easy thing for someone who wants to do it.
then hold the head that comes out through the throat in one hand, and the other head that comes out through the mouth in the other hand, and squeeze them alternately as we do with threads.
Do this until you have cleaned out that wound so that the new flesh is not corrupted by that char, then remove the thread, suck the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian oil, and put it back in its place as before.
Do this for three days or more, until the wound is cleansed of all that remains of the char.
Then apply a piece of raw flesh for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for other remedies, use them.
And this is the form of the instrument used to purge the shoulder, with which one distills oils and remedies onto it.
And whether it is of silver or tin, resembling an open lamp, like a dog, and conduct it thus;
and if you see, then make a closed dog, and let the instruments be played to remove the head;
and hold it at the head for when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the head to the nose
Many times a disease is born at the head of the nose that is called "tulli", and it grows and becomes large, until it is seen to be a thing to look at;
and therefore it is necessary that you cut the nose at the beginning, and then open the whole thing, then put the fire cautery or the burning medicine on it;
and if they are slow to cover it until it is large, take note if it is hard, of poor color, and without sense.
if they do not touch it with iron for it is an infected abscess, for when it is covered, great harm comes to the wound;
and if the abscess is softly touched, not of poor color, and you see that it can be entirely covered, then wash the wound and cover it with things that are secure and restricting.
there are many solutions that come in one of these cartilaginous parts, which is only slightly beneficial to some people.
Therefore, if there is any, then look to see if the wound is fresh at all its blood; and then apply the two lips to a seam, then treat it until it is healed.
and if the lips are already decayed on one side and the other, then you must scrape all the parts of them until they heal, then gather the two lips to a seam, strain it, and powder with dragon's blood powder and frankincense. and place the powders on a piece of strong or other adhesive plaster, and leave it until it heals through it, then treat the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the stitching is such that you gather the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses on the lips
In some people there are abscesses within the lips, similar to small or large grains;
therefore it is necessary to turn the lips, and cut open each one, and take out the pus with forceps and clean every part.
then apply the wound with a solution of vinegar after the incision, until it is no longer moist.
Then apply a dry cloth to the wound, and cure the limb of dry things until it is healed.
Many times, a tooth abscess arises above the gums, which the ancients called "albulus".
If it is necessary, you must support it with forceps at its root, and let the pus or blood flow out.
Then apply a broken piece of glass or other astringent and desiccating powders to the limb.
And if that abscess returns after incision, and often does, then apply forceps again and cauterize it. if it does not return after the cautery;
Sometimes they are gathered at the root of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scrapes that are ugly and sharp; and sometimes they are the black and yellow and green teeth, until the corruption comes to the gum, and are the stinking teeth;
if it is necessary that you remove the pain between your hands, and its roots are in your holy place, and cut the teeth or scrapes that are apparent, until nothing remains; And thus make of the black and green, and yellow and other stains, until they are cleaned.
And if one has removed what is at the first layer, it is good. If not, start again from the second day and the third, until you have removed everything.
And soak the teeth with various instruments to remove, according to what the work demonstrates, because the razor that one uses to remove the teeth has different forms than the one used between the teeth. And these forms and others be with you prepared.
It is necessary when you are treating a tooth for pain that you delay pulling it as long as possible, because one should not do this to anyone. because it is a very high substance that we do not have an excuse for removing.
Therefore, when the tooth is forced to be drawn, you should be certain of the tooth's root. Often the pain of the misaligned joint is relieved, and one should ensure that it is a holy tooth, and have the good tooth pulled. and in any case do not remove the pain by this means, until the bad ones are removed, for we have already done this to these saints.
And when you are certain of the tooth that is decaying, it is necessary that you burn around the tooth on all sides. with great heat to protect the gum from all parts;
then move the joint gently with your fingers or thin needles at the first point and point, until it is well dislocated, then firmly fix the needles. and let the joint with great pain between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After straightening the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump back, take one of these tools and push it gently into each part lightly, and shake it as you did first.
And if the joint is dense and painful, then it is necessary to fill it with cloths where the punctures are. and if the thin needles are firmly held, so that they do not break when being pulled out.
And it is necessary to carefully wipe around the gum to cleanse the tooth.
And be careful not to break it, and that a part remains, and again give the pain by the greater evil of the root more severe pain from the first.
And be warned that you do not act in such a manner as the ignorant saint does, who through their haste and boldness break everything at once, and never bring back what we have told.
but bring forth always by the skilled hand of healing for the roots that they delay, or for the cart that they break, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is drawn, wash the mouth with wine or wheat bran and salt.
and if blood comes out and often does, use the mouth with broken glass wine.
If it does not heal, then cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, with which one moves the first tooth, should be long points and large pliers, so they do not double over when you pull the tooth.
These are the forms: And they should be thick enough so they do not bend when you pull, and they should be made of good iron, and they should have sharp teeth to hold.
from the root of the tooth When the root remains in the tooth, it is necessary to place cotton moistened with oil or honey on the gum until the gum is softened, then pull out the hooks called "algefri," of which the patient seems like a beak;
and they should be made inside as well as a lime and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these needles, it is necessary that you scrape around the root entirely, and there you put the instrument called "althali", which is a spoon, of which this is the shape:
And if it is also large, so that it does not break immediately, and if its root jumps upwards, that is good.
If not, with all the instruments, because of which the forms come after:
And if one helps with this instrument that has two prongs, of which this is the shape: and other forceps that are before in the range of the teeth, and with this instrument that seems like large needles, of which this is the shape:
And if these instruments also do not break it, and they are very dense. And so with other instruments, which are not counted as such:
And the wise masters find their own instrument, according to what their observations and the disease show, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach an instrument for the variety of them and if it does not break the cartilage or other bones, or if it hurts, if he looks for instruments that are necessary, as I have said, and helps with gestures, because of which these forms come after:
And let the bones be large and well-holding to hold the bone, that it not slip, but that it can be held and removed;
and then restore the limb to its proper position, and if it has decay in the bone, and it is small, then the surgeon uses this tool:
When the tooth appears not in its natural position, and its shape is ugly, and especially in young women, then it is necessary to remove the tooth after the decay, and it is not in the right place, and no one can be a dentist or liar:
therefore the rake; and if it is stuck with the tooth, take this tool that has such a shape, and it is similar to a small beak, and let it be made of iron sharp at the end:
And the copper is slowly and slowly placed in the mouth for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the other teeth, and if it appears that one can be removed, then the copper is removed with a small force as follows:
and it is also like the tip of the needle with which we make arrows;
and in the tip of the tooth, lightly and gradually, so that it does not move until it pierces;
then the flat at the end has no razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, then you must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt the speech.
When the tooth is broken or by percussion or falling, and the pain cannot be relieved by pressing on the gums to prevent it from decaying, and you treat them with restrictive medicines, and this does not work;
if they need to be restricted with a gold thread, because the silver thread becomes green and rots, but the gold never does;
and let the thread be of a suitable thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth;
and if you see that the teeth are coming together, then take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the broken ones between the healthy teeth on the other side, as long as you can see clearly into the healthy tooth on the other side; then reapply the bandage to the part where you initially applied it, and gently and carefully stretch your hand until it does not move.
and your bandage should be tied at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the threads with scissors, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy tooth and the tongue so that it does not bleed on the tongue.
Then leave it so tight as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the thread breaks, then tie it with another thread.
If it stays and serves in this way for the rest of its life, and it is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth, and two molars, as you see.
And when the tooth is knocked out, if it is put back into its place, little by little, as we have said;
and does not interfere with it, which is wise and painful, and once made, the shape of a goat's bone tooth is formed, and it is put back into its place where the defect is, and it is held as we have said, and it is left in place for a long time.
No such thing exists that comes out of the tongue or naturally, which is born thus; or by accident of a wound;
and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and put their head in your own, and relieve the tongue;
Then copiously lubricate the affected nerve with oil, as long as the tongue is displaced from its position, and if there is hardness or no movement, and it is due to a wound, then apply the ointment and lubricate it generously.
And be careful not to cut too deeply, as there is an artery nearby.
And when you have done so, lift the limb with a cloth of red or cool linen, then place a tent over the tongue.
And apply ointment to the wound every night, so that the limb cannot become infected.
And if blood comes out, put some vinegar on the wound. And if the blood does not stop, then cauterize with a slow-burning iron, which is good for the body. Then apply other treatments until it is healed.
And if you see that the wound is of a dark or black color and hard, and if it does not hurt, do not touch it, for it is an ulcer.
And if it is inclined to bleed and there is moisture, then pour the wound with a thin, sharp instrument, and deliver it from both sides. and if it does not remain in place, put on vinegar-soaked cloth until it is cleaned, then return to your work until you remove all the force.
then lift the limb from its socket and shake it, and treat other wounds until it is healed.
of throat abscesses Never come from within the throat, which are called "godath", and they are properly called the second mandibles, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then be careful:
if they are abscesses difficult to feel and of small size and dark color, do not touch them with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with a little iron, as for the escape of blood. but let it remain until it is ripe, and then you will break it, or it will break by itself.
And if it is of white color and the root is thin, have prepared the instrument to cover, but first see if the abscesses are closed and at rest.
Then place the pain in front of the sun, and its head is in your hand, and the work the mouth and the prick the sergeant between his hands, and press the tongue out of all the instrument, from which is the shape.
and it should be of silver or fine brass like some knives:
and you can press the tongue with this tool, and you see the abscess, then take the needle and poke it into the amber, and draw it up as high as you can;
and take nothing from the cloth with it, then wrap it around the tool, of which this is the shape, which resembles a forceps; and the teeth are sharp, and one side is pointed, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or brass;
And if you do not have this tool present, use a pair of tweezers, which is the form: And it should be chiseled on one side, and on the other part, not;
And when you have cut the one of the arrowheads, then cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the sharp pain with hot, sharp, and cool water, and if there is blood flowing, gargle the sharp pain with hot water, or use pounded green pomegranate skins, or similar things, until the wound is clean. Then cure it until it is healed.
And never do any other abscesses come out in the throat except the two arrowheads, so cut them then like the two arrowheads must be.
I treated a woman with an abscess that was lodged within her throat, specifically a small abscess.
And she had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the condition that was choking her, and could neither eat nor drink, and died if she continued in such a way for a day or two.
And the abscess was so large that it had already been drained twice through both nostrils.
I therefore acted quickly, and pushed it in one incision, then cut out the rest, and cut out a large portion of blood.
Then I carefully pushed it through the other incision made in the throat, and the work of the mouth and pressed her tongue.
After I applied the bandage to these wounds, and drank a small amount of blood, and thus the woman's throat was dislocated, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting into that wound with a long knife;
and the wounds reclosed and filled the skin that I had emptied, until it became very large;
therefore I pressed it and cauterized it inside her throat: and it did not grow larger;
and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened after that.
of the eye
When returning to the eye, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular".
And if it is not very large and round, it is called "uve".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help much, and you see that the patient's pain is relieved, and it is thin, then you must remove it.
And the one that is round and not very long; And it is bloody or of a dark color or black, then you must avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger in pricking it.
Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its breadth and length, you should make the hairs sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned before. Then cut the cord in the wound, and pull it out, and cover it with one or two of the instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two mandrakes.
And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural end;
because if you cover more, it causes pain to the voice and speech.
And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the second mandible, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the pains are too great for the patient to bear, then it is necessary to use a cauterizing instrument to relieve the pain.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp and hot. And if the hairs put their head in your healthy hand, and then press the tongue against the instrument that we have said or in the chapter of cautery, and knead with a sharp, live chisel, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and in using the movement of this instrument, because of which this is its shape:
And it has a head or hair where one puts the medicine, like the movement of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine over the tongue;
and the hairs should lie flat on his chest, so that the saliva and muscle tissue from his mouth can flow into the medicine within, so it does not drip down his throat and into his lungs.
then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it against the eye for a quarter of an hour, until you see the needle and the medication's effects are eased.
and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wipe the cotton in the medicine, and blow the instrument through the entire length of the cotton into the eye until the cotton becomes red.
And do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry and scab after four or five days.
And if you are skilled in restarting the cautery of the medicine, then restart it, and after the cautery, apply a poultice of butter around the eye, and clean what is around the medicine;
and be sure to use cold sharp ones, and treat with gargles until they are healed.
This cure is more saving of the incision, than only the cautery;
if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and gather all or some of them in one pot, and put vinegar in it, and make it boil;
and let the pots be well glued with strong earth, and within the pot has an instrument shaped like this: And it should be of silver or tin, and one of the spikes should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the wound through the gum, until the wound is dead.
After the remedy is repeated often, until the wound dries, and make sure you do not apply this at the beginning of the appearance of the abscess, for many things happen. and do not apply it until the decline of the abscess.
If this instrument is not present, take a knife and place it inside the head, so that the tongue does not protrude too much. because the knife does not cause excessive steam to burden the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with safety.
Often it is asserted at the throat of bones or spines of fish, or nothing.
Therefore, you must remove what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun at all times with the instrument, so that you can see the thing.
And what you cannot see and is pushed back into the throat, it is necessary that you make him vomit the thing as soon as the meat is cooked in the stomach. If by chance, the other thing is also dislodged by vomiting.
or the hairs swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a leaf of lettuce, or some dry bread crumbs. and ties it to the sponge with thread, and then swallows it again. and when it comes back up, it will harden, and then be pulled out.
and if it does not come out as we have said, take the instrument of a spoon in this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high. and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that it does not come out, nor push the bone inside;
and move your hand so the hairs do not push the instrument, for it is better that the hair is out or the thing is clear; if the pushing goes down, or it pulls to all the instrument evenly, as long as it is even.
of the throat's lining
No one has been healed by the saliva, as I said in the division, by the care of medicines; and when it does not help much, then look at the throat of the hairs in the sun, then you press the tongue to the instrument that I told you.
And if you see the shoe, if it is made with all small nails, or with thin tongs that are worth a penny.
And if it is not worth a penny, take a hair rope, and beat the evil one in the throat with it, then beat or move the iron as often as you can. And if the evil ones are all tired during the day.
then take full I of sharp cold, and open the mouth, and the spit out in the direction to swallow, and move it with your hand often. and if soon as he feels the sharpness, he spits.
and if it does not spit as we have said, then fumigate the bad smell of putrefaction, with the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye;
do this many times, because it will disappear without delay.
And the way of the fumigation is that you hold the pot where he has charcoal visible, and it is covered with a cloth perforated in the middle, and in that punctured place is the object;
then you should give your fumigation, and the painful one puts the head of the snake in its mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes just to the nose.
and the nose will now drip, and if it does not drip, then repeat the fumigation many times;
and suffer the painful one thirst, and give it salty and bitter things to drink, and do not let it drink any sour thing.
and then it has the task to be cured by this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the nose, so it is, when one can see it, similar to curved needles for threading through the throat; And it resembles the beak of a bird, and it has a roughness of lime, so that whatever it takes in, it cannot wear out.
There are many types of abscesses, according to what memory brings from one and the other in this book, and they differ in puncture and cut.
And it is in two ways that one is in its own likeness, and because it holds moisture.
And the second manner is for those who are at the neck.
For the abscesses of the head are different from those at the base, and the abscesses of the neck are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if to abscesses one should not puncture, until the hole is completed according to its fulfillment.
And if they have such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are beyond joints.
For when abscesses come beyond joints, and it is left until it is surrounded by, perhaps because the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which it is the cause of contraction in that limb.
And if the abscess is beyond the main member, and if you delay the perforation until it dies, it will harm the main member.
And if it is beyond the foundation, then pierce it when it is dead.
And it is not necessary to pierce abscesses that are ripe before digestion is completed, except for those beyond the foundation, which should not be opened until it is ready, and then they will become long and there will be a fistula. and cannot heal in a long time.
and it is best to lance the pus from the abscess according to its completion, and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and swelling, and the decrease in debility and alleviation of the main symptom of the abscess, and the others;
and it is best to make an incision lower down on the limb of the abscess where the pus is most dependent and open;
and the incision should be made along the long axis of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all these places equally, where there is no blood flow. In such cases, according to the affected member.
And when an abscess is in the throat, it is better to leave the incision until it is confirmed that digestion has been completed, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before the sky, so it would flow along with the blood of it, and is plainly full of much dirt; and perhaps harden the lips and the deeply pierced ones of him.
And if any abscess that is pierced according to the wide vein, as the member has need of it.
And it is necessary that you heal them in small abscesses, small pustules; and in large abscesses, large pustules, and many wounds according to the resemblance of the greatness of the abscess;
and if at such abscesses or it is necessary to cover the wound, and cover; when it has become just as the cloths, and is softened, then it is necessary to do as one does with boils:
And if there are such as are cut into three angles, and if there are such as are coped with as the sole of a shoe, as abscesses;
and if there are such as have a round cut, and other cuts and similar coverings.
Those who do not have a head, as with a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce clearly through.
And it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has a great deal of pus, and you pierce, not to draw out all the pus in that hour, but to draw out a part. then apply a poultice to the abscess on the other side, then take away anything directly. do this many times with great pressure, until the wound is completely closed.
even if the wounds are of weak virtue, or if a woman is carrying, or small children, or old decrepit people. For the patient should never be raised too high with the release of the bow, for by chance the patient may die from the pain, and you would not be blamed.
therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, then suck the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a gaping wound, then soothe the pain with linen or old cotton. and if they are large abscesses, and there is much pus, it is necessary that you make incisions in each one so that they face each other;
and if you have pierced into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have pulled it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or shredded linen against moisture, and tie it just above the wound;
then the bone, and the healing ointment until it is healed.
And if blood flows from your work, apply sharp cold and cooling ointment, and wipe the wound, and place it on the affected area repeatedly.
and if the bleeding persists, and is treated with government and care, and the powders that I have said in hand are in this book, and if it is where it is tense, and if the abscesses are very painful, it is necessary that you put on tents and moistened cloths with vinegar and oil;
If the joint is already in this state, and the limb is charred, then it is necessary to apply moistened cloths with vinegar and oil, or wine and oiled, just as we have said.
Then drain the abscess and dress it, and treat it as necessary until it is healed.
And it is necessary to know generally about the treatment of abscesses:
as I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and read this chapter.
When small abscesses come from the body, and there are ways that are in cloths, such as the lancing of a boil, and very many similar things.
There are some that are fat and such as have moisture like chickens;
And for those who are hard and bony to cutting, and there is no doubt if the artery is not cut against.
And the work of the belly is such that you try all instruments called "intromissions", from which the form comes after, a thing it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then they make it through above the long one.
And when the moisture is drained, scrape off the hair that contains that moisture, for it returns when one leaves anything.
Then soak cotton in Egyptian oil, if present. If not, with vinegar and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it just before the next day. And this will continue until it is removed.
And then begin the cotton again, as before, the second day, and the third, until you are sure it will not remain for a long time.
Then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess remains large, then apply the following remedy: and pour water and skin from all parts, and put all your remedy to draw out the pus.
And if the arrow makes it worse, then do as I said earlier.
And also do this with an abscess if it is pierced, and cut and treat as I have told you.
And when cutting above an abscess, if it is less painful, for they are of little blood. And if any of these abscesses or wounds do not have pus, and are from the same type of abscess or wound that I copied or treated from an old woman;
and found the abscess as hard, rough, and white, and could not break it. and if one had done so, they would have made just as bad a wound as from a stone.
In other abscesses coming or near, but those that come at the top of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be made as low down as possible, to let out the pus;
and treat them accordingly.
often have abscess on the neck, and discharge pus, and inflammation, and sometimes appear elsewhere in the body, and are very painful, and are inflamed together.
And each bubo is properly within its own side, as with the neck and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these scrofula are many.
and the similarities of these scrofula are many. There are some that contain moisture, and some that are harmful and do not wish to follow health.
in that one which you see in good disposition at the touchstone, and is similar to the color of the body, and moves from each part and is not connected to the veins or artery or conduit, and is not deeply penetrating.
if it is necessary that you scrape it from above, and scrape the skin of each part, and place the two lips of the wound together as soon as possible, if you have skill, as we have said in abscesses of the head.
and gradually and slowly, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve or vein, and is not connected to the spongy tissue or cutting, which the hand does not escape, and does not see too soon, before you cover what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to stop the bleeding, put vinegar or some powders that stop blood into the wound, and press the wound. and let it stay until the abscess is calmed down, and soften the wound, and begin to heal.
And when the wound is clean, return to your work, until you complete it;
then consider whether there are any small pustules left, and cut and drain them.
And if there is much blood in the root of the pustule, then it is not recommended to cut that pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop through the wound, without causing harm;
then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian oil, then apply the cure.
And if you cut out the entire pustule, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and hold them in place, as there is no remaining superfluity due to the size of the pustule. it is necessary that you cover the root of it with a covering, and draw out the core, and hold it as we have said.
it is necessary that you cover the root of it with a covering, and draw out the core, and hold it as we have said. Those abscesses that are superfluous, pierce where it opens and dies.
and pierce it in this way as the one previously mentioned, depending on it, then immerse tents with oil and similar things, so that what remains does not corrupt from the corruption. and when the wound is well bandaged, the oil cure is added with charcoal until it is healed.
The ancients said and spoke of the necklace of the throat. but I have never seen such a thing in our land, and it is their written word.
For those who are choking, the neck's furrow called "epiglottis" must be avoided; and it cannot be helped by this, because all the veins and the prime evil are in those who have abscesses in the mouth, or in the throat or in the hands.
When the disease is in the throat pore, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we must cut it outside three circles or four a small cut across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut of the throat, not in the cartilage;
And those people are suitable for the section of the epiglottis because there is no cartilage, and the valves are long and thin.
And if the master is not experienced, it is necessary to extend the skin of the neck all around, then cut the throat until it reaches the chin. And avoid the veins of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the throat, as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the section of the windpipe at the chin that jumps out through the limb that is broken, and by the lack of voice.
and leave the wound open for a day.
And when the hour has passed for which there is doubt of strangulation, gather the two lips of the wound together, and suture all the way through without the cartilage;
then administer medicines that cause blisters until they are healthy.
Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely stiffened, and the limbs are judged to be dead, and the defect has left the body. Therefore one must remove the epiglottis because the hairs cannot hold it, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death;
and because the ancients ordered to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four, and then they commanded to sew the wound and heal, as long as it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young lady came to the sword, and stabbed herself in her neck, and cut off part of the veins of the neck.
and I was called to heal her, and found her as if dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the arrow that had come out of it, and although she had not bled from the vein or the wound, blood flowed from the wound.
I hurried, and sewed the wound, and healed it so that she was well;
and the young lady did not suffer any other harm than that she could only speak softly, and returned to her usual condition.
because I know that in the sewing of the epiglottis there is no fear.
This is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess in the color of a grape, and it is very common in women.
It occurs in two ways: natural, and accidental.
or natural, which has no cause.
And the accidental one occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to a boil, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery. And there is fear, and it does not require to be opened except in the one that is small, and the proof and search are made throughout the entire incision. If you find it as I have not grasped it, and it cannot be found in any vein, if the copper, as we copper the bones, and bring it to all its covering, if there is none. And search well soon, and treat as it should be, until it is healed perfectly.
Many methods of us are, of which I will say all the similarities;
And now it is fitting that I tell all the difference that is between us and the other.
I say that the other is cold and fever-causing, until the bile is passed, and is accomplished by the purgation; then rest the fever and the heat.
Without the nout, there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains the syfac, which is its own sacs and is according to the color of the blood, and begins like a rash, and becomes large.
and are according to two appearances, either dry or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the section.
When you come to the care of a new patient, it is necessary to first examine and try the instrument called "entromissoire", according to its form as found in the chapter that follows.
And the manner of the inquisition of the abscesses of us is that you grasp or more moist skin than you pierce in the abscess, and turn your fingers gently and gently, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then it is according to the size of the abscess;
Then extract the dislocated bone, and take care not to break it.
If the wound is bleeding excessively, apply a poultice of the same color as the wound, as I have described for other abscesses.
And if after extracting the dislocated bone, moisture does not come out, squeeze it to remove the grease, then make a cross incision, and take out the pus with forceps, and lightly scrape off all parts and wash the wound with clean cloth that you take away with the blood.
And if you cannot remove it cleanly, remove it in pieces until nothing remains.
If there is nothing left, it returns to us many times;
And if it takes a little while, and does not bother you, use some corrosive powders on the wound, and close the wound, and apply things to relieve abscesses, and treat other cures until it is healed.
And if it is large, cut out the two lips of the wound, and treat what causes the infection with charcoal.
And if it is bleeding and you have no other option, use the juice of broken glass, and leave it on for two or three days until the wound heals, and rest the bleeding of the blood. then return to the copper cup that was left out.
See the forms of the instruments inserted, and there are three ways: large and medium and small.
and there are three quarters that are called "awl", and one that is called "barrel", and there are three ways: large, medium, and small, to puncture the abscesses of fistulas.
They are also like the needles that one buys for sewing, and are made of brass, or iron, or silver, and cost as much as those that are yellow, and are more experienced in puncturing the sinuses of fistulas.
and there are three ways: great, medium, and small, according to the amount of the width of the wounds.
The shapes of needles are mostly similar, as you can see here:
and there are needles that have two barbs in three ways as well.
and there are needles that have three barbs, and they are also in three ways.
and there are needles that have two barbs, and needles of one barb only, and they are also in three ways.
all of these are necessary in their own way.
The heads of these are sharp, and of such that do not cut more than a part, from which we skin the muscles, because we do not want to cut the vein or the nerve.
And of these intermediaries are the almonds placed in the palms, so that the pain does not persist at the opening of the abscesses.
And there are three ways: Great, small, and medium, as you see.
And we do not use more than in the joints, such as knees, and arms, and breasts, and shoulders, and similar joints.
and never make another instrument small, resembling scarabs of pustules, according to this form, with which one pricks blood: and it is never put back in place which should have healing contact with the veins, and arteries, and never again according to this great form:
Never burn the breasts of some men when they begin to be corrupted, until they seem like female breasts;
and keep them inflamed and swollen, and whoever wants to heal them, if it is necessary according to this form of this line .b. until .g.: then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with healing ointment, then sew the two lips of the wound together, and cure it until it is healed;
And if the jaw is dislocated downwards, and is twisted due to its size, as it often happens in women, then make a cut into the two ribs above, through two similar wounds; so that the other holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g.; then scrape the skin that is between the two jaws, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary for healing, until it is healed.
And if it is not safe, or the incision is not completely made, because the hairs do not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in a corrosive ointment. And let it remain until it has absorbed the remaining and grease, then cure it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come from the hocks are hard lumps or have ribs, and they contain moisture.
Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line .b. to the line .g.: And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply old cotton to the wound and leave it there for a day, then remove all the cotton, and treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscesses are similar to pustules, then treat them as we have said about incising pustules, and if the wound remains open, then cauterize it as we have said before.
When the artery is cut, and the skin above it is sound, then often an abscess forms, and similarly, there is often bleeding from the vein and abscess.
And if it is known, then one should know when it is for the artery, as the abscess is long and flat. and when you sense your duty, if you sense tightness;
and when it is for the vein, then it is necessary to be careful of appearances;
it is foolish to cover this abscess, and immediately when it is outside of the bones and muscles and where it is very deep, and it is very large. Therefore, one should avoid the cure of iron, and the one at the head should also be avoided, and in the one that is from the enlargement of an artery made through the long skin;
then work the incision as small, and then tear away the artery of the webs, until it is exposed;
Then cut off the arrow from one side, and pierce it through to the other side, and stretch the artery with a double-stranded thread according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then puncture the limb that is between the two ligaments of an instrument until the pus that is inside comes out, and remove the abscess.
Then apply the remedy as I have instructed, until the wound heals. Then treat this condition that has occurred to it, until it is healthy.
and if the abscess is in the belly, it is necessary that you dip your hand into the abscess to remove all the pus from the skin, then pull out the needle away from the limb that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and if there is a double layer of skin, so that you can draw it from the other side. then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or with one of two threads from the two wounds.
and if you doubt that the thread will not hold, then insert another needle all along the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and stretch the threads into four loops.
Then drain the abscess until the excess pus is removed, then clean the wound and leave what remains.
Then apply a moistened cloth with wine and oil, then treat the wounds with tenting and poultices until they are healed.
Similarly, abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses also come to the nerves when they are cut, or from too much work, and similar things.
And there are often injuries and doubts in all these cases where there are joints, and it is the painful abscesses, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and it is in many positions with pain.
And when it is stretched, the patient feels great pain, and it is not in the same position as the flesh, but outside of the wound.
and moves well from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor dislocate nor displace, and that which is in joints does not need to be covered by iron. by chance I had contraction; and that which is at the head or face, makes the skin to the spatula.
and that which is at the head or face, makes the skin to the spatula. If the abscess is small, take a needle and lance it at its root;
and if it is large, hang it from the tip, skin it, then bone it and stitch the wound to the seam, and care for it until it is healed.
Never occurs in the abdomen and no other place, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its resemblance to mushrooms, and it is in the fine roots, and the large legs.
And there are small and very large ones.
And I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had fine roots, and were torn, and were filled with moisture.
I took them and found in one eighteen ounces heavy, and in the other six drachms, and the work of the incision is that you look to see if the roots are moist, and the color of the root is white and moist and of fine root. If the copper is wide at the spout, and they are present with the fire cauterizer.
If the copper is wide at the spout, and they are present with the fire cauterizer. For in cutting, there are often too great losses of blood, and if you do not stop it, then hurry to use the fire cauterizer;
and if you see the evil spouting and painful from the cut of the iron, then take a piece of cloth well made, and tie it around the wound as we have said, and leave it for two hours;
and then tighten it, and do not stop pulling the cloth from below until it covers the wound, and cut through it with effort.
and if the roots are large, then it is best to cover them directly on the belly, but you can also cover half of it, then cauterize so it does not return.
then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cover the thrush which is of pale color and poor sensation and milky appearance.
For it is some abscesses which become infected, and I will come to the treatment of wounds after this.
When the foot is injured, if the appearance of the bubo comes from fire wound or cut of syphilitic, and is above the belly and in some of the sores, as it has in other wounds, or of blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of moisture;
If it is by the breaking of the tooth and through the discharge of pus, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of blood, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various sources. And if it is for the purpose of the intestine, then it is most diverse, and when one presses it to its two sides so that it returns, and then it comes back, and perhaps if it is torn, and expands greatly at the entrance of the bath and for great labor.
If it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, but do not force it.
If it is by blood, it opens with these signs that the abscesses are large and hard, and it is filled with a quantity. If it is by windiness, it is a swelling at the touch, and the work is that you look to see if it appears from the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
If it is by windiness, it is a swelling at the touch, and the work is that you look to see if it appears from the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. If you must leave, let them care for themselves. For as I told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if its appearance is for the intestines or the boil, then it is necessary to command the patient to tint his bandage, and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the belly; then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the limb that you have signed all over, then stretch out half of the abscess above all the big bone; then tie him around with a strong thread, or a tight silk cord, and let it be loose on the injured limb;
then open the half of the abscess stretched out over the limb, and insert your finger, and pull out the intestine; If you find the joint, pull it out, and push the intestine to the side of the belly.
And if you find the bone, take it by the end, and cut off the excess.
And if the artery or vein makes you go against it, then go around it, and return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads, and push the two needles around what you have done in order to pierce.
Then strain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it is healed, and cut the dead flesh by itself. when you cover it with a thin cloth and pour in what is necessary, then treat the wound as we have said, and drain the abscess.
when you cover it with a thin cloth and pour in what is necessary, then treat the wound as we have said, and drain the abscess. and remove the arrow or the moisture that you have removed, then treat the limb as it needs, and soak the limb.
For the fire cauterization, instruct We have said in the division the similarities of chancre, and how one should treat with medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron.
and let us say the chancre is ingrained in the marsh, and great caution in its treatment, and the ancient one said that when chancres are in a place where it can be removed as if chancre which is in the breasts, and in the armpits, and similar places, and all of it must be removed when it is at the beginning.
I have never seen any healed before me.
And the work, when it is in place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you remove the evil of black bile once;
then make it healthy if it has manifest repletion, then remove the evil from the good limb to do the work;
then pour your ointments or salves, and hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything;
and let the blood flow fully, and clean the wound well with your hand or something else, and if the blood clots against the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped. then perform other treatments until they are healed.
For hydropy, instruct the patient to let the h We have said in the division the similarities of hydropsy, and how the assembly of the sharp is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment by medicines, and that which is cured by iron.
And one should not touch iron in these two similar cases: That is to say, tympanites and hypospadias, for this is a deadly matter;
Therefore, when you treat this resemblance of hydropsy which is called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not help, look if the pains are weak, or if he has another disease than hydropsy, as in all cases and solution of the belly and similar things; if you do not touch iron, for there is doubt.
And if you see the pain of great virtue, and he has no other disease than hydropsy alone, and he is not too thin nor too old, then thus proceed: Raise the painful limb up to your hands, and the assistant presses the belly by pushing the sharp instrument to the lowest part of the worst, then take the spatula with spinous form according to this form: And cutting of two parts. and the tip, and make sure it is not too sharp so that it does not pierce the intestine when cutting, and it does not bleed;
then look if the hernia is pushed against the intestines: if it is necessary that you cut them from the belly three fingers down from the navel; and if the hernia is due to the disease of the liver, then cut your incision on the right side of the belly three fingers down.
and if it is for the shoulder, then to the right, and it should only be that the painful parts are shown above the wound so that the excess does not run to the weak limb.
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and the bone, and loosen your hand to all the space between the skin and the flesh as when scraping at the quantity of an inch or around.
then pierce the flesh until the space reaches the wound, and this is the end of the needle, then remove it, and then pierce with this instrument which has the following form: And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and is made of light brass or silver, and has a small hole at one end. and on the other side, three small holes. and two on another side, and one on the other.
And it is shaped like a quill, and is cut as a pen, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes make on the quill.
At the top of it is the nib, so that when the instrument comes to the tip, they now write with it.
Therefore, empty the middle or one-third part, because if you empty it more than necessary at that hour, by chance, it may cause the patient's death due to the resolution of their spirit from the arm, or they may lose their hand, or they may approach death.
but according to the quantity of its power, and according to what the arrangements of the power of evil mean, and its fangs.
Then take the tool and hold the sharp edge, and it is now held by the one who stops the perforation that is above the puncture, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner.
Then restart the tool on the other day, if you see the evil suffering, and take a small quantity from the sharp edge.
Do this every day, and be careful not to follow for as long as it does not delay but a little sharp edge.
If you doubt the injury and leave it for too long, the wound will be covered with dirt or sand, and by much sweat or bathing and in the sun, and it will become infected from drinking. And the treatment of drying medicines until it is clean, and cauterize above the stomach and above the liver and above the spleen after the extraction of the arrow, as I have said before.
No child ever is born who does not have some pertuss in the rod, or the pertuss is small, or it is not in its place.
If it is necessary to pierce very thinly throughout the entire length according to this form:
Then put or pierce a thin needle through the bottom, and tie it and keep it thus for three days or four, and when it wants to urinate, if it is removed, and urine is made, and then put it back.
And by chance, it does not seem to fit, for the urine that comes out does not keep it closed.
If the one who is pierced is small, then treat him with a thin piece of cloth from the bottom, as we have said, and it will expand.
Those who do not have the perineum in their joint cannot give birth, for none are born with the perineum at the top of the staff, because it cannot urinate before they raise their staff up. And they cannot defecate because the matter cannot come out just to the marsh, and it is a bad disease.
And the way of the work is such that the pains are hidden so quickly on their back, the top of the staff and the copper as like the waist of a pen, so that the perineum opens in the middle, as it should.
and guard against the flow of blood that often comes, and if it does, if the cloth that stops blood flows, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the pus from the knife often come these blisters on the finger, and it is an ugly appearance of a char.
and there are both harmful and not harmful ones;
if it is necessary that you squeeze them at the base, and clean and dry all, then put on gauze in Egyptian bandage; then the treatment of bandage until it is healed.
And if it is a malignant ulcer, black and putrid, then you must apply cauterization.
if you have cleaned it, and if the blister is inside the finger, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the blister that is inside first; And when it is swollen, if the doctor is not present.
For when you treat it together, if you are not sure about the fracture of the bone that it is not pierced, and then blackness and corruption in its bone and where the connection.
Then cut off all that is black and corrupted, then bind it with the plaster of honey and flour that is made of the skin of grapefruit and cloves, then the doctor of other treatments until it is healed.
If bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cauterization according to this form:
The cautery if helps in two positions together: That is to say, at the drainage of abscess, and at the corruption.
and if the head of the shoulder is broken and twisted, it is necessary that you break or direct the staff like a club, and urinate on the wounds.
and when the skin is pulled across the head of the staff which has not been circumcised, or it has a wound or an abscess, then you must burn it with the instrument that has hair, until the flesh is separated, and deliver the head of the staff from all parts;
and if it is a difficult thing to divide the head, then you must burn it with the spatula at any part of the head and the skin;
Then thoroughly dry between two and one puts a thin layer of fine flax thread in cold water, that it does not adhere again.
Circumcision is not different from other wounds; Whenever we perform this work of our will, and properly in children, it is a matter that we should do the best work, and the lightest for their health.
I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I have seen the largest part of masters and sages who performed circumcision during childhood, and with force, and at all one time;
if it was the chosen one because there were two cloths, and perhaps if one covered it from above and delayed the other outside. When it is covered with copper, and the pain is doubled, and the wound cleansing which is done from below is not sure of the exact point of the member;
and the cleaning of the finger by chance escapes the iron, and ruins the work, and many times it happens that they do not have to clean it, and I want.
Of the mundication which is done with force to all the length of the thread, I have found the best of the experiment, for the forces cut as much from above as from below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in all the skin; but that the thread is well stretched around the skin;
and that the method of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he listens, that you only tie the thread around the rod as much as possible, and then throw it in all the ways that you can;
then place the fetus between your hands straight out, and apply force between your hands or away from your feet so the child does not see it, nor any of the instruments.
then close your hand around the staff and blow or suck, and pull it up until the desired length of the staff is reached. then clean it well of the dirt that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it from one end to the other.
then clean it well of the dirt that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it from one end to the other. and hold it with two fingers of the second hand at the pouch and the index, and pinch between the two ropes, then pull the child up gently and pull out the staff. then let the blood flow slowly and slowly, for it is the most dangerous. and apply powder on and on the powder with the glue of a mule's hoof boiled in quicklime tempered with rosewater, confected with rose oil and fresh, and let it stay overnight, and continue the other cure until it is healed.
The form of forces at the mummification is as follows:
the two forces should be equal and strong, and the forces should also be great like the even hand.
The error of mummification is that the cuts are made too deep at the incision;
Therefore, you must extend it to your angle, as the joint causes an abscess.
And the coping evenly, and if you cannot hold it at your angle, then use nails, and then the coping.
And if they overshoot three times, and what is outside the rod is swollen, let it remain until the abscess is fully healed, and scrape lightly;
if the coping moves as you can move it, and keep away from the part of the rod, it will not harm him.
Therefore cure the limb of soiled wounds from powder, which we have said or treated in the treatment of powders, and if the coping is done too carefully, it goes beyond, it will not harm;
Cure the dislocations, as we have said, until they are healed.
retaining of the urine
The retention of urine is caused by the obstruction of a stone, or frozen blood, or a bone, or charcoal, or similar things, as we have said in the section.
And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone which is lodged in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary to pull it up over the knees. And let them be placed on their backs, and extend their belly from the upper part of the back, and restrain the hairs as much as possible. and consequently, the neck of the bladder is pressed against the stone above, causing the urine to leak out.
and if it does not come out as we have said, and the pain is great, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called "syringe", which has this form:
and it should be made of thin silver wire, like the quill of an eagle. and it should be the tail of a long and half-palm, and thin at the tip.
And the way to extract urine is that you take a double thread of yarn or cotton, and tie it to the tip of the syringe, and pull the thread inside the syringe.
And cope the excess of the cloth and the bottom with juice from the slingshot, then oil the slingshot with oil or butter and egg yolk, and place the painful area on a chair, and apply the wet cotton and oil of olive and vinegar;
then lightly place the slingshot in the cotton, until it reaches the base of the cotton, then double the cotton over against the bandage;
then press the slingshot before juice from the cotton, and feel the pain coming with the empty thing, and this is not made according to this order unless because of the reason that it leads or goes is twisted;
then the thread is drawn through all the yarn slowly and slowly, and the urine follows the yarn, then it is extracted forcefully, and make a correction of the urine.
and restart the catheter until the bladder is emptied, and align the hairs.
When skin or blood enters the bladder, or putrefaction and assembly occurs, and you see it distill water and medicines, then use any tool called «clepsedre», and its form is:
It is closed, and if it has three openings. one on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
and the threads are inserted through the holes that the medicine cuts so that it stops well the urethra, if one can draw out the moisture, and put in what is needed.
When you see your medicines going into the bladder, put the head of the catheter in the moisture, and draw it to the drainage which is inside.
If you drain the moisture from the catheter, and then blow strongly into the drainage inside. If the moisture enters inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it.
And this is the form of the subtle catheter with which you catheterize the bladder:
And it is of silver or brass, and it is the highest one.
And it is open at the top where the bend is.
Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you saw clustered in the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a double thread of wool, and heat the moisture over the fire.
Then push the tip of the cluster into the rod, then strain your hand on the bladder all around the moisture, until the hairs feel that that moisture has come to the bladder.
And if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle, and pierce it roundly through. Then push the thread strongly into those holes, then assemble the circle as you would assemble a bowl, and put inside what you saw of oil and moisture and salt, and tie it in the instrument.
And do as you have done with the bladder, of pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have said in the previous section the ways of arrows and their extraction together with remedies.
And I have said the difference between an arrow embedded in rain and all the signs, and in which arrow one should make a cut. And in the bladder, and in the penis;
And I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the arrow that is embedded in the bladder often happens to children, and it is a sign that the sharp pain of the bladder resembles a sharp pain in its subtlety.
and it opens the hair, and grinds the painful spikes, and does it many times, and then soothes. and with much of these, the base.
and is light for the healing of children up to four years old, and is very painful in the elderly, and is constant in those between youth and old age.
and it is the cure lighter for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the wound with a poultice, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For it never hinders one from seeking the stone.
Then take the pain by the feet, and stand up and move away from the side, so that the stone descends to the base of the bladder, and does not come out once high.
then let the patient sit between your hands, and his hands should be away from his thighs, so that the urine flows downwards.
Then the knees and the toes;
If you feel a stone in the space, hurry now to cut above the stone.
And if it does not break at the touch of all, then rub your right index finger with oil from your right hand, if the pain is sharp, or your middle finger, if the pain is dull; and place it at its base, and knee the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, then moisten the foreskin with urine.
Then press against your thumb, and the bone against where you see it cut.
And command the minister to press the bladder in his hand, and command him to extend the right testicles with his hand, and the left hand remove the skin that is outside the testicles in the part where the cut is made.
Then insert the spatula, which is shaped like this: And make a cut between what is between the testicles and the fundament, not in the middle but on the right side of the naval.
And the cut should be straight above the stone, and your thumb should be on the fundament, and the cut should be across so that it is wide outside, but narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
If by chance the pressure is too much for what it should be, which is on the foundation, it will suddenly jump out of place.
And it slips that there are stones or sharp edges and margins where it can get stuck. If it is greasy to pull out;
And if there are parts that are soft and smooth like a glove, with a rounded shape, its extraction is easy.
In this case where there are sharp edges and margins, make the incision wider;
and if it does not jump out, then it is necessary to hold it with forceps that are like a clamp at the head, to prevent the stone from escaping. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And if you do not engage it thus, the small pox will spread, and if it is not dissected, then strain it with vinegar.
And if there is more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove it, and the smaller ones later if there are many.
And if it is very large, it should be made larger, and a larger wound should be made. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or the urine flows out because the sutures cannot hold.
But if you try to pull it out, or tear it off with pliers, until you tear it into pieces;
and when you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, and bandage it, and place a moist cloth on it soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and vinegar and cold rosewater, to alleviate the abscess. Then resolve the pain on its neck, and do not let the bone slip back into place.
And when you reset it, rub the joint well with oil and vinegar, then apply a poultice of mustard plaster and basilicon until it is healed.
And if the abscess comes to the wound and corrosions, and congelemens of blood in the bladder, and it is retained so that the urine is held back, which is known in a certain way as without a jump with the urine: Then put your finger on the wound, and remove that blood, because if it remains, it will irritate the bladder, and it will spoil.
Then lift the wound with sharp and smooth and silk, and help in all ways that you can, until it is healed.
And it is necessary that all the bandages that you use to treat him, that you tie them around both thighs, and place the medicines on the wound.
And if it is a small stone, and it is conducted with a reed, and tied around, and the urine cannot come out; if the cure of which I said before, that you cut many times, and excuse the cutting for this cure. I have already experienced this.
Take an iron rod according to this form and be at three angles tied with a thread:
Then take a thread and tie it around the stone outside of the bone, so that it cannot return to the bladder.
Then gently push the finger into the thread until it reaches the stone. And slowly turn the finger back and forth in the stone until you can pierce it from the other side.
If urine comes out soon, then press your hand above the part of the stone that remains inside the thread. If it is already broken and shoots out with the urine, and is sharp on the hairs;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that defends it, then tie the thread outside of the stone and the other above, then make the thread in the place of the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and release the thread, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound; And the healer as long as he is healthy.
of the stone from women
It rarely happens that a needle is inserted into women, and if it ever does, then the healer is in great distress, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
One is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
And the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-informed and willing to reveal her secret, especially when she is chaste.
And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who is well-informed in this art of hands.
And the fourth reason is that if the woman's needle is longer than the man's, because it should have a deeper groove and there is great pain. And if necessary, one must send for a woman who is well-informed and knows how to insert the needle, and if you do not find such a woman, then it is not advisable to proceed with the operation.
And the present one is a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and she commands that she do what you command of the examination of the stone; and look very closely if the woman is virgin:
and look very closely if the woman is virgin: then it is necessary to place her hand or foundation and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, then she must hold her hand away from her foundation, and recommends that she place her hand or with the pain, and press her right hand firmly on the bladder:
if she finds it, then it is necessary to move it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh;
Then cut into the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the knee, where it is moved and feels the stone in that part. and do not move his leg above or below the stone, and let the wound be small at first.
and do not move his leg above or below the stone, and let the wound be small at first. Then stop the bleeding in the wound, if you feel the stone so sharp that the wound can be closed until the stone can be removed, and know that many ways of stones are:
It is to know, small and large and sharp and smooth, long and round, and those that have rain.
If you have similar cases to know the outcome.
And if you do not know, then put it in vinegar for an hour until the stone is cleaned.
then return to your work, until the stone is fully removed, and have the tools that I mentioned in the extraction of the stone for people to assist you in your work.
and if it does not move, and it is the artery that is cut, then put powder on the wound and bandage it with tents and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, lest by chance the patient dies. then treat the wound.
When the heat of the blood is calmed, and the wound has healed, then return to your work until the stone is formed.
Water is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white saphir, which is dissolved out of the cavities that contain the urine.
and is called "syfac", and it is never properly in the web of the eyelid, if one thinks that it is the other eyelid; and it is the thick skin between the white syfac that we have said;
and it does not have a name. And the growth of this branch is due to its weakness that comes from the roots, and it is spread by that matter.
And it never comes from striking on the eyelids, and this moisture has many colors: or it is yellowish to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or watery white, and it has more;
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is the white syfac that we have said, then the abscesses are present, slightly long like the shape of an eyelid, and do not open the eyelids, because it has moisture all around.
And if he has moisture in the own bandage, then abscesses are treated with a part of the egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another egg;
and if his moisture is between the skin of the wounds and the white sfax, then he feels it well;
therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, try in all the surrounding tissue where it was before. According to what comes after the introducer, judge what is inside.
And when we cure it with iron, then it is necessary that the hairs be cleansed according to some power and the replenishment of his body;
then the sweat on his back, above something a little high, and put much cloth on him;
then lift up on the right side, and command the minister to lean to the left, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the ribs;
then take the spatula and cover the ribs with the skin on the long side up to the sharp point, and your blade should be straight in a cutting motion across the ribs towards the white face, and gently scrape the skin according to the power;
then pierce the white face flat with a sharp, wide opening, and extract all the sharpness, then place your forceps, and press the white face upwards;
and do not touch the bones of the ribs, but only the sinews. and carefully remove the entire or even the ribs themselves, if you do not cut it well, it will return to him sharply.
and if the bone breaks during your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the sinew.
then sew together the two pieces of the rib bone at a seam, then treat it as with other wounds until it is healed.
And if you break the bone and it becomes corrupted with another disease, then it is necessary to tie the veins that are suspended, in doubt of the flow of blood.
Then copulate the joint to all the suspensory, and strain the eye, and treat it as we have said.
And if it is sharp and assembled in two parts together, these are two branches. If you copulate the other part as you have done the first evenly, then soak the blood, and put in the wound linseed steeped in rose oil.
If you copulate the other part as you have done the first evenly, then soak the blood, and put in the wound linseed steeped in rose oil. And put on top other linseed steeped in wine and oil, and put over the two joints, and put over doubled cloths, and tie it to all the limb which is according to this form.
Then take two cloths and place them according to this pattern and sewn together at the waist of the undergarments, and one of them on the back just above the buttocks, and the other at the side where the armpit is.
and the other two over the two angles, and let the whole assembly be the restriction in the loop of the undergarment.
And never apply this cauterization in the form of an iron tail, and it is that you grasp the delicate cauterizing needle and pierce the skin of the wounds, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white matter that contains the acid is discovered;
Take the fire cautery in this form, and pierce the affected area with a thin needle, and burn the skin with this delicate cautery:
And cover it in all ways that you can, until you remove everything;
and be careful that the flesh does not touch the bone;
and make sure that this work is more safe; and keep from bleeding of blood, and make sure that the work of the needle is even;
and if nothing goes against you, or an abscess forms or bleeding occurs or other things, then cure what goes against you, according to what is said above.
And if the pain is unbearable, and does not want to endure this work due to its horror, then apply perforation as I have told you, and when you are certain that the boiling water is ready, place the injured part on a raised seat. Then pierce the abscess in the unaffected part of the body, and place the perforation at a distance from the entire length of the body.
And let the holes be wide enough so that all the sharp pain is removed.
Then place cotton on the wound and tie it, and let it bleed until all the sharp pain is removed, then care for the wound until the wound is healed.
and if the white cloth does not allow the sharp edge to exit from the mouth of the wound, then you should insert a pen or the instrument used to treat hydrophobia, of which the form is as follows:
and widen the wound slightly, and make sure that the sharp edge returns, and it is reassembled after six months or within a year, and when it is reassembled as before, and thus it will pass the pains in its course.
make sure that in the section of this branch, many positions are possible, for which it seems to me that moving it is better than leaving it;
I will tell you about the work and similar things of an abscess.
Therefore, many abscesses come from wounds, and at the same time from blows; and this is often the case.
It is to know by excessive sharp and wet, which is expanded from blows, or from impact;
and the color of the abscess according to the color of the blood; and does not show pain, and is a painful abscess.
And perhaps some gray, painless and pale abscesses, and of yellowish color, and never come from a vein or from inflammation of the blood.
When it is by the out of artery, then it is known by the position of the abscess being high, when you press it to your fingers; and it only requires that you touch it.
Those who are made of venous blood are known by their position at the expression of gentle touch of the fingers, and can well do the cut across this resemblance, and across others. and it is that you cope the courage of the coins, then the wound is high, and the trauma from the white swab, and deliver the suspended part of all parts of the wound.
If the shoulder is already set with these charms, then it is necessary to remove the shoulder and the cloth.
And if it is in the armpit or inside the ribs, then it is necessary to remove all of that which is inside the ribs, and the cloth should be replaced.
And if the hair at birth is on the back of the head, it is necessary that you shave it all, and straighten the forehead, as we have said.
And when your work is done, apply the wound with a soft cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then apply other treatments until it is healed.
This is an abscess surrounded by an envelope resembling a blister, with the softening of the sinews, and the painful movement of the limbs as it moves.
And the treatment of this disease is just as difficult and painful as the previous one, and we will tell you about it in the work, according to what the ancients did.
You should sit the painful limb on an elevated seat, then lift the suspensory ligament of the fingers to your two fingers, and all the tendons that are close to the carpus, and comb the masters, and extend them properly.
Then cut the sharp spatula wide through the tendons at that place, as long as they are exposed, and then scrape each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert a needle or one with double thread, and tie it to the first joint where the blood came out, and tie it to the other end. then place the copper correctly in the middle, according to the length of the wound, and draw out the corrupted moisture;
then treat the wound as with others by injecting ointment, so that no one notices that they have inserted one of the coins.
for if there is no harm, and all the men come in sight, then it is necessary to remove the coins from all the men. if they do not lose their coin through the incision of the men, and dry up and cannot be helped.
The consequences of this branch are due to the section that comes or sticks out, or the extension over the belly in the part of the angles, because the intestines descend from that break to one of the coins.
And this rent is due to either too much sucking, or from the extension of the limb, and these two methods come from many causes:
or from impact, or from jumping, or from a loud noise, or from lifting heavy weight, and similar things;
and the signs when it is due to too much sucking, is that it happens slowly and gradually, in a long stretch, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are even up to the chest, because the sucking quickly reaches the intestines.
And the signs of the cutting of the tongue are that it brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various appearances of abscesses outside the skin, and it is for the end of the intestine and the heart because of the cutting of the tongue.
And sometimes the worms are found with the intestines, and they are retained inside, and cause great pain to suffer from the misalignment, especially when pressed.
And in these cures of iron with fear, because it should be avoided.
And the method of treatment is that you command or prick at the intestines to twist them into a ball in the wound, if it can be pushed back inside; Then place it on its shoulder. Between your hands, and lift the elbows;
then press the chest above, and cover all the skin of the ribs; then stuff between the buttocks woolen cloths according to what you have skill to open the wound, and let them be such that the eyes do not come out;
then scrape the belly that is outside the skin of the ribs, until the white belly is exposed from all parts;
then stuff your middle finger in the part that leads to the ribs, in the part between the white belly that is outside the skin of the gut, and between the second belly, and depart from where it is behind the gut, and between the second belly;
and if it moves to the right within the curve of the ribs, and places the white cheek on your right hand, and raises the chin towards all the face towards the waist; and commands the assistant to extend the chin upwards, and release what is behind the jawbone;
and ask if there is any intestine wrapped or white cheek hard, and if you find anything, if it pushes against the belly outside;
then take a needle or it has the thick thread made of silk, and push it into the back part of the face, which is after the skin of the ribs; After the belly, then cut the tendons that appear like hairs, as long as there are four hairs. Then gather them one above the other in the shape of a cross, and bind them with a strong thread of two parts. Then wrap the tendons like hairs, and bind them with two parts of thread, so that no one who might touch them could enter into wounds, as an abscess does not come. And then apply the thread along the first thread of two parts of that, and after these two threads leave the thread that is outside the skin of the belly, the great one of a dowry. and then the other according to the roundness that the mouth carries.
then cut in the part that is outside the skin of the fingers, as we have said before.
then apply a softened wool in oil to the wounds, and put it on as we have said before. And never cauterize the white, pus-filled wound that we have said, after incision, due to doubt of bleeding. for this has often been done, and leave the wool until it heals over it.
and if it takes too long to heal, then boil water and put it on as we have said before until it heals.
then treat the wound with other treatments until it is completely healed.
of hernia carbuncle
In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to make the cure by iron.
And the ancients said that it is made so that it is like a branch that is together with the bone, in a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision slightly to the outside.
Then cover it with a bandage, and treat the abscess that works, until the vessels die.
And the treatment as we have said, until they are healed.
No time comes for tearing and breaking, as we have said, and open the veins;
and do not cut any of the intestines at the same time, and if there is, it is little, and repair every hour.
And if he remains too long at this point, the wound or the infection spreads, as the intestines descend.
And it happens by the extension of the pus that is in the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and the muscles are stretched and opened.
And the treatment is by cauterization, as we have previously said.
And it is never treated in this way: And the hairs are cut off with a sharp blade over their back between your hands, then the limb is stretched widely according to the quantity of three fingers.
and then extract the sinew that is outside the skin that connects, then take the tendon and put it on top of the bone that appears from the sinew.
and press it against the front of the abdomen, then cut the two bones that appear from the sinew above the head of the tendon, and cut both.
then extract the head of the tendon, and do not cover it with the sinew or extend the wound or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the root of the intestines. then treat it according to the treatment of wounds.
then treat it according to the treatment of wounds. And when you remove the splinters, uncover and heal the wound until it is healed.
The splinter is hidden, and does not appear in the rent, and the cauteries are dull in this limb, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of leather from harnesses
Many times the tendons of the joints are softened in some men, because the cartilage inside is softened and it can be seen.
and it is a matter of skill, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the misaligned part lie on its back, and the copper which is softened over the natural skin;
then join the two lips at a seam, and if you see that it is too much, cut off the excess of the softened skin at three or four stitches;
then cover between the seams, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and cut off the thread.
for gently
It is said that these things are not mentioned in our law, and for this reason I do not want to speak of them in this book;
and are necessary for two ways:
one is that the physician responds when asked, and in his knowledge the cure;
and the other, because we often have experience in castrating some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and rams and others.
I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: or by traction, or by cutting.
In the one that we make by traction, we make our seat the animal in high heat, until the testicles are softened and during; then hold them in your hand, until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
The punishment of the waist: it is necessary that you rub the animal skin with your right hand, and press the leather of the sleeves against it, then tie the suspenders, and burn each eyelet at the top, when you have well scorched them;
and leave no spot of the face and the subtle face that is on the sleeves;
and this method of punishment is better than that which is made by attraction, because at the attraction something remains from the sleeves, by which the animal desires pleasure;
Then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermaphrodites
There are two main methods for men: One method is that between the two testicles, open wide as the natural shape of a woman, with hair and sometimes cutting the urine.
And the other way is in women, and has a penis like a finger and two testicles.
And the treatment of men and women is that you remove all infected sores, and treat them as other wounds;
In the second method, men whose urine sprays through the skin of the testicles have no treatment.
Tenting is an infected sore above the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see. and some women have had it as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
You should wipe away the excess blood from your hand or fingers, and clean it lightly.
and do not move too much in front, as arrows do not come, then the treatment of other cures until it is healed.
and another char that is born from the mouth of a marsh, and use it, and by chance it jumps forward, and it is similar to a cow, and for this reason they called the old "cow disease". If it is necessary to treat it, as we have said about the treatment, and care for it until it is healed.
It is erratic when the nature of the woman is not well known, or the pustules are small. And it is either natural by birth, or an accident due to disease that has come.
And it is either natural by birth, or an accident due to disease that has come. Or it is due to a charm, or a subtle blow or sharp, and it is done by force in the marsh, or in the ribs, or outside, or wherever it may be.
And they prevent the conception, and childbirth, and perhaps the flowers to have.
And the knowledge of this is by the gaze of the tail.
If the swelling appears to be nearby, then it is either yours or his.
If it is a subtle blow, and it is near to the two lips, then you hurry, and the treatment will be as follows:
Put your two index fingers together, and the woman is on her back, spreading her legs;
then the two books are formed, as long as the subtle sphincter is not torn, and not over the obstructions.
then take linen, and soak it in oil, and place it on the limb, and grind the woman against him every day, so that he cannot stitch.
And if the facial swelling is hard and rough, then it is necessary to apply a poultice like a leaf of mint.
If the obstructions are made of bone, then soak it in vinegar and cover it.
and have the remedies stained with blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and plenty of sulfur.
then apply a wide piece of cloth, so that the wound cannot stitch.
and then let it be long, and the bandage a tent of dry linen;
then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
And when in the marsh comes a horse's kick, cover it according to this method, unless it is an infected abscess. For the infected abscess in the marsh, one should not touch it with fire.
of hemorrhoids Emorrhages are openings of veins which do not usually bleed, and when the emorrhages are old they become thrombosis.
and we have had in the section similar cases and signs, and I will say here those that require treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and thelul, when they are formed in the marsh, and do not appear until felt, if not treated with iron.
Those that can be felt at the edge of the marsh, are those that can be treated.
Therefore it is necessary that you put the woman in a cool house, then apply leeches, and the cope in its roots, then powder of medicines restraining blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
Then, press his feet against the wall for an hour, then put it in cold water.
And if blood comes out, if it sits in a decoction of sumac and the skin of green apples and galls and similar things, then take flour of wheat, mix with honey and egg, and make a poultice on his back.
If he is strong, it is good. If not, then make him dizzy by suction at the back and breasts without hurting;
Then take the cloth, and soak it in juice of plantain or in juice of elder with old wine, and make him dizzy at the limb.
And when the abscess is ready, treat the wound with poultices until it is healed.
and the one called "albathir" is red and resembles the sharp chief, so cover it as I have said for the throat. And then treat it until it is healed.
Many types of abscesses come in the marsh, such as chancre and pustular abscess and herpes and estiomenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and chaut abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Therefore, I must say in this treatment of the abscess that comes in the marsh, which is not one of the abscesses that are filled with pus.
And if you know the work of iron, look to see if the abscess is hard and at the beginning of its arrival, and painful and feverish, and if it becomes red, then you can see it. Therefore do not rush to pierce, but wait until the pain is eased;
and then place the dislocated part on the seat, and have two small seats where it leans, and support it on its back and gather its feet to the sides of the leg;
and let its knees be spread apart, and place its arms away from its hips, and tie them together with a strong cord;
then place the ball against the right side, and introduce the tool used to make the mouth of the marsh, from which afterwards comes the form;
and it is necessary that when you see this tool being introduced, that you check the depth of the marsh, so that nothing comes in front of it which it should not, and that it does not dislocate the limb; and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marsh with cloths, so that the instruments do not hurt him.
and it is necessary to put the horn of the instrument above, and to stain the instrument.
And when the abscesses are open, and they make it by hand, then it is necessary to cover the head, at the spatula level.
And when the wound is drained, then it is necessary to put in the wound moistened cloths in red or green dry oil.
and put the bandage of the wound at the depth of the marsh, and put above the marsh and above the clean moistened cloth in vinegar or wine.
then the healer after two hours of heating comes to the patient, as long as they are healthy.
and never lift the marsh and the wound with a poultice of honey and honey, and then with honey or roots of lily and aristolochia being cooked. then reapply the heating.
And if the wound is sutured with a marl, it is necessary to be careful not to use iron, but to cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth Midwifery is first to the birth that she knows the natural shape of the child, and the signs if it is when you see the woman approaching, and wants to smell the armpit.
then quickly take the child out. then shake that child according to its natural shape, and it comes out with its head first, and the second part with it.
and when you see these signs, if it is necessary to gently press on its belly, so that the child comes out quickly.
for when it descends with its head first, and the second part is with it, and it is cleaned of its excess by good washing.
and this that comes differently does not come naturally.
for it never comes out of its feet, and it comes out forcefully from the back or the head, and the hands, or it comes out over its belly, or sometimes, and it is turned by chance on its neck, and by other bad shapes.
If it is necessary for the shoulder to be skillful and subtle in these things, and if one becomes aware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should assist them.
If the child comes out through its own head, and the woman gives birth painfully, and the strength of the one who is giving birth is weak, then let her sit on a seat, or the women hold her.
And take oil or fenugreek cooked in its own fat, and then give the shoulder between its two fingers the smallest amount of it that is here in this form: and break the second joint, and cover its joint until the moisture that is inside has gone away.
Take the belly of the woman until the child descends, and if it does not, then it is necessary to grease the woman with mustard plaster made from fenugreek with sesame oil.
Then make her inhale and exhale through a cone, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour. If now the child is born.
And if both hands are dislocated, then it is necessary to gently and slowly reset them little by little. And if they cannot be placed in position, then place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up high. Then, remove the seat above ground, and tie it up so that the woman does not urinate during the removal.
And if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then use the hands that were previously placed on the buttocks, remove the child, and reset it evenly.
from the child's birth above its feet When the child comes out of its feet, if it is necessary to put it up high; and then turn it little by little until it is even;
Then take the feet and extend them little by little.
If it jumps towards the toes, then command it to bend, and make it spit out the condition. If you must, God willing.
And if it does not lie down as we have said, gently turn it little by little until it is in the natural position. Then it will be perfectly fine.
And if it does not come out as we have experienced, say so and take muscle powder of high, and oil of sage, and melted glue, and grind everything in a mortar; and put on the natural substance of the woman inside and outside of this plaster, then make it sit in high heat until above the ribs;
and when it is softened outside, make a garland of myrrh, and put it on, and let it sit for an hour. then make it sit on the seat, then make it vomit and hold its mouth and nose, and lightly press its belly, for it is about to vomit now.
of the child's head above its knees When a child comes in this form, so put the baby's hands gently and gently; then it should be laid on its back, and the feet hang down, and it should lie on the bed; and gently fold its hands, then grasp the hands on the stomach, and remove the swaddling clothes until it is dressed all over; and if the child does not cry, then take its feet and gently move them, then move the stomach upwards, then push your hands; and gently feed the child. and command the woman to hold it until the child is born.
of the issue of the child who comes out widely with a hand extended You must engineer to bring back the hand: if you cannot bring it back, then lift the woman and go;
if she cannot go, then make her lie on the bed, and bend her knees gently;
then apply the muscle relief that I have mentioned;
and if she does not improve, then make her sit on the chair, and then study how to bring back the hand. and if the child is according to the natural shape, and make her spit, and command her to bend until the child comes out.
of the child's neck, and have his hands spread out, and his face turned towards his mother's back It is necessary for the patient to soak their hand in water, then slowly and gently turn it, and lightly rub it.
And when it is even, place the natural muscle balm of aloe and oil, as we have said, then command the patient to move it slowly.
And when you have done this, place it on the seat, and command the patient to sit down. And make them spit out. in the same way for all the second joints
in the same way for all the second joints When it comes to this way in the second joint, then adjust the second joint to your angle, until the moisture is drained.
And if it cannot be adjusted to its face and neck, then adjust the back, so that it is not held back, and let the adjustment go.
Then push the child inward, until you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman that she does not give birth again:
of the issue of twins it is said that children are born many times, and sometimes in giving birth, three or four: and this is not a strange thing, and it happens often. these are strange things, and they do not live if they are not named:
these are strange things, and they do not live if they are not named: I know that they are multiplied, and they are divided by the midwife who gives them names, which is tied to the belly:
and never come out as naturally as others do, as we have said.
And if they come out harshly, as we have said the treatment should be, and if there is a subtle breeze, and do it quickly and lightly as it does. and do so as it is worthwhile for health. of many children
Never are they formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, or more than fifteen years old, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious, and it is fitting that the breeze should heal everything, for perhaps similar things happen to them. Do it according to what is appropriate.
of the dead child
When treating a woman for a dead or live baby, as I mentioned in the section on labor, and it does not come out, and you are forced to perform surgery with your hands; if it is necessary that you remove from the woman if she is of sound health and has no accident or fear of death;
if it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her legs bent down, and her legs raised;
and the midwife the tweezers of the other part, where she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated with the delivery of the child;
then rub the mouth of a tumor with moist mustard seed mixed with garlic and fenugreek seeds, then insert the juice of these oils and mixtures into the tumor;
then gently close the tumor, then check if the needles are suitable for the skin, and if the patient is not allergic, then let it drip on their forehead;
if the needles are inserted into their eyes or in their throat or in their mouth or in their palate or behind the beard or on the forehead or beside the costal cartilages, and if they drip on their feet, then let them drop on the soles of their feet or on their chest or on their shoulders;
And it is necessary that he dye the wound with his right hand, and place the cauterizer between the fingers of his left hand, and hold the cautery lightly in any of the ways we have mentioned, until he reaches the empty thing.
Then hold against the other wound, or if you have skill in this matter, so that the extraction is equal.
Then hold it equally by moving from one side to the other, in order to move, and let the wounds be dyed with equal dye, as is the shape:
And if a part remains, oil some of its bones with oil, and put them in that part, and pull the other part;
and if none remains, put this bone or more on top of the limb, and do it as much as it all goes out.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back by tightness, then you must wrap around the injured part, until it all goes out; then put the bandage in the joint of the foot or at the heel, and so you must do in the other hand, and to both feet.
And if the child is large and tight at the outlet, or has an acute angled head, it is necessary that you push the spatula-shaped bone between your fingers, and making the head and straightening the acute angle. or you break it with the tool called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one.
and thus make the same action if the child has a large natural head.
and then pull the bones with pliers, and if the child jumps and is held by the forceps, it must be cut as much as possible until the blood that has been issued stops.
If she cannot get out, then break the copper piece with which you can.
And if it is inflated in the belly or under the ribs, then you must prick it until the pus flows out.
If it is above its feet, then it is light attraction, and the direction to the mouth of the marsh is light.
And if it is hard in the belly or in the groin, then you must squeeze it out with a cloth wrapped around your hand. And making the belly or the groin, as much as the pus that flows out.
And if the other member is broken, and the patient remains, then boil the bay leaf in water, and bring it to the mouth of the wound. then apply heat or cold, and treat it accordingly;
and if the mouth is swollen due to an abscess that has come, it does not need to be pierced, but rather things that are wet and heavy should be administered; and apply plasters, and soak in hot and moistening baths.
and if it is on the side of the chest, and you can make it even, then treat it as we have said for a living infant;
and if you cannot make it even, then treat it by applying pieces and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, apply what we have said about abscesses that come from the marsh.
And if blood comes out, it should be stopped with immediate pressure, and other treatments applied.
I saw a woman in whose womb an infant had died, then consulted the other with regard to that one, and it also died. After a long time, some abscesses appeared in the groin, and they swelled so much that they burst, and then began to cause great pain.
I went to the doctor, and he thought for a long time, and could not close the wound.
I applied strong adhesive, and it pulled out some bones, and after some time, others came out. I was very surprised because the belly does not have bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I dressed the wound, and in the process broke bones, until the woman was no better. And she remained long in this condition, and it was only a little improvement from the bloodletting.
And I did not remember this chapter until now because when the masters find an unusual thing, they know how to provide help.
This comes after the form of the presser, by which we have the books.
And at the second turn, to the second question of the two joints. However, the horns should be more slender than the restrictor, and should be made of smooth or box wood.
And its mouth should be one and a half inches wide, and the edge of the trees should be, and a span and a half long. And between the two joints should be two stoppers of this same wood, which are firmly fixed in one and the other, half a span long or a little more.
et these two incisions are made in the mouth of the horse when turning the two corners.
Another form, which appears more subtle and lighter, should be made of smooth or boxwood, according to the appearance of the tongs. and it should have two incisions, such as you see, of one span in length and one wide.
and when you see that the horse's mouth is open with all the instruments, place the woman on the bed, the feet down and the legs spread, then insert the two incisions incised together into the mouth, and hold the head of the instrument between her teeth. Then work your hand with all the tools, as you have done with evenly made needles, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the marsh, until the bail does what it wants.
These tools are all above, and they are multiplied in their likenesses; And when the master has them all arranged, the work is more difficult, and higher for those who have more of them.
If you do not disregard the tool that you have not matched, for its need is not excusable.
When the second one is retained at childhood, it is necessary that you command the pain to retain its hair, and then make it spit out the conditions, and hold your hands to the mouth and nose; And if she jumps for the sky, well then.
If not, take the pot, and make a poultice or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calamint, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea, and centaury. All these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or poured over boiling water above the fire.
Then put a cloth or poultice from the pot in her mouth, and the other head in the mouth of the marsh, and let the steam come into the marsh.
Then make her spit it out, as we have said. If the patient sneezes repeatedly.
And if she remains after this treatment, and is not much improved, command the bath attendant to rub her right hand with oil of sesame or mustard plaster, and then apply it to the affected area, and ask for the second one. And when she finds it, grasp and extend it slowly and straight, so that the husband does not hinder its extraction.
But move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull it out. If it comes out and disperses.
And if the husband's mouth is also stretched, we have said the cure of expectoration and fumigation of herbs;
If she is not of all that we have said, then guard that you do not follow her;
but it is advisable that what is at the mouth of the wound, that you tie it to the belly of the woman, then clyster with the four-ingredient ointment; if the pains and bring back, and come force;
but always, when she vomits if comes bad smell to the stomach and head, and bleeds the pain. If therefore fumigations inconvenient to that:
none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to fume the woman during retention of flowers and the secondine is this:
And it is similar to glass, and one puts the head subtly in its place, and the wounds are large over the fire;
and either the smoke over the coals, and the lice until they are killed, and then start another one.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stupefied by some subtle poison: so it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that poison at its proper place, and not pierce too deeply with the sharp instrument, and cover the wound so that it does not touch it;
Then apply a poultice of mallow on wine and oil, then the healing ointment until they are healed.
And if you doubt that it will not set, place or press a splint on it, and let it remain for some time, and it should be strengthened as the child wishes to go into rooms.
And sometimes comes the stink of pus from a wound or an abscess; if it is necessary to cover that pus: if they are treated, as we have said of the dog's excrement.
Fistulas that come from below the foundation are noduled, and grosser than those coming above the foundation, or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or more;
and when that nodule is old, it works and increases the moisture above the white or subtle bowels, and sometimes those fistulas persist.
And they are known by the fact that there is vomiting or vapors when the pain causes vomiting, and sometimes it happens that some words come out.
And if there are fistulas that perforate the bladder, and perforate half of the penis. And they reach the joint of the ribs, and penetrate the throat.
And thus one knows the fistula passing through the base, and not passing through. And it is that you should strike your sharp index or base, and insert a thin needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if he has twisting, then beat him with a thin tent peg, or the hair of a horse, until you feel the tent or the hair at your hand.
and if you do not feel it, and he does not come from pustule egestion or windiness or vomiting, as we have said: so that it does not pierce through. if you are in a hurry to cure.
And when the fistula is persistent near the bladder or near a urine conduit, if it allows urine to pass, and cannot be healed by medicines.
if it has pierced up to the joint of the thigh, then beat him with the tent coming from the body. if there is no twisting and the invention of the pain is around, then it is because he has been bitten by a snake, and there is no medicine or soundly by cauterization.
And in these fistulas, there is no cure except for patience and the vanity of those who try to heal them.
In that one which is not ancient and not persistent, with hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the pain hides between your hands on its back;
and the patient's legs up to his knees, and his knees bent towards his belly; then pour water or mud, if there is twisting, until you see the tent come out.
If the pain is felt around the foundation, then it is necessary that you insert your second finger, feeling as if the tent has pierced it;
And it should be discovered or you sense between your teeth the sphacel or the char, then scrape that it is finished; if not to grind a little that we cannot heal it.
It is said that one can heal all, but this happens rarely;
and the aid that is made, if it is to heat the subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula, as it is already said; and the whole mouth is put into the fistula, until it comes out of the base; and do this two or three times, until you scrape that these charred pieces are removed, which are similar to an arrowhead;
and then the treatment of broken bones in butter, until that bone sets, then the treatment of cauterizing charcoal and sealing.
If it is thus healthy, it is well.
If so, no other method can be used;
and if the bone is between, and does not pierce through the foundation, and between the tooth and the tent a thick layer of charcoal or sphagnum, and you see the fistula at which the covering points. if the covering of the beginning of the fistula, and is pushed back before the tent, and then the cauterizing after, until it reaches the top of the tent. and he will be delivered from the tent, and fall.
then one must believe those charcoals that seem like a goose feather, and not remain doubting.
And if you cannot pull it out, and cut between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
For the fire cautery assembles two good things: that is to say, the burning of these charcoals applied, and the draining of blood and the drawing out of moisture;
then the cure of moldy tents is to boil or crush them in a mortar, until the liquid is poured out, and the charcoal is burned in the liquid;
then cure the wound of boils soaked in hard charcoal, and the dry medicines.
For when it is healed, it is healthy and does not return.
And if the fistula comes from just above the foundation, and is distant from the body, then press on the top or foundation, and ask what it is.
If you feel the tent, and there are two threads or sutures or charcoal, where it is about to pierce, there is no other remedy but hope and faith, by administering one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it off at the base, or if you can, you put in tents and treat it as first aid.
and do not move too much in the first few days, so as not to cover the foundation that holds the base, and the excretions come out through the opening. then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; If fortunately it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the bandage since it is cut below the base, or by tent or by other appointed instrument. Then put your finger in that wound which is in the sore, as much as you can. Then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part before the base.
Then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part before the base. If it is a lighter thing to the pain.
And sometimes fistulas are in this manner: And when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is where it costs the base below the skin above, then take a tent perforated at the head in this form: And you push the wire through it, and push the probe along the entire length of the wire into the fistula until it reaches the top.
If it is persistent in the margin of the foundation downwards, then hold the thread of that which is punctured, in such a way that you bring your own or the foundation upwards.
And trace the head of the thread, and gather the two parts together, and hold one against the other, and let it rest for one or two days.
And keep it under no pressure until the thread covers those that are between the two, and heal.
Then treat the wound until it is dried and healed.
If the fistula does not perforate, then try to puncture it in all possible ways that you can, unless it is too deep. For it does not matter to make the sutures so deep if it is too deep, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spiny stone that they make the fistula is very sharp and one-sided; And on the other hand, not, because we do not know what we should not know, as you see here:
There are two kinds of dislocations: Or they are in the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in this case, blood is involved, and there are one or more, and they are under the foundation and at the base of the foundation;
But those that are underneath have little moisture, and they are cut or a little sharp or a little bloody, and they have the color of the flesh;
And the treatment of those who have them in the foundation is that you command the patient to urinate in different rooms, until the foundation is clean and the child appears; If you hurry, and it can be done with pliers, or you hold it at your fingernail, then cut it at its roots.
And if they cannot hold it by their moisture, then take them with a cloth, or a rag, or a piece of linen. And strain them with your fingers, then cut, and powder with any hot powders that are in place of the fire cautery. Or you cauterize them as it is said in the book of fire cautery, then treat with other treatments until they are healed.
And if the foundation cannot come out, then cauterize the painful part with biting and rough laxative to clean what is in the foundation, so it can come out openly. When the painful joints are pressed, and if their roots are deeply rooted, then the light treatment is applied.
When the painful joints are pressed, and if their roots are deeply rooted, then the light treatment is applied. And you should press them with your finger or pliers, and cover them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and do not fear the incision by iron. If it is necessary that you mend the wound in this way:
If it is necessary that you mend the wound in this way: Take a sharp needle, and thread it onto a needle, and then pull the thread from above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two threads away from the needle, and if it is wide.
Hold the thread firmly, then release the thread, and extract the needle, and do likewise with all others, and leave it for a time to allow the excess blood to flow.
Then place above the wound a piece of cloth soaked in red oil or cerate, and place it above the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
Then let it remain until they heal, and when they are healed, apply ointment and other remedies until they are healed.
drily with the hands where the base is founded often found dry where the intestines are, and due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help. If it is necessary to reset at the tip of a small bone or with your finger, the surface of which does not allow it to become moist. then the healer should position it as it should be.
and if it cannot be positioned, then restart the scraping more forcefully than before until it is clean, and let it be scorched. then the healer should make it clean.
high fever Mice are a small appearance deformed on the chest, and they go deep into the flesh.
and never find the cause, and it feels like a fever of coldness, and it spreads throughout the body, and more than in other parts.
And the healer should take a quill of a goose pen, or a strong pen of a vulture, and place that quill on the coldness, until the circle around the coldness is complete. Then turn your hand to all the soreness until you remove everything within the heat, and put it in front, and extract the heat from its roots.
And if you see, do this in the form of a rain or iron dog according to this shape, and be subtlely removed and drawn upwards: Do not let go, to hold on to both and press.
And if you see that the heat is cauterized, as it is in front or in the chapter of cautery.
Never made a salve with silver, lead, molten gold or tin;
And never made those small and large instruments according to those that you will bring. Those who are to be nursed in the care of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Those who are to be nursed in the care of children and those who are weak and painful, are small. The form of the bandage is small and large, depending on how wide the belly is tied in this way:
And if there is a disadvantage where the belly is tied, as you see, and the bowel is inside, then you must pierce;
And say to one of the costal arms, two on the right side, and one on the left.
And let the belly be filled with medicines from a pig's bladder or parchment, and perforate all around with small holes, and put one inch of space between each hole, then wind a thread tightly around in an X or around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat. And when the medicine is inside, tie the thread strongly to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then apply a poultice.
And this is the shape of a circle.
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil the head of the poultice with oil or egg yolk, or a similar thing, then apply it lightly. then the ministers pour water into his two hands together, until it is all clear, then remove the cloth, and lift the patient's legs to a sitting position, and if he wishes to get out of bed, then help him as much as possible. and if he sleeps all night, it is even greater help.
And if you apply the poultice in the illness of diarrhea, and the medicine wants to come out, start it again as long as it is healthy.
And if they are hemorrhoids at the base, or an abscess, then the cloth should be as gentle as for a child.
and this is the form of a gentle cloth over the skin where it is stretched:
We have said in the division, the treatment of wounds.
We will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicines, according to the completion.
I say that wounds are different according to what they are made of, and according to the parts or wounds that are made, and from which they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are done by piercing with a spear, and cutting with a sword or dagger, or of lance or staff or arrow, or similar things.
or that are made according to the lessons of the body, such as a wound that pierces through the neck, or the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members.
and I will tell you the treatment of every wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes or the head is not broken, and if it is a puncture of a similar thing, and the skin is completely torn and is large, and you slightly doubt an abscess: if you quickly heal the head itself if it comes soon from blood of the wound, and whether the healing is on the affected part:
and avoid the pains of overeating of wine and heavy meats.
And if he does not want to heal, let him soften his meat, and do not drink wine, and do not change his food:
Put on the wound, if it is suppurating and pus comes out, moistened cotton with rose oil or sterilized wine.
And if there is no suppuration, put on the wound, if it is fresh and full of blood, and it does not move due to air, powder that I will say a little later.
And if the wound has moved, put on some bandages until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a tailor's cut and similar, and the lips cannot come together by tenting, then stitch them together by sewing, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from sewing.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and can be moved, and only holds at one point, tie it. Then treat the wound with medicine, and replace durable leather in its place, and command the patient to eat soft foods, such as tests and cooked grain, like chicken, and similar things.
And if you find any suppuration or pus on the skin, and it is not attached to the bone, then scrape it all away, and pour in vinegar, then heal.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting it, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie the artery, and if you find any suppuration or pus in it, dislodge it, and tie it with a thread. And if it does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you put in this powder that sours as soon as the air touches it.
And the manner of the powder is as follows: Take a part of incense; blood of dragon two parts; live chalk three parts, and the powder finely ground, and fill the wound, and let it set firmly and join to all its blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it without movement until it does not swell; for one should not use the medicine until it is healed.
And never use chalk alone when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound has moved.
And if the wound has moved, immediately in its place, do not put any other of this powder;
but place some digestible ointments, or hair of barley flour made of quicklime and honey, until it flows out. then the healer performs other treatments until they are healthy.
And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with delicate pins;
and I will tell you afterwards about the main fractures.
of the neck wound
If the wound comes from the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and the main fractures, but if the neck nerves or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerves, then there is no other method than to leave the treatment and not put anything restricting, because it harms nerves and causes them to retreat; and do not place anything sharp on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuity with the brain, which is one of the highest members.
but let the medicine be gentle, like how wounds are washed with warm water, and mixed with rose oil, and bandages are also washed with warm water, and other remedies according to this manner, and keep them moist.
And if the wound is large, then bind it with a bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and full of pus, then prick or lower the limb.
And if the artery is cut and blood flows, then stop it, and bandage it, and cauterize as necessary.
And if it is pricked by a thorn in the neck, and cut off, or if the wound is cleaned, and the conductor is kept, by which the meat goes, if the wound is on the back of the neck, and do not touch the neck but put it back according to its natural shape. Then gradually tighten the bandage, and leave it for some time, then treat the wounds until they are healed.
And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, and it is necessary to remove it. And if there are pieces of bone, and you can remove them all, and those that you cannot remove, leave until the wound has healed, and then disinfect and align the wound.
If the wound is fresh, then apply powder on top of the powder I have mentioned. And if he has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have described in his chapter.
If it is a spear or sword wound, and the wound is deep, look to see if there is any ventricle (air pocket) that the hairs do not reach: then shave off those hairs that are mortal:
if it is not deep and the wound is fresh throughout its entire length, then do not apply powder or bandage for the first hour for the blood that does not stop flowing out of the body, and let it return to the heart, and cover the pain: but I apply an attractive ointment, and tie it twice a day.
and if you do not have an ointment, put dry cotton in the wound to soak up the moisture, and let it rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more. if no spasm occurs, nor trembling of the heart from another cause; and when you see good conditions, cut open the wound to save it. cure the other wounds and other treatments, until they are healed.
and if it cannot heal and work, then cut open the fistula.
if the care is done as it should be. And if the wound is from a sword or dagger cut, and it is simple, or worse, at the back, then the care for what is in front. if it is large, of stitching.
and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken off pieces, then remove the wound, and the traces if they are necessary. and if they are not necessary, then let the wound rot, it will help the extraction.
and other wounds to other members are as the judgments as we have said.
abdominal rupture
The dislocations of the belly are large, medium, and small.
Of the great wound, the intestines never jump out once, or the nerves of the intestines, by which they are inserted.
And the sewing is more painful, and never is worse than the small wound than the great one, because one must put the intestines back in, if not they are put back in from top to bottom.
Therefore, because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, and they are put back in more easily, and because the medium-sized wound is worth less, because one must roll the intestines back to their place like the others.
And the tear of the belly is according to FOUR methods:
The two common sutures in the belly wound are in the seam of the belly, and the seam of other wounds of the chest and TWO other private seams are common to other wounds;
And all in all, they are more suitable with the seam of the belly, and I will say each one and explain it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is protruding, and there is no other thing to be done, it is best to put back by one of the TWO methods: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen by the heat.
When it is cold, warm it in this manner: Soak a sponge or some dry bread only in hot water, or boil it in hot, sour, and salty water until the intestine swells enough to be removed.
And never do this again, as it may cause harm and should not be repeated to avoid discomfort.
And when you see the swelling separate, moisten the intestine with hot or cold water and cook the meat, as this will make it easier to enter.
And if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the instrument used to remove tumors.
and the first care is to move the wounded part, that we should not cut without great necessity.
And these are the tools for the cutting:
If you cut within the beak and not without, and see the shape: And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines have jumped out, if you can put them back in their natural form according to their own place, because this is good.
When the wound is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, it is necessary to place the injured part on its back, and raise its legs higher than its head; and if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, place the head and the foot higher than the other parts, and also if the wound extends to one of the two sides, make sure that the injured part is higher than the other.
And thus, you should manage as I have described in severe and moderate wounds.
For small wounds, apply what you have prepared, then place your hands between the wound and the patient's hand, and administer healing ointment that covers the entire wound and closes the lips.
And this is the common method of stitching, and you should grasp one or more needles, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave the tip of the wound a little space, and there insert a needle with good strong thread. And pierce the two needles through the two pieces of skin, which is outside the skin, until you make it pierce from that part, and gather the two ends of the thread together.
Then the thread of a doubled string around the needle of one part, then gather the two ends of the wound evenly, and leave one inch of space, and insert another needle.
Then tie the wound with a thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you know about needles until all the wound is closed.
And let the needles be of medium size, between thin and thick, because thin needles cover the entire wound, and too thick ones cannot enter well. Therefore it is necessary that they be of medium size.
and should not be placed too far from the edge of the skin and flesh, lest they pierce and open the wound before sewing.
and then cover the wounded with needles, so they do not poke the bad hair at night, and put bandages or cloths on the wounded with needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is sewn.
And this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one or two needles.
The second method of sewing is common, and it is that you gather the two pieces of flesh and the two pieces of skin together with one needle and a strong thread in the middle.
and when you have perceived these joints all together, if you reset the needle in the part where you began, in the manner that one does with the drills.
and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a small needle.
This stitch heals the man, and I sewed a wound that one had in the abdomen, which was made by a knife, and it was the wound more than one palm of great, and it was the intestines two palms of great, and it was the wound inside the belly.
I brought back the intestine after it had been for 24 hours missing, and the wound was dressed with 15 hours, and cured, and was healed.
And the man had been judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and did not care for it with bandaging, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicine. and I put moss twice a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until it was clean.
Or I will tell you the two main methods of stitching:
Take the needle, and the thread from the part behind this inside.
When it has pierced the curved part on the right side, then the head of the needle or the thread where you have put the needle, and make it pierce from the other side of the part inside behind this.
and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the tailor does the fur, and you leave one side of the seam once, and bring it back from another side, until the stitching is entirely completed.
The second method of stitching, which Galen properly describes, is such that some do, who assemble the two parts naturally together, and apply one end of the seam to the other end, in a similar manner.
Take a needle or one end of the arrow near, and pierce that part alone, and leave the two ends of the seam. Then turn the needle, and pierce it through the part before this, from below upwards, as for the two wounds of the throat.
Then pierce both through the part before this, from below upwards, in the two other wounds of the other shoulder.
And this is the most common method of sewing and stitching.
If anyone says this word, and no one testifies to it, then one should sew the belly with needles, where there is thread in each.
And one should insert one needle from one side and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
and it is more painful than other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you cut open the fresh wound to its full depth, and as soon as the doctor has moved it, you should replace the intestine and the skin.
then apply the powder of incandescent charcoal, and if the doctor has moved it, then apply any ointment that is present until the wound heals. and sew up the wound, and be sure to clean the surface and the inside. Then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed.
And if you do not have medicines, put it on as soon as possible, when it starts to bleed, with old cloth, and move it 20 times a day until it is healed.
For you have no business with other medicines in many positions where the wounds are simple;
And if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the main members, then it is necessary to massage gently with oil of cold or red oil, and put it inside the angles, and remove from the joints;
If he feels pain or nausea in the abdomen, and often occurs, then cluster him with black wine vinegar, and immediately if nausea comes to the intestines.
And the puncture of the inside, and the salves that when it is the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is exposed, and this is due to the smallness of the veins that are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
And if the pus jumps from the wound, and put it back as the intestines while it is fresh.
And if it is old and becomes green or black, then you must tie the limb that is black, because there are veins and arteries.
then remove the thing that is between the ligaments, and put the two fingers hanging from the part of the wound away from the wound until the extraction when the bones chip, and the wound opens.
of the breakage of the bone
When the intestines are punctured, and the wound is small, if it can be returned to some people, because I saw that a man was gutted by the belly of a lance.
and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and it was inflamed and became a fistula, and in it was the excretion and the ventosity.
I put care according to what I could, and did not stop until it was healed, and the wound closed.
And when I saw him stitching, I doubted whether the hairs had harm in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, and fed and watered;
and they said no experts that when he has a small wound in the intestine, that he should be tied in such a manner: take thick strings, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the string has opened his mouth, then place it across both lips, so that he strains his mouth open;
and then cover the head, and it holds so that he cannot slip, then place the other string as before, until the wound is completely closed; and examine the wound.
If the sharp object is in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and it can be tied with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in such a way:
take the sharp object from the intestine of the animal that is very dirty, and then tie it to the thread of thin linen, then wrap the thread around the needle, and examine the intestine, and pull it out through the hole;
and this way of sewing is no further than according to the way of faith and hope;
If the wound is large and extensive, especially when it is in one of the internal cavities, there is no remedy or health, only subtlety.
of fistula or where it is all wounds or abscesses, when they appear, are universally called "fistulas", and specifically when they are cut and opened.
And a fistula is along the spine, a hard and white sore, where no pain is felt, and it is as sharp as the beak of an eagle.
And sometimes clear and sometimes thick. And sometimes little and sometimes enough.
And I have spoken of this in the section on wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no char, it is only because of one of the EIGHT causes: It is to know, by the smallness of blood or wounds; or because of its evil. or because there is hard clotting within, and on the lips, which does not allow blood to flow. or there is too much swelling. or the joint is twisted, and the matter is of bad quality. or the medicine is not good for the treatment. or because the corruption is like a plague. or because the property in the region is late in digestion, and late in health, and expelled by nature. where there are veins or bones
and I have already shown all these causes, signs, and remedies in the chapter.
It is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of fistulas made by manual work.
It is said that fistulas can occur in all members of the body; because there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the face, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes to the property of the main member, and similar ones.
And all these fistulas of this kind are of great suffering, and there is only labor and ignorance.
And if there is no fistula that does not come from the joint that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you know the remedy, take a rain or iron tent, if the fistula is straight, if it is crooked.
And if the fistula is crooked, then circle it with a thin tent of wool, for the wool pours through the twists.
And if the fistula has many holes and you cannot well encircle it with tents, then cleanse it through one of the holes, for the moisture will cut from one hole to another, and it cleans.
then correctly and carefully to your power, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and is cut in half, and ask well of the patient about the pain he feels when pressing your hand, and the limb where he feels it.
and when you will know truly the limb where it is, and if it is far from the joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or any of the limbs that I have told you, then proceed according to what I have told you, and remove the cause and the corrupt matter that is inside.
and then the cure until it is healthy, and if the fistula is well deeply at the right place, then you should cut in half as much as you can, then put moist bandages in medicine water, and push them into the main part of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
Then I apply clean, warm wax, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed by then, cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by a fistula, cut it off.
If the vein or nerves do not harm your principal members, as we have said.
And if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then clean out the corruption until it is all gone, then apply clean wax until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, and remains bowed as before, then do not delay in seeking further treatment.
If you discover and desire to be at the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore the limb.
And if it is thus healthy, it is well. If not, seek that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it; if there is no other means than to wait for nature.
And if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with pincers, if it is drawn to the appropriate tool for that, and if there are many bones, then remove them all.
And if the moisture makes it against you, and there is no mistake or fear, then boil and moisten and char, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place a warm, moistening substance on the wound to soften the bones, and leave it until the bones are surrounded by flesh, and then they will be more easily removed.
And if they are large bones, such as a leg or thigh, then wait until the corruption is complete and the bone is completely softened, then close the wound.
And if there is a large part of the corruption, and it comes to form a mass around the bone; if it should be covered and covered with all around the corruption, and then treat it until it is completely healed.
And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you might take example and help in your work.
He was a young man around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, such that the matters came to the leg, and was inflamed by a large abscess, and there was no cause to open it.
But the wise ones over-opened it so much that the abscess opened, and they drained many matters, and it became a fistula, and there came much pain that everyone was groaning and sweating from the body.
and many sought and sought care within two years, and there was no knowledge in the art of hands, until I was called, and saw her leg and the medicines that were used to treat it, and what was running through the pores at great speed. and became red the veins of the young, and had a yellowish color.
I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and found that one was coming into contact with the other from all parts of the leg.
I therefore hastened, and took from one of the pores until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption was coming into the bone from within.
I thought what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption, but that which I had taken.
and began to restore the wound with medicines soaked in long tension, and could not stick.
Then I re-examined, and discovered the bone as before, and found continuous corruption in the bone, and the marrow, and then I removed it, and I was unable to heal the limb. But I could only manage to remove as much of the bone as possible, and then treat it throughout its entire length, and then restore it with medicines. And it healed and healed quickly, but did not want to start the work again except for the weakness of the pain, which could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had of him. For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but he was healed entirely, and in place of the bone grew a hard cartilage, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction throughout, neither to the left nor to the right.
And if the jawbone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this way: take a piece of cloth, and place it at the top of the bone that opens, and command that it not be extended upwards; and place another piece of linen, larger than the first, on top of the part that is outside the bone, and extend the jaw, so that you can remove the rotten flesh from outside, and cover the wound above the place where you want it to be, so that it does not bleed;
and place a bandage or a cloth outside the bone to cover the rotten flesh.
And it is necessary to be as much silk as one can see and feel the corruption, and be another time.
And if the tooth is rotten and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then remove the whole crown.
Then put the wax on one side of the corruption and then silk from one part to the other, and let the silk be as long as possible from the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint and silk the bone on the other side.
and if its deformity is in the continuation of the second joints, there is no other remedy than to apply copper.
and if its deformity is at the tip of the finger or toe, this is very difficult, but nevertheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it opens. and clean it in all the ways you can, but do not cut the vein or the nerve against your will.
and wash those that the cutter and the threads for covering these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and the appearance of the nails, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. and therefore it is necessary to arrange each similar work's tool;
and the work will show you the tool that you will need to have knowledge of this art, according to the knowledge of diseases and their symptoms; if you think the tool that you have according to what it should be.
The head of the shoulder dislocates either due to moisture, or due to lack;
and when you have cured that corrosion by the care of medicines, and it does not improve, then it is necessary to amputate that member until the place where the corrosion comes, so that the pain escapes by death, or by malice, which is greater, due to the lack of the member;
and the signs are such that the limb becomes black, so it seems as if it has been burned by fire, and remains black, then it goes through the corrosion of member to member, and takes hold of the whole body.
if you have a bite, and if it is by the percussion of some poisonous animals, such as scorpions of the sea and snakes, and similar, if the corrosion is at the back of the neck, then the copper, and do not give it any space to come near the hand.
And if it comes near the hand, then the copper at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come near the arm.
and if it comes to the arm, then cut the copper.
and if it passes the collarbone, it is death, and there is no remedy except the amount of its virtue.
and then do as follows when the corrosion comes or stings: if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint.
and if it stings, then cut all the sting. and if it goes up the leg, then cut at the knee joint.
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the pain kill.
And the manner of applying a bandage or a cloth to the limb is such that you tie it above and below, and extend some bandages along one side, and other bandages along the other side, and you soak the char between the two limbs at a span's width, until the bone is exposed;
then the bandage or cloth, and put a piece of linen on each part, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy limb, and comes to the injury, other lesion, and abscess;
And if blood comes out when you work, then cauterize the limb quickly, or put some astringent powders on it;
then return to your medicine as it is accomplished, then bind the injured limb with a convenient bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to the man in the story:
he suffered a severe burn that looked like fire, and that corrosion first affected his entire body;
and when the doctor saw the corrosion, he covered the body with a bandage, and it was healed.
and after some time, the corrosion returned to his hand, and it came to me, and I put him on things that were reflective after cleaning the wound, but I could not stop the corrosion.
and he asked me to hold his hand, and I did not want to do so unless I had hope of recovering the matter. and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for the power of the ointment was weak.
and he completely lost hope, and returned to his land, and stopped covering his hand, and was healed.
and I have not counted it worth mentioning except for the purpose of doing something else if one has such business.
Abscess never comes in the joint that is greased, and it lasts for so long that it causes great swelling. Then pierce and cut through, and into the belly, and let the limbs remain still, as if in a vat. And the skin above is also as delicate as the cloth you remove, and does not corrode the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "sinus", and are not called "fistula".
But if it is so long that it reaches the bone in front, it is called "fistula".
And if the skin is so thin that it covers the bone all around, and even when it is as delicate as cloth. and does not become corrupted by its decay.
And if you have sworn that the skin will not decay, and the corruption is not yet in progress, and the skin is blackened by fire, then the treatment of the ointment should be as follows:
Look if the wound is large, and the belly that is in it has a putrid odor, then the ointment of Egyptian medicine made as follows: Take garlic, oil, and litharge equally, and put them in a small vessel to boil in the fire until the medicine is red and as thick as honey;
And then take as much as needed according to your necessity, and make it into a sharp and sweet mixture, and apply it to the chest, and hold the abscess open. and leave the medicine in place for two hours, then expel it by squeezing;
do this as many times as necessary until the chest is clean and the pus is removed.
and never use the mixture of ash and powdered sulfur when this medicine is not present, and you should squeeze powdered vine wood, and pour boiling water over it, then let it drain, and apply it to the chest, until you know that the chest is clean.
and if the pain is too great for them to bear, neither Egyptian medicine nor the sharp powder of ashes, then apply a poultice of honey and clay or if they have a little bit of burnt willow bark. or you apply a poultice of honey and melted wine, where the honey has the property of healing and cleansing, and the wine makes the wound rot.
and when you have done this, and you have secured that the wound is well healed, then apply a poultice of what makes new flesh grow in it, and it is that you hold a definite plaster, and they make it with rose oil and wine.
where you cauterize the wound with some medicines and ointments, of which I have described their properties or treatment of ointments.
and if the pain is small and the wound cannot take in the cataplasm, then enlarge it a little with a needle, and put in an Egyptian tenting or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave it open as much as possible where the cataplasm can enter, and if the pain is above the shoulder, then cover or higher up the shoulder where it is.
And if you cannot cover the entire side as you see fit, then arrange it in such a way that the bow is at its lowest point where it is, for when the bow is in place, do not let the arrow stick out and if you cannot cover the entire side as you see fit, then arrange it in this manner: so that the bow gently slides down, and leave nothing of the bow.
so that the bow gently slides down, and leave nothing of the bow. and take consolidative remedies to place on the wound, and stay on the linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then apply the force in the right place to push back the swelling of the chest not too wide from the first, since it is stuck tightly under the other cloth according to the amount of the swelling, and put it on the wound to align the bowels, and do not remove the large drape until after many days once.
and the one who is on the wound of the chest, often remove to remove the bowels, and check what comes out of the bowels, whether it is poison or little or enough, or digested or undigested.
and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in a certain way and you see the nature that jumps over the wound of the chest, check if the chest is already raised, and approach the healthy side.
and then dislocate it in the morning, or the next day, and when you dislocate the wound, if you change the bandage, and renew the poultice.
And if subtle poisons are cut after long tension, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
For there are people who delay in applying char to their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and if they apply it in an undigested manner after many days, it is possible that the breasts will not heal.
and if the breasts take a long time to heal, and are distant, then apply moist medicines in substance and dry in virtue, such as poultice, because there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
Take a definite amount of honey, and make it into a poultice with rose oil, and add an equal amount of old wine in substance.
Then use it.
And this itself is made of cooked honey, when there is no raw honey present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and the powder on the honey when it is over the fire.
Then glue it to a cloth, and place it on the chest, and never administer it long, and roots of star anise, which is also like flour and hundred. and in the use of simple or compound remedies: grind them, and make powder from them, and put on honey that I have said, and use it;
and if the cure is long, and not cured by this cure, then scrape away the corruption that has formed, and make an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in joints; if the cure of the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that arises outside the joint of the little finger of the hand, or the toe, or by chance it arises in other places;
When it is dislocated, and no precaution is taken, if it comes into contact with an abscess, and it is covered and poured with boiling water until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps it covers all of it;
and it comes into contact with the bone, until it reaches the point of intense pain, and the affected part is large and red.
If you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help much, then you must remove all the excess that remains from the elbow, then cauterize the wound afterward. The cauteries are very helpful if the bones are healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail is close to the flesh, and it begins to prick, and the wound, then you must put the cauterizing iron on the outside of the nail so that it does not penetrate the flesh, and bring the burnt part upwards, and carefully and gently cover this char with healing and corrosive medicines to remove everything; Then apply poultices until they are healed.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut off and remove it, for as much as the bone has been corrupted, it cannot be healed.
And if you see the other decaying, then cut off and remove it as before mentioned, then apply poultices until they are healed.
And if it is foul, swollen, and causing great pain, then you must first cleanse it.
Then cut the infected part off with a sharp knife, making sure that the cut does not come into contact with the healthy flesh around the nail, for the pain would be too great.
And if it happens, put something on top to soothe it.
The sharp pain that arises in the hands of some men by chance is all chronic, and sometimes it is in the fingers or where there are bones, and never in the nail, and none of them arise at the root of the joint, or in any of the ten fingers.
Those who are born without any bone in the shoulder do not move, and those who are born at the joint of the shoulder may move by chance.
The size of the one who is chubby is lighter, in this way: size it at its root of a wide span.
Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you hold it with a copper.
In those who are born or must be at the back, it is necessary that you first cut the round bone reasonably close to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable silk according to this, then cure it until it is healed.
The same things that come together in two ways come from birth or from the wound, or from burning of fire, or from similar things.
If it is appropriate to cover that which is sore, so that it may return according to its natural forms. Then place between two tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, so they do not stick. Or you place between two thin pieces of wood, until the bones are sound, as they should be.
When it comes to both of his hands with the palm, if that suits the healing as it should.
Veins are large and swollen with excess melancholy, which comes from many members of the body.
And they come more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Therefore, you should never administer any purgative of clay, and then give the healthy one from the basilica.
The cure of iron is according to two methods: One is that one takes the blood and draws out the black blood. And the other way is to tie the vein, and pull it out completely.
The cut is done in this way: First, the sharp knife is heated very hot, until the thick sinews are not thinned, then the leg is straightened from the misaligned position above the knee to the lower part of the groin;
then cut the vein in the thigh, or in the first, second, or third part, with a wide blade, then lift and pull out the black blood with your hand from one side to the other, until as many sinews as the pain can bear are removed.
and then tie it up, and command him to rub with meat juice mixed with black pepper.
And repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are clear, and expose to the air.
The following is done in this way: Rub the painful leg, if there is much hair, then put it in hot water, and apply hot compresses to the leg until it turns red, and open the veins.
If you have no hot water, heat it on the fire, and then place the heated cloth over the vein where it is long at the knee or in the lower leg.
Then work the skin at the incision, and scrape the vein from every part, as it appears when touched.
And you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin seems like a white cord.
Then push the needle through, as long as it is raised from the skin, and then you can put it lightly at the incision, then cover it in the other place with two or three fingers.
Then scrape the skin over the vein as it appears, then lift it to the wound, as you have done, and put it at another incision, as you have done first.
then take another size, or if you have experience with this, then lightly, and apply it to the second part of the wound, then remove it and lightly apply it to the second size.
then extract the sizes in size, until all the strength is gone, then apply it.
and if you cannot pull and lift it, then if an arrow with a strong double point enters the thread, and tie it and remove it, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is gone. and be careful that it does not stick, because if it sticks, then one cannot pull or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient.
and when you have fully treated it, place on the wound a cloth soaked in wine and rose oil. and the care until it is healed.
And if the wound is contracted and twisted and swollen all together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then it is necessary that you cut it painfully, but do not cover it. and treat it as we have previously said.
The shape of the iron that covers the wound is curved, and does not cut through it, so that it does not cover the vein.
and it is of large curvature, because if it were too fine, it would cover the vein, but it should be large as we have said, and this is its shape:
This vein is enlarged in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in land that has no moisture.
And by chance it arises in other parts than the legs, and there is a puss that comes out from under the skin, as it comes from within the body winding and turning, enlarged between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that it comes in the leg a very large inflammation, then the limb changes, and the vein begins to issue forth, like the root of a plant.
When the wound is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth of one and a half inches wide and two inches long, and wet it, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it is not there, if you wrap it around the cloth, and wet it.
If it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining part around its root, and do not cover it completely until it is all out. For if you cover it, it will go back into the wound, and cause abscess and pus or infection in the limb, and make the patient very sick.
For this reason, it is necessary that it be treated very little and very slowly from the top, and nothing should remain or rot.
And there should never be this vein when it is treated with V palms of length, or X, and sometimes I have seen it come out from X palms long, and when you cover it, it will burst the skin or puncture, and go all the way down to the bottom.
and clear out the matter that is inside, and administer to the patient medicines infused for the purpose of healing any injury, then treat the wounds as you would with abscesses.
And never rain on this vein, and especially when it opens at the joint of the finger, or finger, and if much blood comes out, and it is difficult to stop.
Treat the wound as we have said before.
of verses that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called "cow disease" in our land, because it often affects cows, and it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body, and is felt by all members to member, until it reaches the skin where it was, and jumps out.
and is caused by the presence of certain humors, such as come from worms and lumbricus and ascarides or intestines.
and it is doubted as to its harm, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the brain, perhaps enters, and destroys the brain. this often happens.
when you see it to cure and draw out, then one cannot do but when it goes:
then it is necessary that you hold the limb above and away from a very tightly bound bandage, then cut across and draw it out, and if it turns back into the body, then you should cauterize with fire until it dies.
and the greatest harm it does is that it consumes oil, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold the spoon firmly over it, then pour on it and remove it.
and it is necessary to use the ointment of healing herbs for the diseases caused by bad humors, and if there are wounds from eating rotten meat.
of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "wakirir", and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from member to member.
I see what I told you. I was called to a woman with a bad arm, and I discovered that her arm was swollen, and there was a small abscess in the armpit.
And soon after, I saw it grow as large as a worm in the shoulder, much faster than anything, as if it were live silver when cut from the bone.
The pain departed from the arm and moved to the shoulder, then a little later it corrupted throughout the body, until it reached the other arm.
Then she told me that she twisted around her body, as I saw.
I was greatly amazed at how it moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease move in this way. Nevertheless, I wanted to make sure that she could move the pain from one arm to the other, but I did not see her do it as I saw in the woman.
and I thought it was because the woman had dry skin, and the veins exposed, and because that visibility was constrained;
and they do not reveal themselves to those who are delicate, and who have moist skin and veins covered.
And when you see how to cure this disease, and the pain feels as we have said, if it opens as we have described, then tie above and below hastily, and then cover it so that that visibility is constrained to the limb is gone; and burn the limb.
and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat the cause of that visibility, like foul-smelling pills, and snake pills, and similar others.
Arrows are various, according to their appearances and according to the types of bodies they penetrate.
The variety of them is that there are those who have large points, and small ones, and pointed ones, and polished ones. and of those who have II angles, and of those who have tongues, and of those which have pieces.
and that which penetrates into any member if it penetrates according to the two ways: or in a principal member such as the neck, as the spine, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it penetrates therefore into any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears to you: if it is necessary for you to extract this arrow, as many die afterwards in various positions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely removed from the wound, then cut it and treat the wound.
and the sign of the skull when the arrow pierces and goes through the bone, and the sinus above the skull, which is blindness and swelling and sweating and redness of the throat, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is no pain in the nostrils or ears. and possibly the word and voice; and white watery fluid like pus, and also like boiling pitch from the wound;
and if this sign appears to you, then take care of the patient, and remove the arrow if it is not already out.
The sign of the arrow when it pierces or enters is that it is close to the right breast, and also feels like it was stuck in something hard, not empty. and possibly the arrow moves like pus, and also cuts through black blood, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and syncope. Then they are sent away due to doubt of death.
And the sign that the arrow has not been pulled out is that without complaining of pus, it jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the limbs change color, and it gasps for breath and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrowhead is stuck in the coverlet of the poor, it is behind the small ribs; and gives great pain and shortness of breath. and move all the members of the shoulder.
And if the arrowhead is stuck in the stomach, by chance if it jumps out of the wound nothing of the undigested meat.
And if the arrowhead is stuck in the abdomen, and it does not come out through the intestinal wall, there is no hope of cure or extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrowhead is stuck in the bladder, and the urine comes out and goes away, and the patient feels great pain: Then it is clear that the wound is mortal.
The other limbs, such as the arms and neck and throat and shoulder and back and spine and hip and knee and feet, and similar members, are safe according to various positions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of what you were doing otherwise.
It happened to a man who had an arrow stuck in his thigh at the root of the knee: I tried to remove it, and took it out from the other side through the fat of the ear, and he was cured without any harm.
And in one game, an arrow that shot into the grease of the oil outside the paper, and the arrow was returned, and could not reach beyond the tip facing the fust, and it was a great arrow of a Turkish bow, entirely made of iron without ears.
The game was sound, and no harmful accidents came to it.
And an arrow shot into the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears.
I healed the wounds, and skillfully treated it, and the Christian was healed.
And a arrow was stuck in a man, whether it was in his head or belly, and I thought he would die.
and then after thirty hours, he did not change his condition; I cut into the arrow, inserted a probe, and pulled it out, and there was no bad outcome.
And if you want to a man who an arrow fell on or back, and the wound was sewn up from above;
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change his natural conditions, and found no harm in any of his natural functions.
And if you want to another man who an arrow fell on his face, and the wound was sewn up; and prolongs thus without great pain;
and many similar things.
And a spear was thrown at the man of the prince, the king, who had his head in the neck, and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the spear was entirely embedded.
I was called for after it had been three days. If the wound is very narrow.
I found it all in a very thin tent, and did not feel any pain. and he felt sharp pain and pain on his right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the spear. I put it on his forehead, attractive digestive, because the eyes do not swell; And I saw the head of the arrow.
And I saw the head of the arrow. And I placed the poultice on it immediately, and dressed the wound directly, and left it in place for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead still inside his nostril.
And he told me. I placed a corrosive medicine on the wound immediately, until it was open, and I tried to extract it, and felt the head of the arrow sticking in his neck.
Then I pushed it into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visible to me.
and it passed well the ends within four months, and then began to ulcerate the wound that I had sewn with needles, on one side and the other, and could not heal.
Therefore, I continued to subtly and cleverly manipulate tools, until I took the needles again, well made, according to what its form will be at the end of this chapter, so that I sew it, and restore the wound.
And the physician judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I restored it anyway, and the wound was healed, and the pain was completely cured.
I have told you the quality of some arrow extractions, so that you put your care above what I do not say, for the books cannot contain everything.
But the wise masters compare well with little knowledge, and above what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not come from members where they are stuck, unless in two ways: or by the limb through which they enter, or by another part.
And that which goes through the part where it enters, is an arrow entering in its joints, and never comes out of them.
And if she does not jump now, let her remain until the charcoal is burned through and the issue is alleviated.
And if she is stuck in the bone, and cannot be removed, let her remain thus for several days, and move it every day.
Then she jumps, and if she does not jump, pierce all around with a fine needle until the flesh around is expanded, and then draw it out.
And if the arrow is reinserted into the body so that it cannot be seen, then it is hidden in the whole tent. and if you feel it, then pull it out with any suitable tool.
and if you cannot pull it out due to the narrowness of the wound and the deepness of the arrow, and there is no bone or sinew or vein, then leave it until the wound becomes large.
and if you find the arrow, and if it has ears in the arrow that it holds, then break the char that is stuck to two parts of the muscle that you can, and then break or pull out the ears of the arrow, as much as you can pull it;
and carefully do not break the shaft, so that you can pull it out more forcefully.
And if you cannot do it once, then push the lung back inside through the ribs, as extraction causes pain. And if the bleeding of blood makes you contrary, then follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and guard against the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put effort as you can muscle to pull out the arrow without danger, or soon or late, or tightly or firmly;
Put the patient according to the shape it was in when the arrow hit, for this is the greatest help, and if you cannot, put it according to what the signs show.
The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens nothing, or the skin is swollen in that place where one can see or feel it.
Then cut above, as far as the hooks can take, and then extract it. If it jumps now.
And if it is retained in the bone, round your hand and push it into the bone until it enters, then expand the bone, then remove it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it in and then restart the extraction until it comes out.
And if it is from an arrow and it is, if it is stuck in the whole body;
and if it is stuck in the chest, and you see that it is administered slowly, if it is administered with a tool, so that the tip of the arrow enters the hair of the tool;
and then pull out, and if the arrow is stuck, if it is pulled out with the tool entering pointedly, to facilitate the extraction.
And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you cut out all of the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrow is stuck in the back or belly or in the stomach or bladder or side, and it is close, and you can cover it up, if it can be covered.
and do not cover the vein and the limb, then pull it out, and then suture the wound, if necessary. and continue the treatment until they are healed.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and here is the form:
And there are many ways to do this: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of blood.
The shape of the arrowhead is like the beak of a bird, to stick into the point of the arrow, such as this shape.
There are 31 veins that can be tapped from which one has or takes 16, that is to say: 2 bananas that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbaceous"; and the 2 arteries that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two armpits, which are called "aspirants"; and the vein that is behind the forehead; and the vein that is at the back of the neck; and the two jugulars which are on the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augicherich"; and the two veins that are outside the tongue.
The veins that are commonly bled are five in each arm:
one is the cervical, and is on the right side of the chest, and is called the "vein of the head"; The moxa is called "hast", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilar, and they call it the lay people "vein of the heart". And the basilar is on the right side, and they call it the lay people "vein of the belly", and it is above the sacrum, and it is that from which one heals, which opens obviously above the pouch.
And the savatte is the vein that is between the auricular and annular, and it has rain.
And in the leg and where the knee is, there are three veins: One is outside the pouch of the left rib cage, and the second is above the knee on the right side. and the vein that is called "nesse", which is in the knee of the other side.
and in the other leg, there are three veins besides those.
The cleansing of the veins that are after the ears helps with ancient catarrh and headaches.
And the quality of the cleaner, as I told you, and that you rub the head of the pain, and rub the limb where the veins are on a rough cloth. Then press the painful spots on their neck to a noose, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two folds of the neck. For the questions you have about your shoulder, and where you feel the hairs away from your shoulder, if they are painful, squeeze them.
Then take the needle, and the thread from outside the vein to the bone, then lift your hand above the vein, and cut and remove the skin and the vein well, you must pass through it twice, and let out the pus until you see.
Then drain and bandage, as long as it is healed.
And I have already said the incision and the cauterization in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples, it is better to embrace them gently, and soothe them, and apply a custom-made compress to them.
and the qualities of a good surgeon are as I say: and that he holds his head steady, so that both veins are clearly visible; and feels the hairs on his chin, and then shaves them;
then lift the skin over the vein at the chin index, and prick it with a lancet outside, and lift the vein upwards, and cover it as you have done in the other veins, and draw off the blood according to your need.
then release the dislocation, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then form a bandage, and leave it until it is healed.
And we have spoken of them and their treatment and extraction, which begins the book.
The healing of the facial veins is as valuable as the healing of headaches and ancient facial diseases, and migraines, and rheumatism.
And the quality of the pain is such that the patient twists their neck, until the vein appears. Then take the tool called "fossil", which has this shape:
And place the tip of it on the vein, and hold it with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see. Then relieve the pain by loosening the neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and only once in a while with a wide flame.
However, the fire should not be too hot. And the cauterizing iron should be straight, because the teeth are close, and by chance it may break the flame when it is thin.
The cauterizing of the two veins that are in the two arms helps them, and at the elbow, and at the wrist, and at the eye in the oil, and for diseases of the face.
And the quality of their cauterizing is such that the pain is relieved by twisting any ligament, as before.
then the healthy one, and let the health pass through the wound, a little long of the flame, a little wide, for there is no hair. And if the fire is too fine, perhaps it will break;
then apply cotton to the blood, as much as you have skill, and then tie it up and bind it well.
The health of the vein in the neck is useful against ague, and for sudden swelling, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and constantly when it is old;
and the quality of the health is such that the pain is strained at the neck, then strain the neck to your right hand, and take the fine fire long, and put it between the lip and the space between the two noses, for the vein does not open well on its own, and the saint will begin to bleed now;
and do not move it too much, and apply the bloodletting according to your need, then bind it for a night, as it is quickly restored.
The oil of the two myrtles helps to narrow the almond, and at the beginning of melting, and for many diseases, and for impetigo, and for corrosions, and for herpes, and for stomatitis.
And the quality of the oil is such that the pains stray from both sides, as we have said.
And let the masters be above the top of the pain, and the pain lies across one seat, then oil the long one a little widely, then apply the bloodletting gradually, as much as necessary.
then perform the other vein, then release the artery, and hold the veins steady, so they do not constrict. and let it bleed until morning, so the wound may heal.
of the health of the liver The health of the liver above helps to cool in the mouth, and prevents tooth decay, and cracks in the lips, and mouth sores and around.
And the quality of the bandage is to place the wound in front of you, and hold its neck as I have said. then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one on the right cheek and the other on the left, which are black, and by which there are small black veins inside.
Therefore, examine both sides, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, compare the largest of each part, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
of the tongue's disorder The veins that are below the tongue help after the venipuncture of the cephalic, and it is at the narrowing of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of the venipuncturist is that the diseases cease between your hands before the sun, and you lift the tongue, and look away on each side a black vein.
Therefore, both are healthy and do not move too quickly, for they are the arteries.
The veins that are commonly treated are healed in two ways:
either by pricking at all the fire with a wide needle, or with an oil lamp as thin as a thread, and is called "anevil". and are wide and thin according to the width and thickness of the veins. The form of the flame mirror is very famous, and is as wide as you see.
And there is skill for opening the veins that are coarse and flat, which contain large clots and disturbed; and this is the shape of the thin needle fire:
And it is more subtlely pointed, and is for purifying veins that are subtle, where there is subtle blood yellow.
The purgation of the basilicon, which is one of those veins, helps with diseases that are outside the neck, and where the shoulder, and where the arm, and where the stomach.
And it is necessary for the purger to do so skillfully, and to avoid the artery that is outside. And if he pierces the artery, and blood flows out, then it is necessary to apply a compress as I have said. And he should not hold the fire, but cut as with scissors.
And if the basilicon does not open clearly, then it is necessary to strain and change another one. where you want any pain from it, or you know how to put it back in place instead of the vein in the arm: it opens clearly; and the copper to the fire as we have said.
And if you see the limb of the injury, then it is necessary that you strain the arm, so that you touch the limb as much as you know the pulse; then sign the wound with ink, and then tie the arm, and put the vein in the fire. and be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the limb swell, for it is the artery: eschar the wound then.
And if you see it protruding as high as the urine of a child, and the discharge is red and thin, know that it is from an artery: then quickly apply your finger over a long distance, then remove your finger over the discharge, which often occurs; tie the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the hairs;
and let it be in fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the discharge is not stopped, and it hurts, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery open, for the head of the arrow may be drawn back; and stains the skin.
And take a piece of bread, and tear it, and take one half and soak it well in the other juice;
if the skin is not stained, it is good. if not, as we have said, treat with powders that stain blood;
and the stains are not too dark in many positions for the small limb of the wound, and the position of the patient's arm.
The cleansing of the vein in the middle helps that it treats blood above and below, because it is composed of basilica and cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the doctor to stretch out for the limb that is dislocated, and if he does not do it too forcefully, and he finds the limb, and he inflates it and the wound is not healed;
and this limb is often open many times, and if it does not open in any men due to its subtlety, then you must use the instruments of the doctor; and protect the limb from your power.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
The doctor of the head helps, that she draws blood from the head, and helps to those;
and it is necessary for the doctor to prick with the oil lamp or the mint lamp, because it is the safest of all veins, because it has no joints or arteries. In all cases, one should seek the lightest limb, and not cause any harm if it is necessary for the first time, and then restart. And by chance, some men's limbs may swell up, but it does not cause any harm the first time.
The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
The first thing you should know about healing is that healing is not intended for any other purpose than to maintain health and prevent diseases from coming.
And the healing should be done in one of the three veins that are open: that is to say, cephalic, median, and basilic. And one should begin to fasten in the beginning of the first ten days, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears;
and one should begin to fasten the first day or the third, after two hours or three in the morning.
The fastening that is administered for diseases has no determined time, but rather it depends on the hour or the food, in every hour and in all times.
And one should not fasten children under the age of twelve, nor a woman who is pregnant except for low abdominal pain up to the seventh month. Nor should one heal the old who have passed sixty years.
And when anyone wishes to purify themselves in any way that they may, it is necessary for them to cleanse their intestines from a light clyster, if they have much feces retained, so that the veins do not attract the excess and superfluous intestinal matter that harms the principal limbs;
nor does one purify those who are too clean of meats, or those who are bloated, as much as they may be, nor hydrotherapeutic.
And if one wishes to purify after colic passion, vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequently changing of habits, of traveling, of watching and fasting, and all the virtue, or by some means of the arm or body;
then carefully remove the humors, if it is not too large, through food and drinks and through medicines, if you have the ability.
then enter or bathe, if nothing prevents it, to thin the blood and cleanse the veins from the worst in the third, as we have said.
and avoid that day of work, and pain, and luxury, and similar things.
and be tied and joyful, and let the healer be higher than that one who is being healed, and rub the arm twice or three times, then restrict the movement of the joint above, for when it is too loose or tight, it cannot be corrected.
And then rub the limb with hands, until the veins swell, and feel them.
Then moisten the vein with a drop of old oil, then place his finger on the hand nearest to the vein where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not burst and fail to draw blood.
For there are veins that burst as if they were strings to the bleeding, and some are so thin in flexibility, that when one puts on the fire, they withdraw from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus are those. And if he opens the vein, if the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the bleeder be aware of these things.
And if you see this work for the first time, it is good. If not, then restart a little below or above, if the part is not inflamed.
And if the part is inflamed, and the pains subside, then leave it for a day or two, and do not bind the arm tightly. Perchance I will bring abscesses afterwards.
Do not enter or take a bath, then restart the cleansing if it pleases him.
And if the pain is small, or if you doubt that it will not bleed as much as you have seen, then apply heat directly to the wound.
and the work is done rather harshly, as long as the patient's breath is not held; for this often happens, when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swelling, do not start again with the wound cleaning, and put a little bit of oil on it, because it soothes the pain of the stone, and is more effective in this limb than the oil.
and thus administer the oil remedy in each cleaning to stop the flow of the stone.
And this itself causes a tracheotomy and suffocation when put on the limb. if subtly, separate the teeth when it is too large.
And if there are large abscesses that often occur, specifically when it is not cleaned except at this time or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and place an absorbent sponge soaked in boiled and strained vinegar on the limb for an hour;
and it is necessary to do this after the discharge of the blood from the vein, and if it remains on the limb for any days without any blackness or greenish color, then it does not need to be removed. and if you see, place anything of aloes or of mustard mixed with juice of camomile, monsterwort, or similar.
And often appears to be an abscess at the base of the church:
So put your hand on it, and if you feel the bone moving under the pressure of your hand, then that appearance is bad. Therefore do not put anything on it that we have said, because accidentally you might cut the artery;
but rather apply a dry bandage to harden the bone, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And follow each vein according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
For if it is not black, let it bleed as long as it is red; and if you see that it is thick, let it bleed as long as it becomes thinned out; And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is appropriate for the one who is skilled and experienced, and has the task of extracting arrows, to make a larger wound, and to use wide flames;
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is appropriate to bandage often and little, and it should be bandaged by cutting across, not by pinching;
And this method of bandaging is safe from the corrosion of arrows and the compression of nerves, and it is better than long or wide bandaging.
And for the one whose body needs bandaging, it is appropriate to give bread soaked in juice of green grapes; If it is hot-tempered, take three or four bloodlettings with warm blood; and if it is of cold complexion, change the bread before the saint's day into a moistened, sweetened bread in a musky syrup, or an aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and coriander, and a strongly scented syrup.
And if he palms the wound after much bleeding of blood, it is necessary that he drink broth of char, and sweet-smelling syrup, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to strengthen an arm, and wound again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bandage gradually and gradually, according to the amount of its continuous virtue.
And if he wants to wound again an arm after the first bleeding, and he has great pain, he should bandage seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the second hour.
And whoever wishes to heal on the other side, they should heal according to the second hour or the third.
For it has much blood within the body that is already hot, and causes fever; if it is necessary to draw a great quantity, and widen the vein until it bursts; then you must restore all the conditions of health, and place your hand on the pulse when it is healed, so that many die in place of the vein, and this often happens when the healer is neglectful;
and it does not matter whether you see the shoulder sliding out of its place, and making a cut again, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly on; and if it is crooked, extend the arm quickly, for this would be bad;
but let it rest until it heals the second time; or you have not at the tip of the flame, until the uncongealed blood flows from the wound, and put on a small piece of cloth to stop the bleeding, and press lightly.
And if it flees, let it go and do not hold it until the abscess is calmed.
And if necessary, draw the blood from another vein, or from the other arm.
The vein in the arm is safer than the main one because it is composed.
And the way of healing is that the hairs put their hand in hot water until the wound is red;
then tie it gently, so that the vein appears well, then clean it thoroughly, neither too narrow nor too wide;
and let it bleed widely, and clean it well near the joint of the hand, and if none can come out, put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the hot water, until you have enough;
and if it is already in that state, do not put the hand in hot water again, for it will freeze more than it is already;
and the cleaning of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are no artery or nerve.
The right hand's savior from all diseases of the liver is as follows:
Strain the hand, and boil in very hot water until the vein is broken, if one can see it. And if the savior is crooked, and if you hold it with both hands, it will not hurt anything.
Do not remove it too soon from the fire, for the nerves are all stripped of flesh, and then put the hand back in very hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and it cannot be removed.
And when you have treated the arrow as much as is necessary, put oil and silk on the vein to sew quickly, and thus do for each part.
The right side of the hand is useful for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you on the right.
The left side of the hand is useful for all diseases that are outside the body, such as diseases of the marsh, retention of urine, and diseases of the feet, knees, and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its savior is such that the pains boil well in very hot water, and rub on the vein until it rots, and tie above the joint. and if the vein is at the elbow, and from above the flesh goes out much of rain.
then give the larger or more water, or at the elbow, which is better.
And if you give it above the flesh, then beware of the nerves which are dislocated, and give it across as in bandaging.
and let the flames be extinguished.
And if it cannot issue from the bone, reset the joint in high places, and let the vein well drain.
And if the first giving is not enough, then start the second above a little, because the veins are salty.
and do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus give the other bandage equally.
The vein of the neck is at the elbow, and its resetting is equal to the pain of the back, when it comes to arrow removal.
And the quality of his health is such that the hairs between or in the baths, and strangulate above the ankle four times in twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein.
and if it opens, then the healthy one in all ways that you can, and in crossing; and it is worthwhile to cover it, for the veins are dry, and it is very difficult to find.
and it is worthwhile to cover it, for the veins are dry, and it is very difficult to find. And if you do not cover it, then the vein of the one who opens or falls asleep at the little finger, and towards the little toe, and guards against the nerves;
and make so much correction of the blood that you see, and then remove the sinew, and place it on cotton and hold it tight; It is now healed.
Vacuums are made of horns, or of brass, or of glass;
And suction is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
And this suction without pricking is done in two ways: either it is at full heat, or without heat.
And suction done by pricking and drawing blood is done in twelve steps of the body, of which one is at the top of the head. and the others are in the neck. and two others in the second rib of the neck. and the suction from the chin. and the suction on both shoulders. and the suction on the buttocks. and the suctions in both arms. and the suctions in both legs. and the suctions in both knees.
and the suction does not treat blood, but only the small veins that are scattered in the body, and because of this, it does not weaken anyone, as one does with the treatment of bloodletting. and it should only be administered, not at all times or in all fevers, in no disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
And if necessary for diseases, it is recommended to ventose, or for customs, if you amnistron each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every ten days.
for there are some who, when they have business to ventose, have heavy heads;
and if some have repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and tormented by them;
and some who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and reach for blood; and if there are some who dream, and see through blood and nausea and death and similar things.
When we see these signs, and especially when it is in the month of May, we order them to fast after three hours of the day.
The sweating of the muscle helps to ease the pain of the shoulder ... that comes from the eyes, and it should not be done except after the evacuation of all the blood.
And this ventilation is in place of the sweating of the head, and it should not be done except for those of cold complexion or who have diarrhea, because this does great harm.
And therefore it should not be done for those who are awake or have severe cold diseases.
And those who often have this, become forgetful, and for that reason, it is necessary to place the vacuum a little more below due to the doubt of forgetfulness.
The ventilation of the neck is in place of the sweating of the shoulder and the basilica, and because it is good for the narrowing of the windpipe, and for the lengthening of the throat, and for all, and for repletion.
And it is best to place it not too tightly, for if it holds too firmly, it may cause obstruction or stomach and intestine pain.
The ventilation of the second costal cartilage of the chest is beneficial for head pain, obtunded and emaciated, and choking, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the health of the basilica;
And it is best that you command the healthy person to express his hand when placing it, so that he does not compress the artery, and does not cause blood to spurt.
The ventilation of the lower jaw is beneficial for mouth disease, and decay of teeth, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is in the joint of the lower lip.
The ventilations of the shoulders are useful for diseases that come from heat and overfilling.
The winds of the neck are as valuable as three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins.
and commands the patient not to fear too much in the presence of blood, for the veins are bare of flesh, and can be seen and arteries.
The suction cup that is above the back is as valuable as emergency surgery at the foundation, and for diseases that cannot be seen, and it should be large and made of metal, so it can effectively draw out. And perhaps, if it is too fine, it would break. et il faut grand soin.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles attirent du sang de tout le corps, et valent aux douleurs anciennes des reins, et de la marie, et de la vessie, et ramiennent les fluides;
et sont en l'emplacement des deux sophénes, et des deux chevilles, et toute la vie elles affaiblissent le corps après longs usages, et font venir paumonie dans plusieurs conditions.
Le manière de mettre la ventouse est ainsi que tu la mettes premier vide, et succe temprement, et la met fermement, et remue igalement, et ne cesse de ce faire, tant que tu voies le lieu rouge et enflé, et apparait le rougeur du sang;
then firmly, and reset the suction cups, and take care in the positioning of the limbs, for there are some who have tender skin and clear pores. if it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds and one deep one; and clean lightly.
And if the wound is not large, then it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to puncture the path of the thick blood.
And if the wound is not very deep, then it is necessary to strike the third time;
and when we want to draw out a little blood at a time, then we should suck only once. And if we wish to draw much blood, we recommend frequently.
And if the blood is not drawn, we advise using a sharp, pointed instrument, and the ends should be well perceived, suitable for those who have thick skin and are tough, and who have hard pores, that you oil the mouthpieces of the vacuum with an appetizing and dissolving oil: if it is in this state, of purple oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in the other state, of lettuce oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar one.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of tamarisk, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
And if the person who is to be treated with a hot bath and wide pores, then one should not put any oil, but it should be washed after the vaporization of high rose water, or high cold water, or marjoram water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar things.
And those who have much moisture, if they rise from ash, or high mint water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have excessive fullness should rise from old wine, or vinegar, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things.
and should not be immediately saunier of suction before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
and should not sleep immediately after suction, and it is good that they warm up, when they should be sucked and when they are being sucked.
And if those who are sucked are choleric, and if they do not have enough, they become too agitated and inflamed. if it is good that they take cold things, such as green apples and endives and leeks at the spoon, and similar things. And put on wet bandages, and charcoal from Chastelron, and moist meats.
And put on wet bandages, and charcoal from Chastelron, and moist meats. And those with a cold complexion should take honey syrup, and aromatic wine of medium age, which is between old and new, and put on a little, and wet bandages and moist meats and small birds and pigeons;
and the day he starts walking, he should drink more than eat.
And it is recommended to give some men once truffle or muscat wine before walking, or after, to strengthen the main limbs. And it should be made subtle for the sick, but only those who are strong should drink it.
The suction cups that are applied to cause pain are those that are applied to the liver, and to the mouse, and to the gout, and to the belly and the buttocks and the rain and the waist, for these members do not suffer pain from other places, and no one does so except to draw blood from member to member, as we put on the breasts when the newborn cries;
to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put suction cups on the belly and on the buttocks to soften the member;
and remove the pain, when there is an abscess or stone, by its attractive virtue perhaps the abscess, or to remove the stone from its place;
Then it is done like this when putting it above the liver and above the stomach when there is wind retention, and these vacuums are administered empty for suction only. And never are administered together with fire, and sometimes plain hot tea, as in diseases of the pleura, and in such a way that the vacuum is filled with hot steam, or hot water in which he has cooked poisonous herbs to this lung.
The form of the vacuum administered by fire is as follows:
And it has two large and half-palm-sized openings and a cost of the middle I small perforation, as to put a needle, and if it is of silver, so that it does not bleach the wound when putting it above the limb.
and have a long, thin rod of iron or wood, to put a probe in place, and it should be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them.
for the suction cups of children are different from the old, and thin ones are different from fat ones.
And one should thus place this suction cup on the limb:
take the probe of wax or liniment, and put it into the suction cup at the end of the rod that is in the suction cup, so that it clears the bottom of the suction cup so it does not burn the hair.
then place it above the member, and you should be above the opening that we have said, so that when you want to, then the steam goes in, and open the vacuum.
and grasp the line as before, and repeat often if you have skill.
In the vacuum that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, at all sharp, does not have a rod or an opening, and is not administered until it is full of sharp, and is placed above the member alone.
and this is the form:
Noses are not administered until in members where one cannot place vacuums for their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar ones. and when removing a horse's shoe, as with one or two nails, and other similar things;
and the quality of the user is such that when you try to remove nails that are in soft water without any difficulty, if you can;
and put them in soft water until they are familiar and have nothing in their stomachs; and then clean the vein and the wound, then rub the limb until it is red, and put the nails on top;
and when they are flat and blackened, and if it is possible to put a vacuum where, then put it, for this is very good afterwards.
If not, then lift the limb from below, and then from above, very well, and then wipe it.
and if the limb is too clean after the wound of the sweat, then wet the linen cloth in cold water, and put it on, until the wound is cleaned.
and if the wounds multiply, then put on broken glass, or salt, and similar things, until it is cleaned.
or you put half of the crushed beans on the limb, and let them stay until they stick to the limb, then it will stop bleeding.
and if you have more difficult ones, take other remedies.
And if the remedies do not take effect, rub the affected area with fresh blood from a vein, or make a small incision where the arrow is inserted, and then place them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will burn;
and when you see that they have fallen off, powder them with a little bit of aloe and crushed garlic, or ashes, they will now burn.
This begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Pay attention, young apprentice, that the foolish ones who read this chapter do not see any of the old books, nor have they ever read them;
and for this reason, knowledge is lacking in our land, for I have never found any good.
and I know nothing, except by the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have written about it, and by experience, and by the habit of my life.
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are necessary, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
Therefore, we should say or prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the wise put his understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who are experienced seek and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain comes to any one, it is necessary for you to hasten to treat the pain on both sides, if nothing stops you, as in weakness of body, or children, or old people; If the limb is not very warm or too cold.
And use warm lard, that is to say, warm oils, and egg yolk and goose fat, and do not drink wine, nor use any thick broths, and do not eat too much meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of abscess or spread of matter in the limb;
if the hairs return to their previous government as they used to be.
And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to apply a thick mash of meat that causes swelling, such as cooked wheat, and risotto, and tests, and fish, and chicken, and eggs, and similar things. For the mash should be applied frequently and soon after the break.
And know that the bones of old people and the elderly cannot be properly healed or sutured according to their nature due to the corruption of the limbs, nor the same as those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but do not treat, reset over the broken bone and large thick rods that support and join the limb together, until it is strong as it was before. and not at all in its work, and for this reason it must be nourished with large meats, as we have said.
And the fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, and I will tell you all the ways of fracture in this chapter. For there is a fracture that goes through the spine, and another in soaking, like the tip of a quill for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes through the spine, and another in soaking, like the tip of a quill for writing. And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture in a small cut.
And in every way it should have its own willpower, and its proper tool in the restoration, according to what memory comes in its place.
and it is known the breakage of the bone because the leg is twisted, and open well by default, and its pressure against the hand.
and when there is no twisting and it is not against the touch, and the pains are not much, if there is no breakage.
but it can also have twisting, or cutting, or small breaking. It is not necessary that you move it by hand, but place the remedies that come here after, and then gently restrain it now.
and the break that goes into the spiral, and the two parts are dislocated, now you must put them back evenly, as if abscesses come alive;
and if abscesses come alive, do not let any pus, until the abscesses are calmed.
then put it back evenly to the muscle that you can lightly and safely, and if the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of this one where there are pieces.
then hold it as it should be afterwards.
If the bone is broken into pieces, if it is two parts, if it is a hand or foot, or at your hand if it is small members, or to two strings, or to one string and at your hand;
and put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken bone are joined, it is reset by all means in their proper places so that you may not cause further injury or pain;
and well support the two bones according to the best shapes.
And feel it with your hand if it seems not quite right:
If the dislocation is severe, and it is not pulled back too much, and not pressed as those who bring it by their work cause abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have experienced many times.
And when the limb is in place, properly treat the pain so it does not move, whether awake or asleep, turning or in any other way. And make sure that the limb is secure so that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and it should be put in the correct position so that it feels no pain.
And make sure that the limb is secure so that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and it should be put in the correct position so that it feels no pain. and ensure it is placed correctly, as twisting should not occur when it is returned.
and the quality of the broken limb depends on what I tell you.
The quality of the limb broken is different in size and in greatness and in form.
For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: so it is appropriate to wrap them with soft and thin linen cloths; and those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
so it is appropriate to wrap with a wide and sturdy cloth, because the large limbs embrace the entire large member, and hold it evenly in all parts, so that there is no gap.
then lightly tie it around the leg, three or four turns depending on the member, and hold your hand a little on the entire limb, then go above the fracture and hold it less than the fracture, then slowly move away from the fracture.
and gradually soften the limb little by little, until you press a large part of the healthy leg, then take another limb and turn back around the broken leg.
then return to the part away from the fracture and hold it gently, neither too hard nor too forcefully, as we have said in the first section above.
Then place between the limbs wet linen or cloths, as long as they are even, then tie everything together with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing on top of the abscess, and what removes the swelling, and leave it like this for some time.
Then strain over your splints, and they should be half of a wide bandage cut neatly, or of rope that is made into ropes, or of reeds, and they should be according to this shape:
but the screw that one puts over the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others;
and also as long as it is needed for the limb of small or great size; then screwed on the screws as you did in the first step, then tied with a thread evenly, as in the first step above the fracture; the tighter it is, the less;
and it should be that the thread is medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax;
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen works of fools who make their bindings too thick with linen cords, and that is great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too fine, and should only have between each screw less than a quarter of an inch space.
And if the wounds are closed by the thorns after the straining in their place, put discharge from them with linen, or other clean cloth, so that it does not fester.
When the wound is with the splinter, and the stitches are broken, I will tell you the treatment here after.
And do not strain all the broken limbs on the first day. For when the members are large, one should not put splints immediately after 5 days or 7, or more depending on the safety of abscess healing;
and see the manner of ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and twisting:
and take some flour that is held in the walls of the mill, and knead it with abundant water, and put this mixture, not too clear or too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring fracture to various positions, and especially to women and small children, for it is neither too hard nor too soft.
Another way of applying plaster to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take alabaster, daniel, enule, asafetida, Arabic gum, and mugwort, of each equal parts; myrrh and aloes, of each five drachms; eight ounces of oil. and make a powder, and mix it with honey. If the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones to many people.
Another way of applying plaster that is good for twists: Take a sharp knife and cut along the vein, at point X. Apply a bandage and ointment, at point VIIII. Apply pressure at point VI. Grind up belladonna root at point X, mix it with either vinegar or plenty of oil, and administer it.
Another way to treat joints and bones that are damaged is to apply a poultice, ease the pain, and use a bandage to support the bone and the broken part. Take new linen, dip it in oil and vinegar, and place it on the wound.
This plaster does not heal immediately, but it is good for relieving abscesses and properly treating pains.
Another method of splinting to restore broken bones: Take dry fig branches and earth pavement, grind them together, and make a splint.
Another method to treat the break in the bone and to ease the remaining pain of the abscess. Take valerian root, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of each one in equal parts;
grind and mix with wine, and if the limbs are hot, apply the mixture with fresh or dry coriander juice, and use it.
Another method of treatment, more suitable than the first, when an abscess is difficult to restore the member. Take valerian root, linseed, balm, melilot, and without wine, and violet and chamomile flowers, of all one equal part; And bruise, and cook with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put on a broken limb except for a plaster made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galen said that one should put on a broken limb to heal, dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to treat injury and pain: Take fly and horsehair from the eye, or feathers of an owl, and vitriol, and silk equally, and grind them, and make a plaster and apply it to the wound.
And then remove it after a while, and be careful that the hairs do not cause any pain, nor move the bones of its limb. if not remove by hand later. And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, with rest or inflammation, then hurry and reset it, and remove the plaster now.
And take light bandages, and wet seaweed, and soak in vinegar, and lift the limb, until the itching stops, and let the pain be relieved. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry linen, soak in vinegar or rose oil, and tie with a bandage, until you are sure of no abscess.
And relieve the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain be removed, then begin the thin bandage and a little plaster, and do not strain it as much as before. and subtly until they are clean.
And if you see that the abscess is red and swollen and painful and inflamed, and you have knowledge of plasters and ointments, then apply them evenly as you did before.
And if it does not come to the limb as we have said within three days or four or five or seven; and never leaves it for twenty days, as we see, until the fractured bone is set and approaches the position of the chariot above;
therefore the splint is applied again, and it increases its flesh, as I have said before;
and if you see the limb drier than usual, then no humor can come; then rub the affected area with hot water every time you dislocate it, and this should be done daily, and release the ligament a little;
by this work, therefore, cut the broken bones of the limb, and quickly realign it as they do with the foolish, who twist the limb painfully:
it is evil, and this work is not sure, and I see nothing but pain and the correct way of working.
many ways of breaking are, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct:
because it has breaks that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone fractures the entire bone just below the bone, as if crushed or broken; and for this reason this type of break is called «crushing».
When the spearhead strikes the bone from above, piercing through, and is called this type of fracture "absolute";
and is the wound of these two fractures, great or small.
And if there is percussion from a fall, or a cut from a sword, or a break from a fall on stone, or from falling onto something else, and similar things.
And if it is a broken bone that pierces through the skin, approaching the flesh on either side of the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if the wound that is set in the bone as subtly as hair, and is the fracture small, and because of this it is called this type of fracture "hairline";
And if the wound that is made by being pierced with an arrow, or by falling, or by something similar, and makes the piece of the bone enter below, and is the threads as when they make the stove when they strike above the stoves. if between the stones inside.
And it has more in those who have or main moist bones, as of a child;
and it has all these ways of breaking that small pieces are discharged as these; and I will speak about it in its place.
And we know all ways of fractures by the displacement above them, and the inspection of tents, and by the rotten char that is above.
The similarity of hair is known because when one has revealed the bone, and one rubs it above, if there is an open black fracture.
In the treatment of fracture, be careful about the bad accident, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes issuing forth and turning red, and other similar things in many dispositions, it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see any apparent injury, and you hope for recovery, then begin treatment.
And when the broken bone comes first to you, and it is in the leg, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day or you will not be able to.
And if it is in the arm, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, provided that the flesh around the bone has not decayed, and the injury that we have mentioned occurs.
And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the linen that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut the broken part as follows:
and is that you press the head of the painful part, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound as soft as you can, and when blood comes to discover the bone, or abscess chaus, if it helps what it is necessary, and is that you fill the place with moistened cloths in rose oil; And let the wound rest until the abscesses have subsided, and ensure that there is no bleeding. Then begin around the bone to cut, and this is done according to two methods of surgery:
One method is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is the shape:
Then use another cut larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have many different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are sharp and made of iron.
And work carefully, so as not to wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and protruding, it is necessary that you drill around it, so that you administer cuts with targes, not until it goes beyond the bone of the test, and should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not let the point go beyond the bone;
and you must have many, so that each comes in its own time of the bone's growth, so that you have splints for all tests.
and this is the form of the three methods of splints:
the quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place one splint on top of the bone and turn your hands so that you feel that the bone has been pierced;
then replace the splint on another part slightly afterward, and thus do all around, then cover the incisions of the space of the bone between the pieces, and do it as subtly as you can, lightly, as we have said, until you remove the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as pliers, pincers;
and beware of not touching the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is advisable to close the opening that has remained from the bone with all other tools similar to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be thinner and more subtle than the other incisor;
and if nothing remains of the small bones or scales, do not remove them gently with all the tools; then treat the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
And the other method of work is this one that the Greeks say, which is more safe; and the pain is very strong, and that is its word. It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone where the fracture is open, so that when you have removed that part, then place the lens-shaped piece of this incision, which is the shape:
And do not cut into one part, and it is the affected part in the second ribs, so that the cutter is towards the bone.
then strike with a small hammer above, so that you can slightly cut around the bone, and be careful of the wire that is outside.
if it is attached to the bone, then slightly cut around it, for one can cut well without hurting or fearing.
And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only broken on one side, and there are small pieces, then you should smooth that roughness, and remove the scales with a thin razor that you should have in various quantities, to manage each limb as conveniently as possible, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you have large razors before, and then more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
In each of the other hair shears and delicate cuts, it is necessary that you anesthetize according to its advancement.
This is a thing that cannot be answered by one who has studied this art.
And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary to apply a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth. And do this more gently than you can, so as not to irritate the wound, then administer from above another cloth, and do not strain it until it stains the wound only.
and let it remain there for one or two days until the abscess is soothed, then release it, and administer medicines such as lis roots, flour of vetches, powder of incense, aristolochia, and similar things;
and make a powder from these things, and put it on the wound, and administer mediocre medicines without causing pain;
and make sure that the wound is kept clean, that you do not leave any pus in it, or any blood clot, because when a blood clot forms on the surface of the brain, it will cause damage and harm;
For when one puts a sharp object on top of the wound, it does not bite from above. Take precautions therefore, as no accidents come to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful with doubt.
And if no other means come except by the medicine that was put on top, which has virtue, then you must take a part of honey, and three parts of red oil and one piece of cloth, and put it on top of the wound. Then treat the wound with the appropriate methods until it is healed.
It is said that never are both parts of the nose above broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones.
And that one is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it is dislocated or twisted, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you break your small nail or needle through the breakage into your index finger, and place it evenly within the breakage at the pouch by default, until the nail regains its natural shape. And do this lightly, and ensure that the hairs do not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the bone, and cannot reach your finger, it is necessary that you place it at the top of a small stick or a slightly thick one.
And if the breakage is of two parts, then repair the other part, and hurry to restore the first joint if you can.
If not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the abscesses have calmed down, then poke at the tip of the nail with a piece of linen cloth, if the breakage is in one part.
Where you go to one side or the other, if the break is there. and if the tents are so large that they fill the nostrils.
And they said no one should mash the tents in the fire, and each day. It does not seem to me that this is right, but it is necessary that they be ground in the making of an ointment from honey and powdered mille. Then leave the tent until the bone is iron and the cartilage hardened.
And never use feathers in place of tents, and if there is a soft cloth around the wound, and if the breaker holds it, and blows the pain away. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And if abscesses come to the nose while you work, put clay or a cotton ball soaked in red wine or a little hydrogen peroxide on it.
And if there are no abscesses, apply a poultice made of flour of mustard and powder of incense, confectioned with an egg, then place it on light bandages, and do not bind the wound tightly.
And if the bone is broken into small pieces, and it is broken into smaller pieces, then remove them with suitable instruments, then cut away the fracture, and treat the injury with suitable remedies and bandages, as with plasters and ointments suitable for the wound.
If there is no wound in the nose, then treat with tents, and put in plugs until healed.
When the jaw is fractured and there is no wound elsewhere, and the fracture is only slight, and not completely broken into two pieces, as can be seen if one looks carefully.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you bite your own index finger in the patient's mouth. And if the fracture is on the left mandible, bite your own index finger with your right hand, and gently apply pressure to the fracture, and hold it steady with the other hand.
And if the fracture of the jaw is in two pieces, it is necessary that you administer traction of two parts, until it is even.
And if movement of the teeth occurs, or loosening, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place the fractured jaw on the broken jaw, and place it under a double cloth. Put a large, well-made cloth or a piece of evenly cut leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, on top of the blanket, and tie it securely with a rope that you have, and command the patient to rest, and give him light food.
And if you see that the position changes, then reset it to the tiger's shoulder, and then put it back as it was changed. And put a poultice on top, with flour from the mill mixed with plenty of urine or semolina, after you have removed the crust.
And put a lighter poultice on top of that, and if the poultice sticks to the patient, and the position of the patient does not change, leave him until he is healthy. Many times are healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes, follow what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, do not touch any part of the bone that is fractured. If too subtly from the fracture with instruments to the mouth.
If the wound is narrow, then enlarge it according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is none left, if the wound is wide, then apply wound dressings to it, to drain pus until it is healed.
The forceful break several times before, behind the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways:
or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the most light to restore;
or there is a break with wound.
And the work is that if the fracture is with wound, that you have two assistants, so that one treats the help that feels the forceful broken. and the other extends the neck towards the affected part;
then make even the fracture at your fingers, so that it forms as it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
And if you have the skill to extend further, put a round, cloth or linen ball under the shoulder, according to your needs; and extend and relieve the tendon, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you make even the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the shoulder of the arm out, because it comes from above, then it is necessary that the hairs be pulled evenly over its surface, and move the shoulder outwards, and bend the minister's elbow down, until the bone of the arm is raised.
Then bring the fracture to your fingers, and if you find the pieces scattered, it is necessary that you cut across;
and try to find the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined due to any obstacle, then use one of the incisors that you have. but put the forceps of this instrument out of the way to avoid the sinus:
and it seems like a spoon, and is not too tight, and should be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the workman;
and it should have two prongs, as you see, and one wide and the other narrow, like the edge of the wound that you made when you cut the bones;
And when you are sure of an abscess, if the wound is bleeding, and if the tear is small, or you doubt an abscess, apply the wound with bandages and tents, according to its size.
And if an abscess comes, if it is soft, then soak the cloth in rose oil and in vinegar and in wine, and put it on.
The stripping of the bone, when it is sensitive to pain and cutting, is that you place on the bone the plaster from the mill and some flour, and put light dressings on, and put a sphere outside the wound, if you have the skill. Then take a very wide bandage of a palm's width, then put the bandage doubled over the dressing and plaster. Then take a thin stake three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the dislocated joint, so that the head of the dislocated joint is suspended; and place the stake on the broken part, and turn the joint back into its place, and dislocate the healthy shoulder, and dislocate the injured shoulder; and reset each part, and when you see that the injured part holds the broken part evenly, and you clearly see that the stake does not move over the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the joint is released, then hold it;
and place the injured limb on its back, and put a small pad under the shoulder to raise the dislocation upwards; if the fracture of the humerus is aligned by aligning the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and it does not dislocate if no bad accidents occur within 20 days;
then restart the bandage if you see that there is a need for it, and hold it and let it be thus until it is restored;
and it is restored within 28 days, and less to some people.
of the shoulder fracture
Few have had their shoulder broken or the arm torn from its joint, except by violent means;
if the fracture follows the shape of the break, and it is reset according to its natural form, in all possible ways that you can;
then put on the arm powder from the mill with plenty of honey, and light bandages, and place above the sling double; then place above a wide and thin board, somewhat larger than the shoulder, and do not let the board touch any part of the shoulder, so that the board is evenly supported by the bandages made of linen;
Then tightly bind it with a thick bandage so that the joint does not move from its place, and examine the injury every day.
And whenever it is displaced, tightly bind it and put the joint back in its place if it is out of alignment, and reduce the pain on its side.
And the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25.
And when these numbers are completed, reset it and be careful, for it is not bones that move lightly.
And if a piece of the bone is torn off before the wound is opened, and not removed from the surrounding area, then cut through it, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the splint to alleviate an abscess.
of the breaking of the splint
The foot is never broken in the middle, but this rarely happens. but it often breaks again.
And when it is broken in the middle, it declines towards the outside, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of movement, and everything, and possibly vomits blood, and the wound opens in the broken bone, and the smell is bad.
And the restoration is such that the dislocated joint is often pushed back up onto its place, and the arm is placed between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulders, and bring together the ribs of both sides to your hands, and subtly put it in place in all ways that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then put plasters and suppositories above the bone of salt, or another light one, and wrap it in a bandage, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the bandage around the back, and tightly bind it, and reward every hour, and if it dislocates again, then bind it;
If it is necessary to slip it off due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, if you hasten, and slip it off, and scrape the dressing, and address what has come from methods of treatment;
then reset the bandage, and hold it until it is healed.
of rib fractures
Note that the rib breaker only comes in the large gross after the back, and at the top, and does not press unless because they are sharp; and the smell is good at the inspection as it should be.
And the remedies are that you set the fracture as it should be. Then apply the plaster and the bandage of a splint if you know how to do it.
And if the rib fracture is leaning inwards, it causes great pain and sharpness, as if from weeping, for the bone does not touch the skin. and there is much swelling and blood, and it is a great sickness, and the ancients put great effort into it.
And if among those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the stomach, to push the broken bone into place.
We do not make this mistake, if pus does not come, unless it comes. And if it has come, then cleanse it.
And they said none of those who put suction cups on the limb, to draw out well, and it seems reasonable; nevertheless, doubt and because the suction does not draw out the excess from the limb due to its weakness.
And they said that among those who must cover the limb with linen oiled high, and one puts tents between the ribs to keep the lung evenly inside, then treat the care of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
And if the pain is so great that it cannot be borne by the bone that does not touch the skin, and there is doubt, then it is necessary to cut across the rib on the side of the fracture, and it is necessary to place a probe to ward off the pus.
and then one must drill the bone, and gently pull it, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat them with ointments, until they are healed.
And if pus comes out, put moistened cloths on it in red oil, and put on the limb;
and treat it as needed for the abscess, and lie down near it on the side where it should be, until it is healed.
And also at the spine of the back.
And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you touch them with a needle, they do not feel.
It is fatal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when you hold them and do not, it means that the bone joint is saved, and the pain has been cured, if you put care on it.
And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, take note whether the feet are soft, and if the accidents that are in their hands are present, and above the back there is ventosities and involuntary egestion;
and when it is laid on its stomach, there is involuntary egestion. And when it is placed on its back and it wants to sit up, it cannot. It is deadly. if you do not labor in its care.
And if this accident does not come to it, it is the lighter thing.
And the care is that you reward if there is an abscess clean, put on the spine rose oil or chicken grease, until it is calmed;
Then place one of the comforting and drying plasters on top, and tie it with a bandage, and command the pain to rest. And do not sleep over that part where he feels the pain, until it is completely healed.
And if any bone becomes dry, it should be covered with oil. And break the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, to one stitch, then apply the healing ointment with charcoal, until it is completely healed.
And if the fractured bone is called the "crossbone," take your right hand's fist and place it on the other hand to your power, then place the plaster and the splint on top, if you have skill.
then restrain it, and if there is bone deviation, do the same, and the bone, and heal the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the ribs of the back
It rarely happens that the ribs of the back are broken, and if it does, there is no great harm in a slight reduction at the neck; and then extend it long, and incline to the shoulder, and come to the painful limb, and swelling, and that which is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as high as you are above the breaker; and squeeze those which are broken and the shape of the bone;
If the fracture is only at the head, then set that fracture until it is in its natural position.
If the fracture is long or it inclines towards the inside, place the injured limb on its belly until the healing of this fracture is complete. And when you have set it, then apply the plaster, then place a splint of wood or cloth, and hold the fractured part so it does not move.
And place the limb alongside the ribs, until the ribs are even. Instruct the patient to lie on their uninjured side or back.
And if an abscess comes, do not touch it until it is calmed down, and then follow what we have previously said. Then return to the resetting, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident.
of the shoulder dislocation
The auxiliaries are the part between the neck and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of the two methods:
one of which is that you take a piece of gristle of equal size, in this form:
and tie the two ends together, and raise them up, and cut off the pain above the seat;
then pour the broken arm through the sleeve, until it reaches its ease, and has in its middle a peg of wood, then raise it above any heavy thing or the nurse extends below;
Then place the broken bone fragments together with both hands until the broken bone returns as it should.
And the other way is to place the dislocation above its shoulder, and hold the hand on its collar, then command two ministers that one ties what is above the breaker at his hands, and the other ties behind everything, and stretches each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too far, then hold the rope outside the breaker, above the breaker, and stretch each of the ministers to its part.
And if the broken bone is near the shoulder joint, then it is necessary to place the middle of the arm away from the shoulder, and the other towards the ribs, away from the broken bone.
And if the broken bone is towards the ribs, then it is necessary to place the middle of the arm gently, with slight pressure, until the broken bone is even with the shoulder and the ribs.
Then place the broken bone evenly as it should be, and hold it in place if there are no complications.
And if abscesses come, do not restrain it for seven days, and place on it a poultice of linseed and rose oil, until the abscess is soothed;
then restrain it, and the way to restrain it is that you place the bandage on the fractured part, then bring the arm over the dislocated joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest;
and place the bandage, and restrain over the dislocated joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, unless something prevents it, or if the bones are not moving.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place a wider and stronger splint on the fracture, and have two spaces between each splint, and each splint should be so large that it passes the fracture three inches from each side.
Then strain against the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less with each distance.
And if you see the position of the splints and the strain, as we have said in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is not healed, leave it to lie for seven days, as we have said.
Then examine every three days the joint, that the pricking does not come to the bone, or the inflammation cannot come to the limb because it is too tight. If the dislocation, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, then wait until after three days or more, and let the pain lie on its back, and have its hands on its stomach;
and apply the cautery to the joint flat on a piece of cloth equally, and examine every hour of the day or night, that the broken limb does not move, or the ligaments are not softened;
If the patient is encouraged by the power of medicine, and the meat that we have placed before, in a manner that the meat is at the first subtle; and when he begins to eat again, it should be thick.
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be eaten in forty days after all; and then it must be peeled and administer the balms and medicines of ointments for the limb to increase.
If its structure is crooked and swollen, it may take 1 or 2 months to reset.
of the broken arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", from which one is small and is the one that teaches the pouch;
and the others are great, and is the one that is dislocated, near the small bone;
by chance the large bone alone breaks, or the small ones, and by chance together.
When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing;
and when the large bone is broken, then the healing is bad, and more painful than when they are broken together.
If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it is necessary to extend them slightly and align them evenly.
And if it is the large bone, then it must be strained more strongly;
and extend it over the wrist, and tie the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the others, and let the pains cross over itself, and the wrist in front of it higher, so that the pains suffer no labor.
Then extend the ministers' arms to the part below the shoulder, or to the elbow, and other ministers to the upper part.
And then set the mirror evenly, according to its best form.
And if it breaks into pieces, put each in its place, and if there is no piece that can be held, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before.
And if with the broken bone, I have spoken of it in the chapter on singularity; if take care.
And if at the beginning of restoration, abscesses occur, then apply a poultice made of red oil and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft; and bind the poultice gently, until the abscesses are relieved.
Then remove the crust, and put the plaster of powder from the mill with abundance of honey, then place the splints, and let the splint of the broken part be slightly outwards, and a bit wider than the others;
and let it have six splints or arms in many positions: so that the broken part is in one of the bones, or in two;
and held higher than the broken part, and always less far away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. and let the cloths that are on the broken part be soft and moist, and not too hard or rough;
and let the cloths that are on the broken part be soft and moist, and not too hard or rough; And let the son, from whom it is strained, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Reward the limb and the joint after some time. And if any accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must raise the limb with hot water, until those itches are soothed.
and let the limb not be too tightly rested.
Then continue the strapping, and if the joint is dislocated and the bones are broken, or similar things, then address it.
And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little, and let it rest for some time, until the swelling has passed, and then strap it.
And if none of these things we have said come to harm, then let it wait for 20 days.
or inquire within, then let the hands to his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and degumming, and sleep on his back.
and let it be known that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the broken hand
After the back of the hand and to us there are few breaks, and it only happens many times.
And when the bone of the hand is broken or splintered, it is necessary that the hairs lie crossed and straight in front of him equally.
Then place his hand on the extended table, and extend the bones broken by the ministrants, and put them evenly in their places until they are well joined.
And apply the plaster and bandages, if there are abscesses not present, then place a splint according to the amount of the limb. And let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the broken bone is on the outer side of the back of the palm, then make a roll of cloth, and instruct the patient to press it against his broken hand. Then strain a long rope, and place it under the knee as wide as the sole of the foot, and strain it as it should be.
And if the bone is broken in the posterior region, it is necessary to place a splint above and another below in the foot, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and stabilize the joint between the two.
And if the broken bone comes to one of the ends, if it is the shoulder, then put it even, as it should be. And strain with the sole, and if you see that put a straight small rod to lift the broken bone, and do not move it.
And if the broken bone is at other ends, such as in the index or the other, then put it even, and tie it with the healthy joint that is next. where you tie them all together, as much as is necessary, or place them on a stick, like a bundle.
and take care in the restoration and disposition of abscesses, and secure what comes to it, as I have said.
The teeth of the jaw are often broken, and well seen when it turns in front and behind.
and the restoration is as one ties them together above the fracture, and the other outside. And the hairs are cut across his face, then each assistant ties their cord to their equal part.
and it is when the fracture is inserted into the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the rib, then one of the ribs towards the base, and the other ribs outside the broken part.
And if it is close to the groin, and then the tendons over the groin are stretched, and the extension downward.
Then place the bone in its natural position with both hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the poultice, and tie it, if there are no abscesses.
And if there is an abscess, let it subside first, then return to your work and treatment. The bandage is made in this manner.
You should wrap the injured and swollen part in two or three layers, and let the excess remain, then bend the leg until the toes reach the base of the heel, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, outside the groin, and bring the end of the thread upwards.
then turn back up the leg and up the thigh the bend, then put on the broken bones, and put a splint on the bone of the leg.
then apply the limb's own cloth between the leg and thigh to equalize the strain, then begin to bandage about three or four times over the broken bones. and as you go higher than the broken bones, and lessen the strain.
then insert two of the strings that you have rolled between the leg and thigh, and bandage three splints that are above, then return to the outside at the top of the string, as far as you come over the bone.
and the restriction, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then no abscess or swelling or similar thing comes. And if there is, dislocate it, and direct what comes, as we have said many times;
and if it has pieces of bone that prick, it must be removed if possible. and if not, then it is necessary to cut the limb and draw out the splinters. and treat as we have said, until it is healed.
And never break the ribs thus that one puts these, as in the shoulder or arm;
Therefore, in this restoration made thus, it does not hurt the limbs.
And it is important that the ribs are restored at different times, according to the diversity of constitutions.
It is said that on the road of the gentleman there is little breakage, but it rains many times.
And if it breaks, it is only a crack or a puncture, and it has to all wounds, and without wound, and this feels very bad.
And the restoration is such that one puts together what is broken to its two, as much as it can be assembled together.
Then apply the plaster, and if you have the skill, put on a round bandage, and stretch it as it should be, then warm up all the positions that we have said in other breakages, such as abscess and similar things. And apply to each accident what it needs, until it is healed.
of the broken leg
Note that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "tibia" on the right, and the other is called "fibula".
and can break anything as it comes to the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is like that of the broken arm equally, and the work is all there. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg from all parts returns.
And if the small bones are broken, then it returns in front.
And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain, and it can be seen well. and returns dislocated.
Then relieve the extension, and make it even, and tie the tendons equally;
but anyway, it is necessary that the fracture is straight, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is less and lighter; And the physician according to your virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two strips of cloth that gird the leg on one side and the other, and be long enough to go from the knee down to the ankle.
Then wrap them around the leg above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, so that the leg will not incline to the right or left, and thus it is good.
And no one administers the long cloth of the leg, and it is of cloth, and put the leg for support to prevent movement, and properly done, they put it in the break or where he was wounded.
and move each leg every day to see if there is an abscess or other accident; if the healer is healthy until then.
of the breaking of bones due to piers
At the ankle, there is no breaking of bones, but in the case of piers, there is never breaking of bones and it is not necessary, and only a slight injury occurs in some cases.
And if he has bones that are slightly broken, and you see these bones overlapping each other, if you put them on the ground like they want to walk, then put your foot on top of his, where the bones are lifted, then press them so much until they return to their place;
then put the plaster and poultice on top, and put some cotton on the belly of the foot, then wrap it around the leg evenly, then wrap other cloths around, and other things that you know how to do.
And when three or four days have passed, if the bone is released, you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the two broken, restore them as we have said for the two bones of the hand. Then place a splint along the length of the broken bone, and make it slightly wider, then put the painful part of the splint that I mentioned, and tighten gradually.
And if there are two or three or more broken bones, place a splint along each length, wrapped in a piece of linen, and tighten the painful part outside the splint. And make sure it is above the head of the splint under the belly of the bone, so that it presses well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, since we have already mentioned them. and treat each event as it should be.
of the fracture of the finger bone
When the jaw of the woman is fractured, if the tooth is loosened, then incline it to the back part, and hold it from behind.
then fill the cavity of the jaw with cotton, and put in as much as is needed.
then lift the woman, and slowly raise her back, and then jump the cotton, until it reaches the entrance of the jaw, and then return the bone with the cotton.
And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has done so, return it, and thus do this seven times a day: if she will be healed of the fracture, and if you see, take a bandage of burdock, and tie it around the wound, and blow all the bandage in its natural state; then blow into the bandage in a way that the bandage is inflated inside: nature will return to the fracture;
then it should be filled with cotton, and leave it in this way for some time, until it is healed.
When the tooth of a finger or the woman's is broken, if it can be restored as we have said in the bone of the shoulder;
and these broken parts are not hidden from him who puts his study and practice to it, and heed my book.
For the broken part means in many positions the right way of restoration: therefore understand it.
In the tooth, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert the tooth; then wrap it in cloths and leave it for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the ribs or shoulder or similar, that they be cleansed immediately, so that the cleansings that we have mentioned bear witness.
And if the wound is clean, and if the dressing of vinegar, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the fractured bone in the same hour, or the next day, if there are no pus.
And if pus comes, then leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the pus is abated, and do not touch it on the following day or quarter, for you would bring about bad accidents.
And if the broken teeth appear above the gum line, it is necessary that you gently place them in your hands, with slight extension.
And if the extensions are not equipped with you to make it even with your hands, then bend the arm at the elbow with this iron instrument, which is of iron, and has seven or eight spans in length, and the width is according to the amount of the wound; and because it is necessary for the mirror to take three or four, according to how much he has in each breakage treatment;
and let it be round and a little thick, that it does not pour out at the compression above the member in your work, and let it be narrow behind, and thick in the middle in front, thus:
And it is called "palainche", because it should be placed on the top of the head's bone. and it is applied once, as long as it regrows, and they should be evenly placed one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the splints cannot well hold the bone, then it is necessary to cut the head of the bone until the splints have hold.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then use an appropriate tool for this purpose, such as a saw or a chisel, to your power;
then file away what is remaining in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
And when the bone is returned to its place, and the pain is great afterwards, wait until it is not in its natural place.
If you do this until it is in its place, then wipe the area with a sterile black vinegar cloth, and properly if it was in that state; and do not place anything on the wound or put anything else where there is oil, so that there will be no putrefaction and corruption.
then administer elixirs when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not compressed with the break.
and many times have done this to the foolish ones, and have caused the pain or death or corrosion of something every time. and let the binding be softer and more gentle than other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that no evil accident has occurred, as we have said, and you alleviate pain at the limb, then it does not matter to place leeches on it; but rather wrap around, instead of leeches, hard cloths, and tie them.
And when you see after one or two hours that the wound is bleeding again, remove what you have put on top of all the blood, and apply healing ointment, such as Tetrapharmacum and similar.
And it is necessary that you move the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is sound and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bow can move lightly.
And if they continue to protrude, and it cannot be healed but remains bent, saw off the small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you sew the wound with a tent, and remove all those unnecessary pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula comes to the limb, or in any other way of corruption, then it is necessary that you heal it, according to what it says in its chapter before.
And when the bone is broken, and open above the limb, as the bones of the ribs or shoulder, and other similar large bones, do not pull it out, for many times they die, but leave it until it can heal;
perhaps it will fall off after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can.
and if you cannot, leave it.
We often see after the health of the broken bone, especially near the joint, and it is a bad thing to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps cannot do its natural works.
Then take care if it is fresh: if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and similar things, so that you do not use any of these things or all together, and mix them with stiptic wine or with abundant honey or with vinegar; and place them on the nose out of reach, hold them firmly, and do not let go with your hands for a while.
and place them on the nose out of reach, hold them firmly, and do not let go with your hands for a while. then dislocate it again, and start another one until the dislocation is overcome.
or hold firmly on a piece of wet clay well-made; because the property of clay is that it removes all swellings from the limbs.
and if the dislocation has already become hard like a stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then the copper above, and making the excess apparent. or you cut it with any knife until it is removed, and the treatment until it is healed.
a weak limb that is after the garrison
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and delicate afterwards, this often occurs for many reasons: because one is due to the fact that it was too tightly bound, and was not loosened as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and could not reach the necessary movements of the limb; or due to a multitude of swellings; or because of too great movements, and not enough rest; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the treatment is that you relieve the pain, and make the body tense, until the swelling is not multiplied in it; and the assistant bathes, and gives joy and ease.
then places poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to the great swelling, and the heat often from hot iron, until the swelling is drawn out of the limb. and returns to its natural shape.
a twisted limb after healing When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and the bones broken open, and the shape of the limb is deformed, nevertheless it does not lose its natural work.
if one does not believe the people who say that one should break the limb entirely, and many have done this in our land.
And these works are blamed, and great harm comes from them, and perhaps the death of the patient.
Therefore, if the dislocations and torture are severe, it is necessary to apply hot water, or mollifying herbs that are boiled, such as valerian, roots, and melilot, and similar things.
And the mollifying plaster is made as follows: with good adhesive, and you take valerian root and cook it with goose grease or linseed oil, and make a plaster on top.
Or you take dried figs and grind them with linen thread, and similar medicines that soothe the pain.
And never is it necessary to apply continuous and prolonged pressure with wet hands on the dislocation. And allow movement in the limb every hour.
And if the deformity is awake and hardened, like stone, and it needs to be removed with the knife, if it fits just above the bone, with a slight incision; and put on a bandage and leave it to heal.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, it must now be returned against the grain.
For if it delays, the swelling increases, and perhaps if it is reset, it returns to the bone;
therefore, it does not fit to move it to the joint where it swells: often causing pain and other injuries;
therefore, when it arrives, if the pain is healed, then leave it, until the abscess is calmed;
Then raise the limb with hot and oiled cloth, then gently reset it, and treat each member as it would be cured in its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations of the shoulder joint from head to foot.
There are cases where the mandibles are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is in two ways: or they are slightly out of place but softened a bit. or they are completely dislocated, hanging downwards, and the tongue from the mouth cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it often returns in many positions.
And if it is completely and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly and not delay.
And in such a manner that the minister applies pressure to the bad joint, and places his finger slightly off one of its roots within the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand is free, to make even.
And commands the patient to relax his jaws, and move them from all sides. And the mirror moves evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if it is not possible to reset them, immediately if they are both jaws together, then apply hot and oil-soaked cloths, until they can be gently reset.
Do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
And when they are returned evenly, and the mouth of the misaligned joint is tightly closed to soften, then put wool cloths soaked in a thick paste made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind it with soft bands.
and let the misaligned joints lie on their backs, and their shoulders be between two cushions, so that it does not move to the left or right, nor strive to move, but take light food, until the pains are removed, and the jaws are healed.
Then feed it lightly what it wants, and do not strive to open its mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
And if the two mandibles cannot be reset to their proper position within an hour, and they are not converted back to their original shape, then fevers and sweats become common, and possibly diarrhea, and possibly vomiting of clear fluid.
And when you see this, then shave it off as it is deadly. and often killed those who had it, in seven days.
The forceps cannot be removed from the side without causing further damage, and it is not reset once dislocated, and one can feel it.
And the restoration is such that the pain lies silently on its back, and extends its arms; and then press the limb firmly to your palm, and it will return.
then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place.
and the patient who is behind the back cannot evacuate. if not, and if it evacuates once, then reset the limb as we have said.
Then place the plaster and bandage on top, hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until it is healed.
And immediately bring back the dislocated shoulder when it is back in its place.
of shoulder dislocation
It is not dislocated except by three methods:
one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the shoulder blade to the outside. and the second is at the part of the shoulder blade to the inside. and occasionally dislocates at the part above, and this happens rarely.
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves.
and often it is reset incorrectly, especially for those who have little strength, because to these it goes quickly.
to those who have enough strength, it goes slowly and returns slowly.
And sometimes happens to some people, a fracture or crushing, and the shoulder swells with an abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Therefore, you must test it until you are certain. Then begin the treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it goes back to its place, and you will find between the sick shoulder and the healthy one a clear difference. and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and outside the joint, on the top of the shoulder, as if it were an oss. and cannot move its hand to its wrist, nor move from any movement.
and similarly, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you see it clearly at the shoulder.
and this manner of dislocation is only to be reset when it is new, or when the patient feels pain.
And the manner is that the caregiver gently lifts the hand of the patient above, then places their fingers outside the shoulder, and resets the joint above to its place. And the caregiver gently lifts the hand, and stretches it upwards, then places it outside. If it comes quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said before, then it is necessary to bathe the wound in hot vinegar; and the remedy should be softening and soothing, such as a decoction of salt, fenugreek, and melilot in hot water, and it should be applied.
Then the wound should be placed on the patient's back, and a soft pad of even linen, not too thick or too thin, is placed under it, then the patient's foot is placed on top of the pad, and the shoulder is gently lifted, and the hand is drawn towards the wound;
and other ministers tie up the head of the dislocation, so it does not move down. the shoulder is now completely back in place, and if you see if it stays like this:
and that you make sure it is placed by someone who is stronger than the dislocation. and that he is on the right side of the costal, and below the shoulder of the dislocation, and lift the dislocation up, so that the dislocation hangs in the arm. and other ministers pull the hand of the dislocation down towards the stomach. And if the pain is too light, then with it nothing heavy can be done, and the dislocation returns now.
And it is also reset in another way:
and is of a long, thin branch in the earth, which the patient should be as like the dart, and not too thick nor too sharp. then it should be placed outside the pain, but with a soft cloth underneath, and the hairs should be aligned along the length of the arrow.
then it should be extended by the other hand in a different way, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then perform this treatment: take a long, thick branch of about four inches wide, which has the top rounded to enter into the joint from outside the shoulder, like this form:
then tie above the shoulder with soft cloth, which was not a remedy for the pain, then remove it from the side of the pain.
and extend the arm above the long one, and tie the remedy on the long one, and the arm at the top of the hand, then put the arm over the edge of a wide shield, and let the hands hang down from the other side: the joint is now healed.
And when she is healed in any way, it is necessary to place a bandage of equal linen over the shoulder, then apply the poultice with powder from the mill, with incense and a little oil, over the entire shoulder and around, then remove the bandage from the shoulder evenly, and return the limb to the poultice, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let your hands remain thus.
and it is better that he move little, until the limbs are comfortable, for it will heal faster.
then move more after three or four days, and move it. If it is stiff and cannot be softened, then it is healthy.
And if the joint is very strong due to moisture that has come, or for other reasons, it is necessary that you administer cauteries at three points, as it is placed before or in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all of this, and after seven days it dislocates again, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise the arm above, then cut the nerves at the head of the shoulder are torn or stretched or softened. and cut that the joint never returns to its place.
The dislocation that is behind the knee and the buttocks, or behind, is made by impact, and extension of hands, and there is administered another oil.
and treat until it is healthy.
And if after healing the limb swells and moves poorly, then apply the hairs many times, until that swelling is relieved, and returns to its original state.
of the shoulder dislocation
When the shoulder joint is dislocated, it can return to its place with points, and with points it returns.
And it has been dislocated from all parts, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not yet repaired, for one can see it well and feel it. And it becomes dislocated according to each shape. And when you join the misaligned ear with the healthy one, see it openly. For the joint is cut, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as possible, for if it comes when the joint is set, it would be painful to reset.
And perhaps it cannot be reset at all, especially when it is in the back. It is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and perhaps it kills the patient.
And the restoration is, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and its arms are spread, and the hands of the master are held according to the direction of the wrist, back and forth, and press the joint at its root together, or at the base of the palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and holds the root of the palm that is dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, administer strong extension;
and that two masters extend the arm and hold it, so that it does not move during extension;
then turn the arm from every part, then that you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide;
When looking at the joint, if there is any oil to soften the joint, then apply it, and then gently move the joint until it returns.
And when it is in place, apply a dry poultice with some urine, and then strain it, and put the arm on the back of the painful part, and leave it for some time, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the ligament, and leave it.
And if you see that the joint does not strain well, then restart the poultice and the ligament, and leave it in this way for some time, until it is firmly put back. then reset it.
And if he feels stiffness after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved; or you place a fat sheep's tallow on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let it enter or bathe in; and when he feels better, rub the joint immediately, then place the tallow again, and then enter or bathe in. and thus do it two or three times until he is healed;
and if you see, then place wet mud warmed with butter on it, and press it;
it will return to its proper position.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates easily, and its return is lighter than other joints. However, it is necessary to return it to its place quickly, as soon as it is dislocated, provided the skin is not inflamed or there is no abscess forming.
And the return is that you place the misaligned hand on a table, extend the injured hand, and hold it evenly so that it places its palm over the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns.
However, you must check if it is properly aligned. Then place the misaligned limb on a table for extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on a table, and the other person places their hand over the appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that's good. If not, apply soothing plasters and let it rest until it can begin again.
And if it cannot be borne, and you cannot put it back in place after some time, the joint will remain twisted.
and not move the misaligned part until the hand is wrung dry, and cannot strain anything at all. Then check if the tendon or artery is cut.
If there is no other method, it is to cauterize the wound with fire from the outside, and perhaps there is nothing else that can be done.
And when the hand is in place, put the poultice that we have said above, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove and leave it thus.
And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no swelling, then boil water and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of both hands
Never reset the fingers of the hand at any part, never to the back of the palm or to the belly;
then the finger remains, and push the dislocation to your pouches as long as it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed;
and leave it there for two days, then put it back in place that day;
and bandage it as we have said, and the dislocation from the day, and the movement, and the bandage again;
and do this often, until it is tight, and just as you did before, if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, do as you have done previously, until it is healed.
and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dislocation of the spine in the back
When the spine in the back or neck is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, for the patient dies from the pain.
And the signs are such that the excretion jumps out without will, and it cannot be held, and often the limbs become soft, or the two arms or the one leg.
And often the neck moves to the four parts.
That which moves to the back is called "gilbositez".
The cure is such that you reward those who have it from childhood: if there is no cure or healing at all.
And the one that comes from falling or from similar things, they said in ancient ways of healing with great words, or it does not help at all;
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gibosity that comes from the worst part, there is no skill or health;
and similarly that which comes directly in the second ribs, and one cannot heal except for that proper one which comes from the back, as I said.
and let the hairs be stretched out over his face in an even line, and hold the eyes open so he does not blink.
then apply the poultice to the forehead in a thin layer, and the other to the feet, and tie one bandage around the limbs outside of the joint, and the other around the hips, and the groin, and the knees.
and both caretakers tie the bandages, one around the head and the other around the feet, among the two poultices.
and they should be well tied, the poultice as we have said, and the blindfold places his palms over the spine, until he recovers.
If it does not return to its place by this treatment, take a three-armed board, and lever it off, and the pain should be on the side, and push the chief of the board away from the pain, then put the middle of the board on the spine. and put the injured feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place.
and if you see, do it to the thumb that turns to the hand. And it is that you fasten two bands at the head of the pain of an arm of great, and towards the feet two others, and between each band, outside and inside, a handspan of long rope.
and say in each incision, "I turn you back, and let the incisions be firmly in the earth, so they do not move.
and between each two incisions, make one turning incision, so that the wounds may turn back, and say in the two turning incisions, "two small incisions of a palm's length, to turn the turning.
then bind the wound that is among the ribs to the turning towards the head, and the other wound towards the feet at the other turning, and each of the ministers turns their turning along the whole limb, and the masters put the needle evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, place a drying plaster with abundant honey on top, then apply compresses, and then the tip of a tablet of three fingers in length, which will hold the bone of the spine together and the part of the spinal cord intact, then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and use the subtle pressure of binding until it is healed.
And if nothing comes in the end of healing, then medicines that are softening and soothing must be administered, with the remedy that we have said before. And never administer a piece of lead, and if it appears in the back spine of the back, then be careful that it is not a dislocation. and it is the bone that opens, for which we should not have presumption. by chance it would bring death.
It is known that the joints of the back and the joints of the shoulder come only in dislocations alone, and do not come like other joints;
and the joint of the back is dislocated into four parts: backwards and forwards, and front and back;
and more inwards than that, and less dislocated front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inwards is such that when one joints the bad leg with the good one, it is longer, and more open than the good ones, and cannot double the bad knee to the fire; and is the joint which is inflamed from abscess, because the patient's chest is full.
And the sign of one who comes after this is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of those who have it in front, so that they can well straighten their leg according to the completion; therefore, does not double the groin with pain, and if they want to make it move, it cannot go forward, and it holds its urine, and inflames the ankle, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of one who has this after are that he cannot spread his groin, nor double over, and that leg is more bent than the other, and the anger is softened, and the shoulder is dislocated to the side of the ribs.
The return of this similar sign of dislocation is that you reward it with the ancient dislocation, and it stays according to its disposition, if there is no cure; and there is no need for him to have presumption.
And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of four types of dislocation, if you have time to return the joint, extend and retract it, and move it to the left and right; perhaps it will return, and there is no need for other treatment.
And if it does not return in this way, then you must apply a strong minister, and extend the leg strongly at two hands, or at one hand that is tied above the knee; and other ministers extend their hand above in a certain way that they bite their hands from their elbows, then squeeze it with a soft cloth over the knee; and others tie the head of the joint;
and extend it up and down once, until the pain is lifted from the ground once and remains suspended.
This method of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then you must put care to its appearance.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you must first put the pain on its healthy side, then place the joint above the root of the arm, and the limb that is outside the arm, then extend the joint above the arm and towards the forearm;
then take other assistants to hold his arms, and grasp the thick arm of the painful shoulder, and extend it behind in a proper manner: if it returns to its place now;
and this type of dislocation is less severe than others.
And if you cannot close it in this manner that we have said, then you must tie the two hairs of the misaligned joint together with a strong thread above the two heels, and above the two ankles, and let the misaligned leg be stretched out two fingers more than the other;
then it should be hung from the top of a stick, and let it hang two arms' length from the ground;
then command the minister to grasp the back of the neck, and let another ministers hang with the misaligned joint, who grasps the back of the neck, for the joint is now returning quickly.
And when the dislocation is in the shoulder, if it is pricked as we have said in the one with gout, and you hold the joint properly above the misaligned leg, and also above the foot.
Then put two bandages, one at the top and one at the bottom, then fold the bandage between the ribs on the misaligned side. And place wet cloths around it, so it does not dry out, then extend each of the healers towards him, and let the patient hold the dislocation.
If it returns, it's good.
If not, place it on the table, and press it as we have said in the gilbosite, and grind the bad parts against the clean side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the misaligned leg quickly, as I have said. and place the painful part above the bad joint, then press with the other hand, and stretch it downwards towards the groin.
And if the dislocation is in the shoulder, it does not require extending the joint downwards, nor lifting it upwards, but it should be as it was when dislocated from its place, as we have said for the position of the two shoulders; and it should be above its face, and the arm stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be fixed when the joint extends its legs, and they will be even; Then bend the knees, apply the ointment, and place a bandage on it, so that it does not move. And rest it for three or four days, then reset it, and apply the ointment again.
And if you see that they are even, then reset the bandage as before, and leave it for three days.
Then reset it again, and make it move vigorously, until the limb is comfortable.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is dislocated in three ways: That is to say, from inside and outside, and behind.
and do not reset before.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if he does not straighten it at his hip, then you must reset it.
And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and his foot on yours.
Then take his knee in your palms, and pull it towards you, then bend the two sides of the knee correctly. And other assistants extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he straightens his leg lightly at his hip.
and apply the plaster on top, and make the leg stiff at the hip for three or four hours, then release it.
and do not work the injured limb until the limb is comfortable.
And if the member is not straight, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the ankle dislocation
The feet are never splinted and never fully dislocated, inside and outside.
And the signs are that the knee is swollen, and test before the part where it is dislocated:
the re-attaching is light, and one should gently extend it to their hands when it is only slightly swollen.
And when it is dislocated quickly, then you should straighten the injury correctly, and hold it with one hand on the leg, above the knee;
Then hold the string with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and beat the string hard against the top.
And do this twice, as we have said, by pulling and stretching the string;
If it comes back, it is good.
If not, restart the work, for it returns.
And if it cannot return in this way, then lay the injured limb on its back on the ground, and firmly fix a splint between its thighs, and wrap bandages around it, so that it does not bend the injured limb.
then the servants apply the poultice to the chest, and other servants stretch the cloth to his hands or to the limb, that he may tie it around the neck of the wound. then each servant stretches evenly, and the bandages are placed between the ribs of the wound to retain the wound as it is stretched.
then the servants place the hands evenly on the dislocation, and other servants apply the poultice to the sound leg at the side, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it goes to the point, if the plaster and douche are applied above, and the bandage is formed, and the cloth is tied to the leg, and the nerves which are above the ankle behind, that the bindings are not too tight.
then leave it for two days or three, and if its joints are weakened, strain them.
then reset it on the third day or fourth, and let the pain last for four days. and if it goes before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes, it is necessary that you pacify it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
for two When the two are dislocated, if they should be gently extended towards labor, and this is a light matter.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the body or limb, it is necessary that you make the pain sit above one leg plain or above the table straight, and put your hand on what opens these joints, then press your hand firmly until it returns.
and when it is even and there is no opening, put the sole of your hand on a flat table with two fingers, then strain it firmly and leave it for three days, then reset it. and let him rest, until he is well.
of wounds and of dislocations together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often times it kills the patient:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and slow, do not be harsh:
and at the beginning of things, use calming incisions on abscesses, and leave the wound in God's hands, if you do not see hope for health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb at once, as soon as the abscesses come.
When the member is set, administer things that reduce inflammation and heal the wound, as it should be, with dry bandages.
And if the dislocation is fractured and the bones are small, decompose them, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
And guard against entering the path of fear, as I have said, for it is better for you according to your Creator, and by the knowledge of your armor and your body.
