Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	"Thus begins the words of Albucasis."
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	"Oh, sons, since I have fulfilled this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, and by its completion it has reached its end, and by its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I complete it for you with this treatise, which concerns the operation with my hand, that is surgery."
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation with my hand is despised in our region and in our times has been completely abandoned, so that the science of it has become rare, its traces have disappeared; and nothing remains of it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed their hands and have deviated from those errors and hesitations so that they are closed off to their intentions and the strength of it is elongated and weakened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	"And it seems to me that I revive this one with an arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and also with forms of cautery tools and other instruments necessary for the work, which is added in the declaration, and by preparation for it, which is necessary."
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	"However, the reason why there is no good artisan with their hands in our time is because the art of medicine is long and its performer should be well-trained beforehand in the science of anatomy, which contains knowledge of the joints of the limbs and their shapes, conjunction, separation of them; and has the knowledge of bones, nerves, and arteries, their number, arrangement, pulsating veins and quiet ones, and places for their discharge."
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	"And therefore Hippocrates said that in the name of U is the cause, but little in the work, especially in the art of the hand."
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	"But we have already said about this at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will certainly fall into error and cause many deaths, as I have seen too many times, because some are trained in this science but cast themselves away from it without knowledge or experience."
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	"For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor incise an escrofulous abscess on the neck of a woman and cut some arteries in her neck so that much blood flowed, causing the woman to die suddenly among the masses."
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	"And I saw another doctor who took upon himself to remove a stone from a man who had fallen into that state, and the stone was large; but he came to him and removed that stone along with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day."
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	"And I had already appealed to him to leave it alone, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the illness, I knew for sure that he would die."
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	"And I saw another doctor who received payment of one ducat from our land for surgery; and he undertook to treat a blacksmith who had a fracture in his hip. And the doctor prepared with his ignorance, removed the fracture on top of the hip bone with pulleys and screws with great force, and did not leave room for respiration."
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	"And he finally released him according to his desires and removed the splint, and also removed the bandage after some days and commanded that we release the ligature; but he did it in such a way that the hip bone became inflamed, causing damage."
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	"And I was called to him and prepared to release the ligature, and thus tranquility came about with the alleviation of his pains."
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	"But nevertheless corruption had already become confirmed in the limb, so that I could not hold it back, and corruption did not cease to wander through the limb until the patient was endangered."
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	"And I saw another doctor who punctured a cancerous abscess and it became ulcerated after some days, causing the evil to spread throughout its owner."
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	"The reason for this is that the cancerous ulcer is caused by black bile, which should not be approached with any iron at all, but rather to the limb that suffers from it must be applied what can expel it."
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	"And therefore, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two parts: some are operations associated with health, and others are works in which there is danger in most situations."
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	"And I have already explained this throughout all parts of this book where operation is mentioned in which there is error and fear; for it is necessary for you to observe this and leave that alone, so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and dishonor you."
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	"And therefore take up your arms with solicitude and protection of God, and your illnesses with patience and steadfastness."
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	"And use the best way by the grace of God to pursue health and successful outcome, leaving behind terrible illnesses with difficult cure; show your arms against what you fear, so that steadfastness in your faith and name may not desert you: for it remains more to your glory, both on earth and in the end, to your sanctity."
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	"Since I have already said in some of my books:"
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"No cure an illness unless you know how to do it well, so that you may not be called a bad doctor."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	"And I have already divided this book into three chapters."
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	"Here begins the division of the book, first of the first part."
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	"The first chapter ordered is about the head, regarding the forms of instruments and the irons for cautery, and what is necessary in operation."
La divisio de la segonda partida.	"Here begins the second part."
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The second chapter, about stitching and perforation, about cupping glasses, splints, and extraction of arrows and similar things, all ordered according to the forms of instruments."
Divisio de la tersa partida.	"Here begins the third part."
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The third chapter, about reduction and dislocation, and about the cure of torsion and similar things; chapter ordered regarding the head and the forms of instruments."
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	"About cautery with fire and with sharp medicine and remembrance of operation."
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	"And with that begins the treatise of the entire book."
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	"It is necessary for me to say what are the effects of that cautery and its harms, and in what condition cautery is prohibited."
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	"Therefore I say that the discourse about the quality of cautery's benefit and harm is long and verbose, subtle in science, and secretly hidden; many wise men have already spoken about it, and they disagree with each other on this matter, but I will suffice with a little bit of their discourses, fearing lengthiness."
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	"And therefore I say that cautery is beneficial universally to every condition, both with matter and without matter, except for two conditions which are conditions of the body without matter."
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	"The complexion being dry and hot, with matter out of harmony; some said that cautery is beneficial for this, while others said the contrary, that cautery is not suitable in illness caused by heat and dryness."
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	"That person who says the contrary believes that cautery is beneficial in all dry and hot illnesses that occur in humans' bodies."
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	"And I say, according to what that person said, I have already experienced this many times."
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	"But it is not necessary to come back to this topic again since it has already been thoroughly explored in the chapter on cautery by recent authors, and considering the diversity of human complexions, the disposition of illnesses in their various places, their causes, accidents, and duration."
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	"But in other complexions, there is not much doubt, especially regarding hot and humid illnesses, since all physicians agree on these matters and are unanimous in their judgment using cautery for such conditions."
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	"And know, my son, that the secret of cure by cautery with fire and its benefits are discussed in medical writings on cautery, because fire acts simply, affecting only the member cauterized and not harming other adjacent members unless there is some injury."
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"But the action of cautery reaches only those members from which it is drawn away, and if done forcefully, it can bring difficult-to-cure illnesses into those members."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	"But fire, due to its purity and goodness of substance, does not do anything but superfluate. And it is already known to us through experiment and the length of service in studying this art that this is true; therefore, I am excused from discussing it at length here. However, if it were not for the fact that my book on this subject has not yet been published, I would reveal to you in this passage, with philosophical demonstration, the secret of how fire operates on bodies and its expulsion of illnesses."
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	"And know, my son, that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to perform cautery, and they consider the best time to be in spring."
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	"And I say that cautery is appropriate at any time because the accidental harm caused by time is outweighed by the benefit gained from cautery. Especially when cautery is performed for pains or necessary pains, sharp and chronic ones, which do not tolerate delay, since greater harm comes from delaying than from a small injury occurring in the meantime."
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	"And bear this in mind, my son: only the common people and foolish physicians esteem that those illnesses which are cured by cautery have a delayed recovery, considering that consequence."
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	"And the reason is not as they imagine because cautery is like medicine that alters complexion and dries out humors which are the cause of pain."
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	"But cautery surpasses medicine in its efficacy and virtue of operation, being great because of its power."
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	"But it is possible that the illness might return at some point in time, depending on the complexion of the illness, its location, and the virtue of cautery used. It also depends on how much superfluity has accumulated in the body and what nourishment and influences have been received by the person. However, if cautery is applied to an illness that is subtle and affects a member with few superfluities and humors, such as toothache, it is less likely to return."
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	"And it is commonly said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true; however, people do not understand what they mean by it, as they believe that nothing can be cured profitably with medicine or any other cause besides cautery."
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	"And the cause is actually the opposite; the intention behind saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not because other treatments fail to help but rather because cautery is used at the end when all other remedies have been exhausted, and it is then that cautery proves effective."
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	"And from now on, understand that when I say cautery is the last resort of medicine, it is not in accordance with the intention understood by the common people and many foolish physicians."
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	"And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this not because of any virtue of gold itself, but only for its equality and subtlety of substance."
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	"And they said that the place of cautery does not matter, which is not entirely true because I have proved and experienced that this is only true in certain bodies without others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not declared to you how much of it is consumed due to the heat of the gold, nor does it prepare itself to receive friction. And if you adjust the ignition on top of it, the gold melts due to the fire, and sometimes pieces of it fall into the fire, causing the artisan inconvenience."
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	"And for this reason, cautery with iron should be performed more lightly and more precisely to achieve the desired effect."
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	"And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to its chapters and those of the head within its powers, so that you may easily find what you desire from it."
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	"On cautery for headache due to coldness and humidity."
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers upon the humidity and frigidity of the servant who suffers from this accident whose two causes are coldness and an abundance of fluent flux, calledorrhea, from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears. It also causes much sleepiness, toothache and stomach pain, and generally all illnesses that come from frigidity, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	"You should first instruct the patient to undergo a cleansing purge of the head with medicinal laxatives for three or four nights, as required by their condition and age."
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	"And then tell them to shave their head with a razor. Then have that servant bring the seat between your hands over a cushioned bench and have them place their hands on its surface."
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	"And then place the razor's edge against the palm of your hand, bringing it up to rest at the base of the patient's nose between their nostrils."
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But first, when your middle finger has reached that spot, mark it with a thread and then ignite the olive oil cautery, which is prepared in this way:"
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	"And then place that over the marked spot with such force that your hand is slowly pushed down, and you turn it."
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	"And then raise your hand lightly and look at the spot. If you see any bone exposed there, like a grain of barley, then immediately raise your hand. But if not, return your hand with that iron until you see what I have described to you."
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	"And then take some salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it for three days."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	"And then place a cotton wick dipped in border oil on the wound, leaving it there until the fire's scar is destroyed."
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	"And then dress the wound with tetraformacon ointment until it is healed."
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	"When the wound remains open, it is better to raise the arm, as this provides better healing."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	"They said that the nerve should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should be held until some part of the bone's marrow is heated."
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	"And then it should be scraped until the heat reaches the bone, and then it should be treated."
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	"And others said that when the cautery reaches the bone marrow, it should press hard on the bone until it cracks, and this is the manner of treating small abscesses:"
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	"They believe that from that place, the vapors of the head escape."
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	"And if the wound remains open for a long time, it should be treated until it is consolidated."
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	"But I have not seen these two kinds of cauteries done on everyone, only on some people out of fear; and thus, it seems to me, it is better with health when this is done. For the head is opened by the solution of continuity from this manner, just as we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the sick person is full naturally."
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	"And the first kind of cautery is safer and better in my opinion, and that is where that work should be done with health."
Capitol segon.	"Chapter Two"
Del cauteri del cap.	"On the cautery of the head."
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	"If chronic and prolonged pain occurs in the whole head of a patient who has long suffered from illness, and despite using various remedies such as plasters, ointments, bandages, and other treatments, there is no improvement, consider if the patient's head was of strong constitution by nature. If this is not the case, cauterize it again with another cautery."
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	"And cauterize that on the horn of their forehead with an ember cautery where the chain breaks off."
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	"Cut the chain and expose the quantity of bone mentioned earlier. Then cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head where it is called the 'vessel', which is also the location used for applying a cupping glass."
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	"And alleviate your hand in this, do not expose the bone, because the pain caused by this cautery is different from all other cauteries on the head and causes much greater pain."
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	"And I tell you this cautery in its place, because it is necessary to cauterize the horns of the head and the occupit with a more subtle cautery than that used for cauterizing the middle of the head. This is the form of it."
Capitol ters.	"Chapter on cauteries."
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	"On cauterization for non-classical migraine."
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	"When severe pain occurs in the part of the head or a throbbing pain is felt within it, let it be evacuated with medicines that clear the head. If this does not help, and other treatments are administered without success, then cauterization should be performed in one of two ways: either by cauterizing with an acutely burning medicine or with iron."
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	"The cautery with burning medicine is performed by taking a dish of salt and grinding it until its ends are ground off from both sides."
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	"And then carefully cut the location of the pain in the temple with a sharp lancet that is just enough to expose the chain without cutting it completely."
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	"And then press it with a linen cloth moistened with hot water for about three hours. Then remove the salt and bandage the wound with soft cloth for two or three days. Then compress the area again under wet compresses until the wound heals."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then cure it with an ointment so that it is healed."
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	"And if you wish to do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines."
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"The cautery with iron is performed in this way, and this is its form:"
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	"And it is called closed nails because the head of it is like the shape of a nail with some curvature, and there is a small prominence in its middle."
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	"And then place the hot iron on the location of the pain and hold your hand steady so that the heat does not adhere to the arrow. Then slowly move the iron back and forth at moderate speed."
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	"And if the quantity of iron that adheres to the chain is such that most of it is burned, raise your hand up so that the artery is not burned and does not cause bleeding."
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then immerse the area in salt water and apply it to the location, leaving it there for three days. Then compress the area with a warm cloth and cure it with an ointment until it is healed."
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	"If you wish to cauterize the extreme point of the temple according to cautery, be careful not to incise the artery in this type of non-classical migraine."
Capitol quart.	"Chapter Four."
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	"On the cauterization of ancient migraines."
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	"When you treat migraine as we have said in the previous treatment and in the sections on illnesses, and the treatment does not help, sometimes due to the severity of the illness, the first cautery with medicine or fire is not enough. Therefore, you should heat the temple cautery until it is red hot. Then place your hand on the location of the pain for a moment and press it until you incise the artery and cause blood to flow into the mouth."
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	"However, it is necessary for you to protect the continuation of the jawbone, which is moved during mastication, and that the muscle is not adhered to and that no spasms occur."
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	"And if it is about the care and caution regarding the flow of blood from the artery that is opened, for there is fear in its opening, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not studious and experienced. Leave the operation to someone at the beginning."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	"And I bring back to memory the method of stopping accidental bleeding from the artery according to its way, in its proper place in this book."
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	"If you see this illness that does not improve with this cautery and the patient's constitution is tolerable, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have described, and cure the wound until it is healed."
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	"If you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the stopping of bleeding with cautery using two tweezers, for this is better cauterization and more effective."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter Five."
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	"On the cauterization of ear pains."
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	"When there is pain in the ear due to friction and it is treated with laxative causes and other treatments that have been mentioned in the division, but the pain persists, then heat the cautery called puncture, of which this is the form:"
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	"And then puncture around the ignition point, and guide it around the entire ear like a wheel being turned, or make circuits around each one if the pain is in both."
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	"Proceed slowly with the cautery of the rim of the ear little by little, so that you feel the location with caution."
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	"And if you make dots with the cautery all around the ear and leave it like that, then cure those locations until they are healed."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter Six."
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Burning of the throat
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tumor that is treated and cured by cautery is only of those species that come through the blood vessels, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery for the species that arrives dry or due to spasm of the nerve
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that kind of tumor with remedies and purgatives and warm drinks, and your treatment does not bring about healing, then you should cauterize the disease with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below the forehead temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery for the opposite of where the disease started, because softening happens only in the part that appears healed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cautery is that you cauterize there with the cautery in the right side of the extreme tip of the ear above a little over the horn of the head, and on the other temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the thumb, and then pause your hand with the cautery until about half of the species of the bone is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the method of cautery, which is a species of the cutlery trade, the form of which is as follows:
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it would be much more subtle if you could see it this way; and sometimes it's necessary to cut away excess thickness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards, treat the place with whatever is prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter Seven."
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	"Regarding the cautery of ancient apoplexy."
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and treated with what we have said without causing fever in the patient, then cauterize him with four cauteries: over all his temples; and with a cautery on the middle of his head as we have said; and with a cautery on his neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of cauterizing is done as has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	Then cauterize over the mouth of the stomach, and if it is worse, then treat him with what you proceed to do
Capitol .viii.	Capitulum viii
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Concerning the cauterization for forgetfulness caused by a stroke.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	At first give him large jars and purgative pills to cleanse him
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the whole head of the patient and apply to his neck the plaster made of ceter described in the treatise on plasters
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply it several times, for that is the manner of cauterizing.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to that measure which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if he is healed well by that, do so. And if not, then give him three cauteries on the back part of his head, descending from the highest part of his head down to the lowest part of his neck
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery for the thickness of a finger, and then treat the burn with what you have proceeded to do
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if the patient cannot tolerate that much, then give him a cautery in the middle of his head. And if he can tolerate more, then cauterize him over both temples
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat him until he is healed; and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the form given before
Capitol .ix.	Capitulum ix.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	"Of cauterization of parasites and softening of the entire body."
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	"That you proceed with the cauterization of the head with fire and with water as we have said; and immediately seize the patient's head, and immediately cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head, and cauterize it on all the corners of the head, and cauterize it on the back part of it, and cauterize three times on the shoulders of the neck."
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	"And if it is necessary in the illness for mollification of the body because that one is too hot and the illnesses are tolerating and the illness is strong, then cauterize them with four cauteries on the shoulders of the back, and afterwards cauterize them between the nape of their neck and their shoulders, and raise their head up."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	"And immediately heal that one which is healed, and this shall be cautery with olive oil."
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	"On Cauterization for Epilepsy."
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	"Epilepsy is not cauterized unless it is due to phlegm."
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	"Therefore, it is necessary to cleanse the brain at the beginning of the treatment and in the other cure that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is big and tolerant except for the exception of medicines."
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	"And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer gargarisms and mastigators to cleanse the throat, beforehand for several days, with beneficial foods."
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	"And also burn the head of the patient, and burn it with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the aforementioned manner, and with another cautery on the occupit of it, and on each horn of the head burn."
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	"And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then burn it with cauteries that I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back."
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	"Let it be cauterized with olive oil according to what has been said beforehand."
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	"But if the patient is a child, then pause cauterizing subtly in this manner."
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted moisture and thick bile, then cauterize it with the cauteries mentioned earlier in paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If the cause of melancholy is declining superfluity leading to it, and the patient's body is humid, then let them drink what cleanses the brain according to what has been mentioned earlier in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And properly shave the patient's head, and also make a poultice decently from it over the circle, and properly apply that poultice in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be seated, and held down on all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And also apply a liniment; afterwards, it is fitting to bind with wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire for gentle heating according to measure, which the said patient endures when it is most in them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And afterwards place that in the middle of the head within the circle, and let it lie there until it cools down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient once every week, but with the other regimen of the boil until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that making little points according to how much of it there is, ensuring that your hand holds a cautery arranged thus: this is a species of cautery which moistens the brain evenly.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And also bind that wound with cloth or gauze.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On cauterizing descending water in the head
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it has been declared to you that water has begun to descend into the head through the signs which have been mentioned in this division, then begin and give the patient to drink what cleanses the brain of him, and guard him from all humidities.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let him be subjected to bathing with decoction for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then order him to raise his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of descent of water into both heads, or on one side if it is the beginning of the descent of water into one head.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cauterize with cauteries all veins and arteries which are below the nape, and let the cauteries be placed at that distance along the line of latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see any fluxes of blood, stop them with some medicine which is at your disposal.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I come with wisdom which is in extraction of arteries and in excision of those, and in caution about fluxes of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized in the brain between two bones with two cauteries producing copiously.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	"On the burning away of ancient tears."
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	"When tears from the eyes are abundant and flow through the veins and arteries that are visibly present in the head, and it is confirmed that this is a superfluous fluid matter, then cauterize that area with a cautery, which we have described at the beginning of the chapter on hot water in the eyes. Cauterize the middle of the head and two spots behind the temples, and two spots behind the ears."
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	"And if needed, cauterize that area on both sides of the eye socket above the eyebrow with a small cautery."
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	"On cauterizing the foul odor from the nose."
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	"If you treat someone with what we have mentioned in the section and it does not help, then prepare and give them this mixture to drink for three nights: ..., and then shave their head and cauterize it with a cautery made of mastic mixed with olive oil."
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	"And also cauterize that area with a clove cautery, placing two cauteries on both eyebrows above the hair."
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	"Be careful not to burn that area."
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	"And this is how you make a clove cautery:"
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	"For cautery of softening of eyelid inflammation."
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid is softened due to illness or moisture, cauterize that eyelid with this silver cautery device, and this is how it should be done:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	"If you must, cauterize above both eyebrows using two small cauteries on each side, avoiding the temples."
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	"And let the length of each cautery be proportional to the thickness of the eyebrow."
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	"Press the cautery gently against the skin without burning more than a third of the eyelid."
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	"Regarding cauterizing the eyelids when hairs grow inward and pierce the eye."
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	"When the hairs of the eyelid grow inward and pierce the eye, cauterize them in either of two ways: either with fire or with medicine."
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	"If cauterizing with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to extend his eyelashes like those that are combed out, until they are lengthened and hardened. And if any hairs emerge during this process, then stretch the eyelids using a bandage so that no harm is caused while waiting for them to grow."
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	"When the hairs have grown and hardened, then pause the patient's head in a suitable position, and holding the eyelid taut with your thumb, place the cautery upon it. The beginning of the cautery should be shaped like a sickle of iron, placed close to where the hairs begin."
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	"And then pause cotton dipped in alum or in mucilage of hartshorn on the eye."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	"And then ignite the cautery which has this shape:"
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	"And then cauterize along the shape marked here, little by little, with repeated motions, until the surface of the line resembling a myrtle leaf is entirely consumed."
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	"The sign of the cure being accomplished is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and its hairs raised up from the puncture of the eye."
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	"And then raise your hand and leave it alone for three days. After that, pause a cotton bandage on it until the scar is healed."
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then dress it with ointment until it is healed."
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If the eyelid returns to its previous position due to some cause and is softened, then apply the cautery again on that spot as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the eyelids are stuck to the eyelid, then cauterize that area which is elevated to its natural location and swollen, so that the eyelids do not stick together.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	If the cautery with medicine is used to burn this area that you command the patient to lift the eyelids which are prolonged and swollen, then a piece of cloth like a mint leaf should be placed nearby.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take some known soap and live coal on a needle tip, mix them quickly so that it does not cool down, spread this mixture on the cloth shaped like a mint leaf, place it on one or both eyelids, then place cotton wool dipped in egg white on the other eye, and keep the patient's head tilted back.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Place your finger on the medicine and press it lightly, but do not rub it in while the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the sensation is like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And once the burning sensation is felt, then remove the medicine and wipe it with your finger; when the burning sensation stops, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. Then observe if the eyelid has been lifted as it was before, in which case you should cauterize or cut the constriction with fire, for it is now at its best. And if not, place the medicine back on the location where it had not previously adhered until the swelling subsides and your operation is completed and the eye is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then place cotton soaked in boric acid or another suitable solution over it until the inflammation of the adhesion is erased, and then dress it with a suitable ointment or another substance until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to be very diligent in your operation that no medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes inflamed over several days and some cause of hairs puncturing the eye occurs, then repeat your medication on that location where the eyelid has become inflamed, just as you did at the beginning, until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the method for treating a cataract.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness, and therefore your cautery should be done accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the path of correctness from anyone who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cautery for a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	"When you treat fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases and your treatment does not succeed, then you must cauterize it in this manner: Command the patient to place their head on your thigh, and hold their head steady with one hand between their teeth so that they are neither moved nor agitated by their own head."
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	"And then place hot wax or pitch plaster on the wound on the head."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"Furthermore, this is the form of the cautery you will use:"
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	"The cautery should be hollow, like a reed or a vulture's feather tip, at the end of which you will perform the cautery."
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	"Furthermore, if you wish, it may also penetrate into the other extremity."
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	"And if you want, let it be like this: as if tending."
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	"But truly, that which is hollow is better for your task."
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Approximately press the fistula if it is open, and draw out its pus and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not open, then tear it open and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then press the cautery which has been well ignited onto it and hold it there for a moment, but not too long at the end of the nose so that you do not burn your hand or disturb the patient, and then immediately place the cautery in the ashes and extinguish it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cautery you perceive that it enters into the bone, then that is good. Otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice more if necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and again press on that spot with a border and around it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then apply a medicine that is sharply corrosive to it until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what seems appropriate in this chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some doctors first described: enter the place where the fistula is and open it up, and immediately insert into that opening a very subtle probe whose shape corresponds to its form. Then pour into that as much melted lead as you can hold in your hand with caution so that the patient does not suffer too much so that the melted lead does not reach the wound; and cover the wound of the patient with a bandage dipped in album of egg or water, because lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, then that is good. Otherwise, it is necessary to administer traction of the nose and reduce the fistula into the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cauterization of the split hoof.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times it happens that splits occur in the lips, and more often in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	"Therefore, when treating those fissures with what we have mentioned in the divisions and your treatment proves ineffective, then apply a small cautery knife in this manner which is shown."
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	"And it should be curved according to the subtlety of a needle."
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	"Then pause your hand carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the front of the fissure."
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	"And then cure that wound until it is healed."
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter XIX."
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	"On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth."
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"When an aposteme forms on the uvula or palate or roots of teeth, and it bursts and is cleaned out, and then breaks open again, and a fistula forms, if you cure it but the cure does not take effect, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to the amount that has been received in the fistula. Then put that hot iron into the mouth of the fistula, keeping your hand inside until the hot iron reaches the front of it. Repeat this process once or twice more; and then cure it with what we have said about curing until it is healed."
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	"And if the wound heals and is sound, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone according to what is written in its chapter."
Capitol .xx.	"Chapter XX."
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	"On the cauterization of teeth and the softening of gum boils."
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When gums are softened by moisture and teeth are painful, and you treat them with medicines without success, then place the patient's head on the table, and immediately apply the cautery of this form: thus you will place the tweezers over the tooth and quickly insert the ignited cautery into that area, keeping your hand a little withdrawn so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And immediately remove your hand, and repeat the application of the cautery several times according to what you desire.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and keep it in for an hour, then spit it out, because the painful tooth will be solidified, the softened gum tightened, and the harmful moisture dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by coldness, or there's decay in the teeth, and medicine does not relieve it, then cauterization in that area may be done in two ways: either with a hot iron from cattle dung, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	To cauterize with a hot iron from cattle dung: Take some cattle dung, roll it into the shape of an iron ball, and place it on the glowing end of the tongs. Then quickly wrap that end in cotton cloth, and apply it to the painful tooth, pressing firmly until it becomes cold again.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	"And then repeat this several times until the power of fire reaches the root of the teeth."
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	"And if you wish, soak some wool or cotton in the border of the powder above and place it on the painful tooth, then place a heated iron on top until the iron reaches the point of the concavity of the tooth."
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	"However, you should wait until the coal or iron is hot enough before cauterizing with fire. Make sure it has reached the center and that its heat does not reach the patient's mouth."
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	"And then heat the cautery iron to its proper shape and place it on the tooth with your hand until it cools down. Do this several times, once or twice a day, until the pain disappears."
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	"And it is necessary that after this cauterization, the patient should rinse his mouth well and hold it closed for an hour. Then he should spit it out; and this is the form of cauterization."
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	"And cauterize with whatever you wish according to what seems best to you."
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	"And this is the shape of the cannula:"
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of exstrophic defects
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	"When exstrophic defects are caused by friction and fluids that do not heal well with medicines and you wish to promote digestion of those, then heat the cautery iron to its proper shape, which is as follows: it should have two openings at its ends so that smoke can come out through one opening while the other remains closed. Place the heated cautery on the exstrophe once or twice until it reaches the point of the defect."
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	"And if the exstrophe is small, then place the cautery accordingly, according to its size. Then leave it alone for three days and place it on the edge of the wound, pressing it down until what the fire has burned is healed."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with ointments and dressings until it is healed."
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	"And the shape of the cautery iron for such use should be like this:"
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	"For cauterization of vocal cords and constriction of breath."
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	"When humidity reaches the lung canal, especially when it's accompanied by cold weather, first, the patient should be given laxative medicines and then cauterize that area with a hot iron in the depressed place."
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	"And make sure that you do not burn through to the gut or scorch the spine, but only lightly cauterize it."
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Burn that area with another cautery at the junction of the neck on the last cervical vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	Then apply the cautery to it in the same manner as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards dress that wound as is said above until it is healed
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cautery for the illness of the lung and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are from moist friction, and the illness does not have fever or spitting, and is an ancient illness, therefore cauterize that area with two cauteries on the furcula at the depressed points of lion's head and buffalo's hump; and another cautery in the middle of the chest between both nipples; and let the cauteries be applied as described above.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery be puncture cautery with the cautery called punctum, of which the form is described above in the punctuation for earache.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let them be punctured thus, and afterwards dress that wound with what is said above until it is healed
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And since the cautery has three prongs for this cauterization, in one cauterization you can apply three cauteries as follows:
Capitol .xxv.	De cauterizacion del mal de gota, e del dolor de lumbos.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	"Regarding the cauterization of the little head which is the tip of the helper."
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	"When the little head is displaced due to slippery lubricity and not firmly held in place during its return, it should be reduced before it returns completely; and gently move it so that it returns properly, as we have witnessed. Then, have the patient lie on their back or side; lift the thigh which is at the junction of the little head, with your left hand."
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And therefore you should cauterize it thus:"
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	"And cauterize the thigh until that side enters into the other side; and this is the figure of cauterization for four heads."
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"Then, according to the amount of tenting, it should be cauterized thus:"
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	"And sometimes this is adjusted according to this count and there are eight cauteries."
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	"And then apply a poultice with salt and oil, and have the patient rest quietly until they are comfortable; do not move the limb for some time until it is healed."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	"And if the dislocation is at the top and it is done this way, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery called 'clavilh' or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is dissipated, and the pain is healed."
Capitol .xxvi.	"Chapter 26."
De cauterizacio del stomac.	"On cauterizing the stomach."
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	"When there is heat and much humidity in the stomach that causes it to swell beyond its normal size, and if you continue with the same methods of treatment without improvement, then it is necessary for the patient to sit upright on their bed or chair, extend their hands and feet, and cauterize them thus: one cautery on the left side of the pit of the stomach, as long as a finger with a blunt cautery; and two cauteries on each side of this cautery, so that it forms a triangular figure. Do not allow those that are not well-adjusted to cause burning."
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	"And the depth of the cautery should be equal to two-thirds the thickness of the thigh."
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	"And the figure of the cautery should be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is one cautery according to the circular form according to this form:"
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	"And cauterize the stomach puncturing it thus for whoever is afraid of this cautery: You should poke on the stomach with a tent as much as you wish and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat them according to the treatment that has been previously mentioned until they are healed."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter 27."
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	"On cauterizing an inflamed liver."
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness that causes it to be thrown out of its normal condition by an excess exit, and if this condition is treated with what has been said and does not improve, then it is necessary for the patient to sit upright on their neck, and poke three cauteries according to this form and size onto the liver on the left side of the hypochondrium where a man lies when he is decubitus."
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	"And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of a finger, and the cauteries should be as long as the right hand's middle finger."
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	"And do not press too hard with the cautery."
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	"And the amount of cautery that is necessary should be equal to the width of the middle of the thigh and not any more than this. And if the condition persists, then place the patient on their hands and knees. If they are standing, then have them sit down with their arms extended, elevate their elbows."
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	"And this is the form of the cautery:"
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	"And it may be possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife cautery if you have subtlety and prudence in the art."
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	"And be careful not to proceed too quickly with the cautery, and cauterize only one third of the thigh at a time so that the entire body may be cauterized and it may reach the vessels. For here the flesh is thin."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter 28."
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	"Regarding the cauterization of a liver abscess."
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	"If you ever find an abscess in the liver and want to know if that abscess is within the liver's flesh or its capsule, then know that if it is within the liver's flesh, the patient will have more severe pain and tenderness."
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	"And if it is in the capsule of the liver, there may be intense pain, sometimes even tiring out the doctors treating him."
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	"Therefore, it is necessary for the patient to lie face up on their neck; then carefully feel for the location of the abscess with your fingertips; and also prepare the cautery instrument which resembles rags, whose form has been described in the previous page."
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	"And cauterize it with that cautery until the entire chain is charred, until it reaches the gallbladder, until it burns clean."
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	"Also treat any other nearby abscesses to ensure they are healed as well."
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	"And note that this method of cautery should only be used by those who have studied medicine extensively and have experienced treating many illnesses. Although some may have tried it a few times, it is better left to the discretion of those who know what they are doing."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX."
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	"On the cautery of pleurisy."
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	"The ancient cauteries for pleurisy were made in this manner, according to Aristole: Take a dry, long stick of reed, cut it in half lengthwise so that it is as thick as your finger."
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	"And then dip it in oil and heat it over the fire, and cauterize with this cautery at the spot between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and also cauterize with two small cauteries slightly inclined towards the left side of the beard, and two cauteries inclining between the fifth rib and the seventh rib, slightly sloping backwards; and another cautery in the middle of the chest; and one on the stomach, and three cauteries at the back parts; and one cautery between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on both sides of the chest."
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	"And do not grasp the cautery with your hand, but rather hold it at its midpoint during the procedure."
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	"And the ancient masters said that men who use an iron cautery like a rod should heat it in that place between the ribs until it reaches the abscess and burns it clean, as we have described for the liver abscess."
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	"But in this procedure with cautery, there is nothing to fear, because even if it happens that someone dies right away, it occurs in the location of the fistula which was not healing."
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	"On the cautery of the womb."
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	"When you treat the illness of the womb with what we have said about the cure in its division and it does not improve, then perform cautery on it in three ways, all of which are acceptable. One way is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the womb according to the shape of the liver cauteries, whose shape has been previously described."
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	"And let each cautery be as thick as a finger or slightly more, and the manner of the cautery should be the same as that described for the liver cautery."
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	"But do not grasp the cautery with your hand, and let the illness be over before the two sides [of the womb]."
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	"And another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery having turned it twice, which causes we have described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift up the cord which is towards the womb where the seat of the left-sided illness is located."
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	"And let your lifting be such that you lift up the cord according to the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the width of the body."
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	"And then insert the two vertices, heated with hot coal, into that place where with those you penetrate the cord from the other side."
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	"Then remove the cautery, and thus four cauteries will have been made."
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	"And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vertices."
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	"Then treat the cautery because it is possible that it has remained there for too many days, since heat is more effective than other causes in curing."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Chapter XXXI."
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	"On cauterizing hydrocele."
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	"Do not cauterize a hydrocele unless it is inflamed."
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	"When you treat a hydrocele with the methods of cure that we have described in its division and it does not improve, then you should cauterize it with four cauteries around the scrotum, and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the womb, and two cauteries between the spine bones of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the thighbone, and another cautery on the stomach."
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	"And let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the cord."
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	"Then leave the cautery buried so that it may heat for a long time."
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	"And do not remove the illness from the cure right away because of the cautery, since two intentions will thereby be joined together and it will be speedily healed with the help of nature."
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	"The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a keyhole as it has been previously described, and that with which the back is cauterized should be like an olive as it has been previously described."
Capitol .xxxii.	"Chapter XXXII."
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	"On cauterizing obesity and sciatica."
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	"When obesity appears in hydrocele and is filled with serous water, then you should cauterize the obesity on the back of the thigh between the ear and little finger bones, raise your hand with the cautery and do not turn it, and then raise your hand again and do not return it entirely, because the serous water will be absorbed."
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	"It is cauterized in this way: Then make two cauteries on each thigh, and let there be made one cautery on each thigh with the tip of the cutting cautery."
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	"And let the cauteries be made along the length of the thigh: one below the knee and the other below the middle of the thigh; and two cauteries on each thigh."
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	"Then leave the cautery buried without cure for a long time, so that some water may be absorbed from it."
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	"And then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned."
Capitol .xxxiii.	"Chapter XXXIII."
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	"On cauterizing an abdominal tumor."
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	"When an abdominal tumor is due to heat and humidity that weakens the powers, it is because of the digestive and retentive powers which are in the stomach and bowels, and it is treated with methods of cure but does not improve, then sometimes cauterize it with a large cautery on its own stomach as has been previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four small cauteries around the scrotum, with a cutting cautery like a keyhole; and one cautery on the inflamed area or two cauteries."
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	"And if the humidities are excessive and the illness tolerates it, then cauterize it over the navel and bowels, and adjust two cauteries firmly on the stomach near the groin, because this is a perfect cure for relief which you will not err in."
Capitol .xxxiv.	"Chapter XXXIV."
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	"On cauterizing old hemorrhoids."
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When such is the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are cured with what has been said in the division, then cauterize them with three cauteries on the pus left behind of the two small and two triangular ones, and with a cautery above the navel laid across two said ones.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the stomach is cold and the food undigested, and the face sometimes pale, then cauterize thereupon with a large cautery according to what has been said; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the spleen with a pointed cautery, leaving it there for some time, and afterwards cure the inside which is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterization of ulcers after their incision.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you amputate a gangrene, then ignite the cautery that is assembled like a rod.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Insert that ignited cauterizer into that gangrenous wound you have cut open, and finally close the wound with your hand before the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, because if there are too many wounds, then cauterize each one separately according to what has been recounted, and then treat those wounds with this ointment before they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over certain areas, it will leave behind a deeper scar.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cautery of fistulas made naturally in the skin's surface.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work we have recommended for it, and the patient is frightened by this, then heal him with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when there is some fistula naturally appearing on the skin's surface that has grown old and corrupted with humors and moistures, then it is proper to probe that with a thin needle, and also know its depth using the aforementioned needle.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cautery which resembles a needle.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to how deep the needle entered.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat with that cautery burning away those corrupt tissues until they are completely consumed, once or twice or three times according to the depth of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerves or veins; if the fistula extends into the body of the bladder or the intestine, then be careful about all those areas. And do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy location and you believe that it is not penetrating deeply.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place becomes sealed and the materials are cut off from it, and remains like this for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not removed from it, then know that either it is penetrating or there is corruption in its front part, or it may be due to those causes which will be mentioned later.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of cautery of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When warts cause pain due to friction or excessive growth, and the patient's condition worsens because of this, then it is necessary to cauterize them with a hot iron over each wart with an iron rod about which there will be mention later.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And make the second cautery smaller by a little bit, so that three cauteries in a line appear and thus they will be more useful in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXIX
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cautery of the bladder
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes weak and soft due to friction and moistures so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it in its lower part over the bladder, where the pubic hairs begin, using one cautery on its right side and another on its left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the opening of the urethra. And cauterize it with one cautery in its lowest part or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And use an iron rod about which there will be mention later for cauterizing.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XL
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	"Regarding cauterization of the thigh."
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	"When the thigh becomes dry and humid, and because of this impregnation is prohibited, menstruation is corrupted, and its onset is delayed. There occurs pain during their emission. Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize that location with three cauteries in the region of the navel, as we have said regarding the cautery of the bladder; and with one cautery below the back, or with two cauteries, and the cautery should be deep."
Capitol .xl.	"Chapter XL."
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	"Regarding cauterization for dislocation of the ankle."
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	"When moist humors flow abundantly to the joint of the ankle, and their causes are responsible for its dislocation. A sign of this is that one part extends over the other when they are compared."
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	"And the location of the dislocation can be found in it [the joint] which hurts."
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	"Then it is necessary to cauterize the illness over the joint of the ankle with a circular cautery, because you will have indicated with your finger in the circumference of the joint as it rotates, so that the joint falls into the middle of the circle."
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	"And this cautery should be of the same shape as the one used for cauterizing the stomach."
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	"And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three olive-shaped cauteries."
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And let the cautery be according to the quantity of heat of the whole member. And afterwards cure the interior that has been healed."
Capitol .xli.	"Chapter XLII."
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	"Regarding cauterization of the sciatic vein."
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	"When pain occurs in the joint of the ankle and its cause is friction and moistness, the illness can be cured with what we have said if it is not too old. Otherwise, you should first remove the illness by using foul pills or artificial pills that resemble them; and then cauterize it."
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	"And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines or cautery with fire."
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	"According to two known methods, one of which is to cauterize it over the joint of the ankle with three triangular cauteries in this shape, and make them go deep."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	"And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of a finger. And if it is an olive-shaped or large cautery."
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	"But sometimes the cautery should be placed on the middle of the top of the ankle because there are four cauteries."
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	"And if you wish to do so, cauterize with the circle of which we have given the shape in the cauterization of dislocation of the ankle. Let it be a continuous circle and burn the heat of the whole member."
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	"And this is the method of cautery in sciatica when pain adheres to the ankle and does not extend into the hip joint."
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	"But if it extends into the hip joint, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip over the location where you feel the pain, and one cautery on the knee about four fingers' width below the right side."
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	"And if it is a scalpel cautery, let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of heat of the member."
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	"And if you find that the pain extends to the location near the toes, then cauterize it here with a cautery of three points or four or more as needed."
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	"And if the illness is found to cause pain below the hip joint, then cauterize it here with a scalpel cautery."
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	"And be careful in all cauteries that you do not burn nerves or large arteries with the cautery. And take care that through this you are not causing harm to the illness or contraction."
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	"And I have seen one and another among those who cauterized on the knee and went too far in the cautery process. The leg swelled up so much that the tumor reached the thigh, and it was necessary to perforate and cut away all the thigh."
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	"And accordingly, a very strong solution of belly should be given, and accordingly that is death."
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	"And if the pain is in two locations at once, cauterize each one according to this method."
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	"And some wise men said in the cautery of ankle, this is its shape: make it similar to an iron circle of which the circumference should be about a palm's width; and let it be somewhat below its opening according to the thickness of a finger bone or less."
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And inside that circle let there be another third one; and let the space between them be equal to the thickness of a nut from a pomegranate. And let those circles open into two parts. And let their length be a nut or two nuts, and make their edges decently sharpened within the circles. This is its shape:"
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	"It should be heated in the fire until it becomes red hot and emits sparks. And then it should be placed on the joint of the ankle, with the illness located on its outer side."
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	"And then cauterize it with three cauteries at once in one go."
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And leave it alone for three days; apply a plaster with border and leave the wound open too many days. And cure it with poultices until it is healed."
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: "O son, regarding this kind of cautery we have used it little because of the fear of its appearance and because few are those who regard it."
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	"But among those who suffer from burns, some find benefit with this one, especially on that location."
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	"But cautery with adhering medicines is this: make two circles having an armillary sphere pierced in each of which you should place the nail of an iron door. Let the length of their sides be two nuts or somewhat greater."
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	"And if the space between them is equal to the thickness of a finger; and let them open below and above, and let them contain something between them according to this shape:"
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	"And then place it on the joint of the ankle with the illness lying on its outer side, and grasp your hand over the joint of the ankle. And then take cold water and pour it between the two circles, and let the quality of that be heated little by little on the fire for about an hour until the pain and adhesion of it cease — for this one finds biting like fire — until the biting ceases."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	"And then raise your hand with the instrument and wash away all the cold water from the ankle with warm water."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	"And then leave it alone for three days and apply a border over it until the blackness of adhesion disappears. And leave it like that for some days and afterwards wash it with honey. This is the last remedy."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then cure it with poultices until it is healed."
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	"If the pain extends to the thigh or calf, do to it as was done for the ankle, but let its container hold water."
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	"This is the method of cold water, and I have already written about it in my treatise on the correction of medicines."
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	"Recipe for alkali and unslaked lime mixed together in equal parts. Grind them fine and place them in a new earthen pot whose lower part is pierced with a small hole according to the amount that enters it."
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	"And place another inverted earthen pot on the bottom of the first one. Then pour warm water over the alkali and quicklime so that it covers them by one finger's breadth. And then press down upon them with your hand using good pressure, and leave the first pot that has received cold water in the lower part of the second inverted pot."
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another live coal and other renewed alkali, because at that time it will have very great sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and cautery of the other members, for it makes an operation with fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And thus among the medicines some of which are used to cauterize widely, such as pitch and honey mixed with salt in such a way that they are mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Galen tells of an ancient man the operation and cure with which he was cured of pain in the ankle and sciatic vein, and he praises him very much for that, saying that there is no need for another cure, and because he was healed in one visit as it is told, because that man was already accustomed to bathing and exercising.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is said that if verdigris green is not found, fig fresh should be taken; and much should be ground with a little bit of resin and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thing, or in the chamber, and it should be tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it remain for the quantity of three hours or as much as the patient can bear from the heat of the plaster.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then that man went to bathe and after his body was warmed, he entered into the sun because the pain ceased and he was healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you should know that these medicines should not be used for cauterization but rather for evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But already Dioscorides said that when with the horn of a goat the sciatic vein is cauterized, it profits very much for him; and it should be cauterized in this way: take wool and dip it into old oil, and place it between the hole of the knee and between the buttocks.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry horn of a goat and burn it with fire until it becomes charcoal, and then place it on the wool and leave it there until it cools down.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And continue doing this until you feel the sensation of biting on the ankle and then remove it because the pain will be relieved.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this manner of cauterization is called cautery of goats.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cauterization for pain in the teeth.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to various causes, such as through coldness or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, through the introduction of hot and humid material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Cauterization is used only in this one particular case which is done by means of the introduction of hot matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	"Then cautiously evacuate the disease with pills of fitha and similar ones that are made on this line three lines wide according to its length. For each line, use cauteries or more according to the amount of tolerance and strength of the patient."
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	"Use a cautery with a pointed tip for cauterization."
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries with a medium-sized blade according to this form:"
Capitol .xliii.	"Chapter XLIII"
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	"Of cautery for the beginning of swelling."
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	"Very often this disease occurs in small children, and the sign of its beginning in children is that it happens suddenly on theiranus with elevation and movement."
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	"And you will find it in the last vertebra of the back and neck where it has already begun to rise above the others."
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	"Then when you see this and want to prevent it, immediately cauterize that area with a cautery shaped like a circle according to this form:"
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	"That the cautery covers the entire part of the vertebra on both sides."
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	"And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide."
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	"And place the points close together between them."
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	"And then treat the affected area that has been cauterized with what we have said."
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	"Be cautious that cautery is not administered in a state of chill caused by spasm of nerves."
Capitol .xliv.	Here's your sentence to translate:
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pains are caused by humours that froth up and are deposited in each member of the body, therefore when pain occurs in the feet, it is usually called gout properly by physicians.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, since gout caused by froth cannot be cured by medicine and the pain is not removed, therefore cauterization is applied.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	Therefore you cauterize there for proper evacuation in the circuit of the ankle joint with hot irons.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is how to make an olive cautery:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	"If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery."
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	"If pains occur within the joints or elsewhere and this happens often, then cauterize each painful spot with three cauteries or four on either side using this olive oil cautery."
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	"If you need more cauteries than those provided, then heat them yourself without pressing too hard on the handle beforehand."
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	"If pains occur within the two joints, then apply the cautery as described in its chapter."
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	"If pains are only in the flesh and there is no swelling, then prick around the edges like this: prick at those two lines."
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	"If pains persist in these areas, then prick around the edges of each knot and on the palm of the hand."
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	"If pains occur near the joints or muscles, then cauterize both sides of each helper tendon."
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	"And do not neglect the patient's proper regimen and receipt of medications, for if good regimen is followed and the inflammation is evacuated with this cautery alone, it will heal, God helping."
Capitol .xlv.	"Chapter XLVI."
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	"On the cautery of fractures."
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	"When a fracture occurs in the ankles or dislocates the tendons near the heel of the hind foot, and this is how it begins, then you should order the patient to abstain from food on that day and use gentle laxatives to relieve the blockage in his belly."
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	"And then place the patient between your hands on his back, and order him to keep his leg elevated so that the heel or tendon appears from under the bedclothes."
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	"And then return that with your fingers and feel for the fracture on the bone of the ankle with an indication that its end resembles half of a circle, like the uppermost ribs of the chest."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then ignite the cautery, which has this shape:"
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	"Until it becomes moist and gleaming."
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	"And then reduce the intestine or hernia to its cavity, placing your hand over it to prevent it from coming out again."
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	"Then you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion underneath them, with another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest, holding their hands."
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	"And then place the cautery mark on that sign with your right hand, and heat that intestine where you succeed in reaching it through the middle of the abdomen; repeat this process until you have succeeded."
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	"And carefully observe the movement of the intestine during your cautery process, making sure not to burn that intestine, so as not to cause harm or great injury to the patient."
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	"You should know that if you do not reach the intestine with the cautery, your operation is ineffective."
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	"And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be delicate according to their size and measure."
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	"And then take care of the cautery wound for three days with clean cloths so that the scar of the fire may disappear."
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then heal it with other remedies so that it may be healed."
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	"And the patient should rest on their back for forty days until the wound is sealed and the plague is healed."
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	"And it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet according to the length of time for their cure, which cleanses their belly, and that the intestine does not protrude due to the effort of healing."
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	"And then when forty days have passed, food should be administered gradually and carefully, and they should continue this for another forty days."
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	"And they should reduce physical labor, heavy meals and drinks, and loud talking because if one uses this complete regimen of healing, it will not heal."
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	"I will now describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and if it is at the beginning and you want it to not heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity, and that which has been expelled from the intestine should be placed back inside as with the third part of it; and then treat it with what we have said and it will be adjusted."
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	"And some people have already said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, which is marked with a tent:"
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	"and a line is drawn along its width on each side of the rupture and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better."
Capitol .xlvi.	"Chapter XLVI."
De cauterizacio de torcio.	"Of cauterization of twisted bowel."
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in certain members due to blows or percussion and persists for a long time without being alleviated by medications, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery be of appropriate size for each member, according to its magnitude and minuteness, strength and weakness, location of the torsion and intensity of the pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery; for such pains are often punctured from a nearby member to that one, so that you must succeed in healing those with cauteries until the illness is cured.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVI
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Concerning the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers have been seen to be helped somewhat by cautery, but rarely if the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, when you wish to cauterize one who is affected by leprosy, consider if the leprosy is scattered and cure that with what we have said in the division. And if it is not, then fear over the illness, so that corruption does not spread throughout the whole body and entire complexion of the person. Then cauterize that person on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another further away from it, even at the end of the hair; two on each of the horns; and one behind, on the nape or occupit.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally press your hand on the cauteries a little bit so that they impress slightly into the bone, and remove the scabs from them, so that the expiration of thick vapors may be alleviated thereby. And cauterize over the belly according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the person and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize that person with those cauteries which we have mentioned for the head; and cauterize over the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries over each cheekbone, and with two cauteries over two shoulder blades of the neck, and with six cauteries over the shoulder blades of the back, and one large one over the shoulder blades near the buttocks, and one over the buttocks, and two over each ankle, and one over each ankle joint, and two over each elbow, and one over each elbow joint, and two over each knee cap, and two over the tendons of the sole of the foot; and cauterize that person over all the joints of those said members and feet, and over each heel of the feet, and over the hollows of the hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves which are on the heel lest you burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Sometimes one is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the pubis, and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more closely you apply cauteries, the greater is the benefit and advantage. And know that the person does not feel pain from the cautery, as they do from their illness, because the body of the affected person is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints, as is prescribed for the species of instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the burn with powder made from earthworms mixed with honey and the other treatment until it is healed."
Capitol .xlviii.	"Chapter XLVIII."
De cauterizacio de stupor.	"On cauterization of stupor."
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	"If a limb is paralyzed or numb and is treated with medications, oils, and poultices but does not heal, then cauterize the paralyzed limb with caustics according to the size of the limb or the severity of its condition."
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	"And your cautery should enter the spine a little way in."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"Then treat it with ointment until it is healed."
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	"And sometimes it happens that some paralysis is cauterized which affects the thighs and feet, the vertebrae of the back, and the origin of the nerves which move that limb, and the paralysis disappears."
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	"But let not anyone presume to do this unless they are knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the exit points of nerves that move all the body."
Capitol .xlix.	"Chapter XLIX."
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	"On cauterization of moles that become cancerous."
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	"If an old mole does not respond to any medical ointments, then cauterize it with a hot iron slightly according to the amount of thickness in the spine that enters into it so that its whiteness and color may be removed, and its color changed."
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with a poultice made of powdered earth and lentils with rose oil and leaves of mallow, and dove's blood or hen's blood, giving each one part and mixing them all together, and apply the poultice on a cloth and place it on the spot until it is healed."
Capitol .l.	"Chapter L."
De cauterizacio de cranc.	"On cauterization of cancer."
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	"If cancer begins and you want to destroy it, then cauterize around its circumference in the same way that it is turned."
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	"And some wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it. But I have not seen this, because I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen sometimes."
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	"And it is more correct to cauterize around its circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with many cauteries."
Capitol .li.	"Chapter LI."
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	"Concerning the cauterization of deformities."
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	"If some deformity is delayed in maturation, and this is due to the superfluity causing it, or due to the state of the illness, since it is advancing in decrepitude, with little blood, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of a deformity; therefore cauterize around its circumference with small pointed cautery irons; and afterward leave that which has been cauterized until it matures."
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	"But if you wish the perforation of it with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose shape is like this: and afterward place that in the middle of the deformity until it pierces the skin."
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if you burn at that spot which is painful, so that the flesh of the arm may be relieved; and afterward cure it until it is healed."
Capitol .lii.	"Chapter LII"
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	"Of cauterization for corrosion."
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	"Roving corruption eating away at limbs."
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Then if you find that corroded area affected by burning cauterization with fire, immediately cauterize it with a few small, large needles according to what is appropriate for that location where the corruption is found.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And furthermore, cauterize it throughout until you have eradicated all corruption and left no cause of it remaining.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	After that, leave the patient for three days, and then treat the cauterized areas solely with oil mixed with honey until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then dress that wound with healing flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh does not grow healthy and free from corruption, then you should repeat the cauterization on that which remains corrupt in the affected areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrupted flesh is sometimes treated with caustic medicine because it acts like a cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterization with fire is the most gentle remedy.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already explained in the division how to treat it with caustic medicine; so take that when you begin treatment for it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cauterization of wounds and similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Wounds that appear in certain parts of the body due to disease known as "claw," which is a large and deep cause, affecting the flesh, are cauterized in two ways: by fire or by hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cauterization with fire is done by heating the cautery like a crow's feather pen, made of iron according to its size, depending on the extent of the wound in that part, and it should be very fine.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place the heated cautery on the wound and move it around with your hand within the circumference of the wound until the cautery reaches the depth of the wound.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave it there for three days until it begins to heal and form scabs.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a plaster made of three parts wild mallows mixed with salt to one part, and leave the plaster on it for one night because it will eradicate its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with regenerative flesh balm until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert and many wounds appear on the surface of the body, especially on the breasts and thighs, then you should administer cauterization with hot water in that case. Take a quill made of bronze or iron or crow's feather and place it on the wound. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the quill and hold your hand so that the edge of the quill is pressed against the root of the wound, allowing the hot water to flow to the front of the wound's root. Wait for the pain from the hot water for about an hour, then remove it because the wound with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do this in those cases and also on any others that may appear anywhere else on the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then treat those wounds after the roots of the wounds have been eradicated with the balms which cause flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter .l.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When trembling occurs due to inflammation of the nerves or fever from cold causes, or other similar causes, then you should cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and cauterize also on the foot and on the stomach, using an olive-sized cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And let the trembling subside and hasten the recovery of the feverish illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter .l.v.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	"Regarding the cauterization of sudden afflictions in the body."
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	"When sudden afflictions appear in the body and pustules form with openings made from corrupted matter, at the beginning care should be taken to cauterize the head of the fistula using a fine cautery rod dipped in pitchpine resin, the tip of which is heated over fire; or using a long erostology needle; or using a lenticular cautery."
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	"And in future occurrences, the boil should be caueterized at the beginning of its eruption according to this manner; and they are not believed, and the superfluity is removed, causing those, and they heal from those."
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	"But it is necessary that this be done near evacuation with phlebotomy."
Capitol lvi.	"Chapter 60."
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	"Regarding the cauterization of sudden blood flux by incision with an artery knife."
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	"Many times there happens a sudden flux of blood that is cut open over the swelling that has formed there, or over the incision of an ulcer or cautery of a member, and at that moment it seems like it will be difficult to remain."
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	"Therefore when this happens to someone, immediately take your hand with the artery knife, and press over that place until you cut into those veins that are nearby so that the flow of blood ceases from there, and it does not squirt out."
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	"And also press in the fire some olive-sized cauteries, both small and large, by number of mouths, and breathe on them until they become hot."
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	"And then quickly take one of those cauteries, small or large according to the place and the swelling where the artery has burst, and press it onto that vein until you have stopped the flow of blood, and hold it there until it becomes reddened and restrains that blood."
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	"And if blood is expelled from the mouth of the artery when you remove your hand and press the cautery, then immediately take another cautery carefully from those that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease doing this until the blood has been restrained."
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	"And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it does not come to some other harm."
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	"And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to restrain it in those ways, especially when the artery is large, except with one of four methods: either with cautery as mentioned above, or with extraction if it cannot be extracted, for when it is extracted the ends of the muscle are burned and the blood is restrained, or that it should be tied with a thread or a ligature with strong tension, or that they should be pressed upon with medicines whose virtue is to restrain blood; and they should be strengthened with a poultice and constriction."
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	"But he who administers proper restraint of the artery with a ligature and tension with cloth or by means of cauterizing causes and similar things, does not cause harm but rather good."
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	"But if this happens to someone and there is no physician present nor medicine, then he should press the index finger over the mouth of that vein as mentioned above, and extend his hand with great tension so that the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and do not remove your hand from the artery; and pour on it cold water rubbed vigorously until the blood congeals and thickens; and then he should seek out someone who knows cautery or medicine."
Comensa la segonda partida.	"Begin the second section."
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incisions and piercings and cuppings and of phlebotomy and of plague boils and of their like.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words from Avicenna.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already stated in the first chapter all illnesses in which burning with fire is necessary and beneficial medicine, their causes and occasions, and the instruments required for cauterization with their forms; we have arranged the chapters on the superiority of the head over the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you will proceed in this chapter in such a manner that those who seek it may be relieved concerning what they will have asked about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Before you begin this, know that in this chapter there is fear of what was in the first chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason, great caution is necessary in the operation described in this chapter, as it involves many evacuations through blood, which carries life within it. This includes the aspiration of the vein, incision over an aposteme, opening of an abscess, cleansing of a boil, extraction of an arrowhead or incision of a stone and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these operations are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in many cases death may result from them.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you not to fall into that which causes hesitation, for sometimes it happens that people with many bad habits are afflicted by many illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	Among them there are some who are angry with their illness and find death light, due to the violence of what they encounter in their illness, its duration, and the fear that it brings, which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among them there are those who give away their possessions and property, hoping to achieve health through that, while their illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, do not consent to that person who comes to you with such behavior; let your caution be greater than greed and your rapacity. Do not undertake any cause except with certain scientific knowledge that can verify it for you, and upon which successful outcome may depend.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of all your illnesses, for that is where you will find help in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, may God inspire your understanding with His spirit and not deprive you of direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished into chapters according to what has preceded in the chapter on cautery, concerning the care of the head down to the feet, so that you may find what you seek and what you need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Concerning the treatment of water that is retained in the heads of children
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often happens to children at birth, especially when the midwife squeezes the head of the child without gentleness.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it happens for unknown reasons which are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have only seen this illness in children, and of all those whom I saw it afflicted, death ensued. Therefore, it appears to me that it is a hopeless condition for them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I saw an infant whose head was filled with water, and the child's head remained so swollen that it could not lie on its back due to the size of its head, and more than the moisture increased until death occurred.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either collected between the fontanelle and the bone, or it collects behind the bone over the forehead.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For if the operation is performed in that case where the moisture is between the fontanelle and the bone, and the swelling is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head in its width, with a length of two fingers so that the moisture may run out. This is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the moisture has increased more and the swelling is greater, then make two incisions in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	"Should the moisture be left on the bone, the sign is that you will find the corners of the head open and water squeezed out when you compress it with your hand inside."
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"You should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:"
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	"Then extract all the moisture from around the incision;
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	"And there is another method of incision, which takes into account the size of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it may be larger in the occiput, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore, make the incision where you see the abscess and the accumulation of water, and then proceed according to what is most feasible for you."
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	"And observe that thou shalt not cut the artery nor cause flows of blood, and let not the illness linger because of that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity."
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	"On the incision of those arteries which are close to the ears, called 'hila'."
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	"When there occur cataracts or tumors in the eyes or the belly, and they are old, and the cure with medicines does not help, then the last resort in this is the incision of those two arteries."
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	"And thus when you wish to cut those two arteries which cause the illness to spread its head, and close by rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and also press the neck of the sick person with some cloth; and also consider where the vein pulses; and the places of each over the places which are near the lower ears, and they become hidden except in certain men."
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	"And also signal over the artery with a thread, and also cut each one with its own spatula of sharp division made so that it enters into the bone, and this is done according to the width of the head."
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	"And if you wish, insert the spatula into the artery and tear it apart at the incisions previously made."
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	"And let the length of the incision be about two fingers' width, because when any vein is cut the blood flows out with pulsating exit, which flows forth frequently."
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	"But if the artery does not appear to your sight then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space for three fingers' width, and mark it with a thread, and cut into the bone."
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	"And this is what is necessary to remove from the blood: one pint's worth, and more or less it removes according to the quantity which appears of the strength of the illness and the fullness of the artery."
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And also consider the plague, because if something remains on the bone which causes inflammation, then cut that so that it does not cause an abscess."
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And also strengthen the wound with cotton and linen cloth strips, and cure it with ointment inside until it is healed."
Capitol .iii.	"Chapter .iii."
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	"For extracting the bowels that are in the temples."
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	"When some people suffer from ancient or catarrhal migraine, due to humid heat and poor quality in the temples' arteries, or if it is an ancient and violent case similar to these ones, and if it is not cured with medical treatments, we then resort to this remedy for those ailments: extraction of the bowels in the temples, or cauterization of those areas as shown."
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	"The method for the operation and extraction of those is that the patient should lie on their back, with the head tilted backward; understand the artery visible in the temple when it is shown by its pulse beat, and it is hidden only in a few people due to the intensity of their hair."
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	"And if it is hidden, then the patient's neck should be wrapped with some cloth; and rub the area with a coarse cloth or evaporate it with hot water until the artery appears manifestly."
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	"Then take the scalpel of which this is the shape:"
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	"Then carefully cut the skin with that scalpel until you reach the artery; then pierce it there and extract that [the artery] at its upper parts until you have extracted it from the skin and revealed those of the tunics which are beneath it, in every part."
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	"But if the artery is thin, then you should wrap it with the tip of the needle, and then cut it a little bit according to how much its ends are extended and contracted, so that there will be no flow of blood, for otherwise the blood will not come out completely."
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	"And then evacuate the blood from this wound within three days:"
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	"And if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with double stitches of thread or linen, and do not leave it to putrefy before the wound has healed, otherwise there will be a flow of blood."
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	"And then tie off the excess that is between the two ligatures; and do this at that time or another time."
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	"And if you wish to cauterize it with a cautery, do so with a cutting cautery until the ends of the wound are burned, and this will serve in place of that work."
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	"And it is better to do this without causing the patient to have fever or an excessively hot complexion, for cauteries are among those causes that help the fine humidities, and therefore it is better to use them with moderation."
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	"And after the extraction of the arteries that were previously hidden and exposed on the wound, powders should be sprinkled over them decently, and then it should be cured with dry medicines to cause granulation and with compresses until it is healed."
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	"And if during these operations there happens to be a flow of blood from the artery again, then you should stop that bleeding either by tying it off with a ligature or cauterizing it with a hot iron or compressing the wound with your hand until the bleeding stops."
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	"And if no cause of this is apparent to you, then place the tip of your finger over the wound until the bleeding stops, and bore into the wound with very cold water until the sharp pain subsides, and then compress it according to what is necessary."
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	"And what is lighter in extracting an artery is that you should cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, after you have felt both locations with a finger and placed each one on fire separately, until they reach the bone and cut through the vein at two places, so that what is between its ends may be elongated, for it will not be completely consolidated by this cautery."
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	"And this is the form of the cautery:"
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	"And let the sharpness of the two points be like this:"
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	"But if they have a smaller sharpness than two points are better, for if they are very sharp they approach each vein too closely and do not cut through the flesh quickly."
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	"Therefore since they have some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in them, and the flesh is cut through gently."
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	"And this operation is better than any other and is also gentler."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	"And let the space between the two points be equal to the thickness of your finger."
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	"On the treatment of wounds from sharp and acidic injuries to the eyes."
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	"When there are acidic tears and it is a wound of those veins that are on the surface of the head, and there is no apparent cause for the cure with medicine, then sometimes the face of the patient becomes reddened and they feel as if there were ants running across their forehead, and the eyes are exhausted and humid to such an extent that the eyelashes become stuck together, and the skin is scaled by the sharpness of the tears. The old method for treating this condition with this operation is no longer used."
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	"And you should command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then incise into the forehead three grooves evenly spaced according to its length."
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	"And if the length of the groove is equal to two fingers, then one groove should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly below the movement of the eyelids that are on the lacrimal bone, and the third on the other side."
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	"And be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws."
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	"And if the space between each incision is equal to three fingers placed side by side."
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	"And if you have a piece of sponge soaked in water or dry cloths with which you can dry the blood."
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	"Then carefully insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of its incision:"
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	"What is from the beginning of the temples into the second incision."
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	"Then cut out with it all the cord that is between two incisions with the knife which is on the bone, and now do this from the middle incision into the second incision."
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	"Then place this spatula in and insert it into the first incision once again with another instrument called a cutellar, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	"And pause on the side of that sharp part close to the attached flesh near the cord, and on the side of the lion within the bone, and employ it there so that it may reach the middle fissure, and cut with it all the vessels descending from the head to the heels."
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	"But if the incision is continued up to where the cord appears, then do this in the middle fissure and enter into another fissure."
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	"And since some blood may have escaped, compress the places of the blood vessels confluent together."
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And then pause in each wound made by the knife, and apply upon those powders enclosed in wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that no inflammation becomes cauterized."
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	"And on the third day untie the ligature and administer a generous infusion of cold water or tea, and then cure it with Basilicon ointment with rose oil and other remedies so that the wounds are healed."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter Five"
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	"Of the care of lacerations by cautery and the heels descending from the parts inside the head."
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	"When some veins are cauterized and continue to bleed, and the heels of the sick have become attenuated and small, and their regard is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their hair has fallen out, and there is acute painful feeling in the forehead with subsequent extrusion, then know that these matters and cauteries come not from veins alone but from many smaller veins proceeding from within."
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	"And the best cure for these is this: command the sick person to wash his forehead, and then incise a fissure in that middle place of the forehead, about half an inch wide (and begin at the left temple and extend it to the right temple; and let it be an incision into the bone; and remove your hand from the lachrymal glands of the temples which are near the mastication), until the bone is uncovered."
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	"Dry up all the blood with sponge or dry cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the fissure with hot water or cloths heated."
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And then sprinkle above with powders enclosed in wine and oil so that no inflammation becomes cauterized."
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	"And when you remove that and see that the inflammation has diminished, then it is necessary to scrape the bone until it begins to appear flesh-like, and then cure it with a drying regimen which causes the flesh to be born again, like this: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together, and make a plaster out of them, and apply it to these wounds in order that new flesh may be produced."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter Six"
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	"Regarding the treatment of that which falls into the ears."
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	"All that falls into the ears can be of four species. For it may be mineral stone or something like stone, such as iron and bronze; or it may be of plant origin, such as chickpea or bean; or it may be fluid cause, such as water and vinegar and their likes; or it may be some creature."
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	"And therefore when stone falls into the ear or another cause that does not fit nor cross within it, and closes the ear to the sunlight, and sometimes the stone distills in that which contains some cause of olive oil or sesame, and then promptly administers its extraction from there, and makes them sneeze conditionally, and seals their nostrils at the time of sneezing."
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	"And also place in the ear circuit some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch out the ear towards its parts above, because many times it is forgotten with these causes."
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And if not removed, then promptly administer its extraction using the instrument called 'epicicarious gesture' whose form is as follows:"
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	"And if it has been forgotten in action, then let it be; but if not, administer the extraction of it with a subtle hook of little duplication."
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	"And if it has not been forgotten by this, then make a cannula of silver and insert the extremity of the cannula into the track of the ear and seal around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that nothing may be opened except the cannula."
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	"And then extract it with a small wind and strong attraction, for many times seen with this which we have reported."
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	"But if it has not been forgotten in this manner, then take a heated piece of ambergris or sometimes prepared with which the birds are caught one by one, and place that on the extremity of the ray, and then wrap around it carefully placed."
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	"And then insert that into the track of the ear with facility, and then extract the ear from the humidity."
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	"And therefore if it has not been forgotten with all the causes which we have reported, then you may cut that before it becomes an abscess or spasm."
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	"And the manner of cutting that is this: first sanctify the illness of the vein sephasica and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make a plaster between your hands and convert the ear to its parts, and finish with a small fissure in the root of the ear where it has been pressed."
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And let the fissure be of lunar figure until it reaches to the stone, and when the stone is absorbed, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure immediately, and cure it until it is healed."
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	"And if the cause of the ear is one of the hairs that grow and become inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it. But if it does not obey your efforts, then take a fine and subtle spatula in this form:"
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	"and use that to remove the abscess of that hair which has fallen into the ear."
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	"And do not do this when you think that it has already become moistened by the vapor of the ear, but rather wait for some days and then remove it with tweezers or with a subtle gesture, or with the incision as mentioned earlier, because the extraction is eased."
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	"But in the case of water that enters into the ear, it is necessary for the illness to use sneezing with the condition that at first, it fills its ear with some old cotton and covers that ear with it. And if through this it is forgotten, then good. But if not, then take thin pebbles and small stones according to the length of your finger, heat them a little in the fire, and the patient inserts one of those into the track of his ear and jumps on one side of that part and percusses with another stone upon the stone which is inside the ear."
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	"Therefore do not cease this until all the water has been forgotten."
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	"And now water has been forgotten so that you take paper or cotton and put one end of it in the earhole while extending the other end with fire until it is burnt almost entirely."
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	"And then put cotton again and do this as many times as necessary until all the water has been removed, and then remove that with cannula as it is said above regarding the stone extractor."
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	"If you want to extract a small beast entering that earhole, do it similarly as said above in the division; but if it is a large one causing swelling at the cheek area, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and pincers, and its cause will be easier than all other causes that can occur in the ear."
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	"But in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with what has been said above in the division and in the treatise on distillation and it does not improve, then you should examine the ear towards the sunlight."
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then if you see any cause of the worms there, extract them with gestures or with fine pincers; but if you do not see any cause, then take a cannula with this shape:"
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	"Insert the narrow end of an instrument into the ear according to how much the patient can bear; then suck strongly with it, and repeat this several times until all worms are expelled."
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	"If you do not comply with this procedure, then plug the opening of the tube with wax as mentioned earlier; then administer distilled substances that have already been proven effective in treating worms, and you will find these in the treatise on distillation."
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And this is the funnel with which you should pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, of which I have drawn a diagram:"
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	"Make it of silver or brass, narrow and straight, with a small hole at one end and flat on top."
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	"And thus it should fit into the hollow of the tube that contains the oil where it will be needed."
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	"And if you wish, take the tube and wrap its end decently with cotton; then pour some oil into the concavity of the instrument, or juice from some herb, or any other medicine you prefer in the tube — which is now placed in the ear —; then insert the tube with the cotton on top gently and squeeze it with your hand using moderate pressure until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside."
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	"And whatever is poured into the ear should be lightly warmed over fire first."
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	"But make sure that the cause you are treating with this method does not have too much heat, as ear medications do not tolerate excessive heat."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter VII"
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	"Regarding the treatment of earache."
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	"Sometimes children emerge from the unperforated wombs of their mothers, and this has happened in some men, suffering earache due to plague or a piece of flesh entering that ear; sometimes this earache occurs in front of the opening of the ear canal which does not show symptoms, and sometimes it is located on the outside parts."
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	"And that one which occurs in front of it (the ear), which does not reveal symptoms, is among those with the most difficult recovery."
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	"And in that one where symptom appears, you should hold the sick ear towards the sun and look at it."
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And therefore if earache is apparent, open that with a thin spatula of which this is its shape:"
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	"If its extremity where it should be small in width, of which one side is sharp and the other not; and the spatula is made of two thin sheets so that it does not harm the ear."
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	"And therefore if the earache is due to flesh born in the ear or in its canal, then take that with fine tweezers and cut it out forcefully until all of the flesh has been removed."
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	"And if earache is in front of the ear, then take a thin ray made of iron, heat it with fire for a moment, and soon place that inside the canal of the ear."
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	"And therefore if you feel earache with something that the patient finds with ease, due to seriousness of hearing loss, forcefully alleviate its oppression with ease; and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear."
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then press on the ear cloth with it according to the quantity of width of the bandage which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the solidification of the plague. Or else take wax, soften it by immersing it in hot water, sprinkle it three times over it and use it; and if sometimes the ear is already inflamed, then you should heat the wax and replace that with other wax which you will wrap in rose oil cerot until the inflammation has been cauterized. And soon cure it until it is healed."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	"But if bleeding occurs, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and press it upon the ear, and use the other cure which prevents the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation."
Capitol .viii.	"Chapter VIII."
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	"Of the treatment of swelling that occurs in the eyelids."
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	"Dry up those tears that sometimes gather at the corners of eyes, for sometimes they are dry."
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	"You must therefore have those animals with hooves or claws, and separate them according to their kinds, and then pause over the places mentioned."
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	"But if blood flows abundantly, you must cauterize those wounds with a hot, subtle cautery iron."
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	"And the best cauterization is near the incisions and openings that often return when there remains some cause of their kinds; but when they are burned with fire, those kinds do not return."
Capitol .ix.	"Chapter IX."
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	"Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids."
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	"Many times, some cause resembling hardness and toughness appears in the eyelids, and therefore it is called swelling."
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	"And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the lower eyelid."
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, their operation is that you should now consider if the greatness (i.e., size) appears from beneath the eyelid and is swollen all around. The cause of this is lightness.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision along the width, and carefully examine that area all around with ease. Then suspend it with ligatures and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if the incision does not appear immediately after you penetrate the eyelid with an incision little by little, that is not noteworthy for any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you should close it with stitches; and take care of it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	But if it's small, don't worry because the ointment will heal it and it will scar over.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the greatness declines within the eyelid, you should examine the surface inside. Then elevate the eyelid and suspend the greatness with ligatures, without making any further incisions, and press it from all sides. If the eyelid is elongated by incision, do not worry about it.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Also, after making the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that encourages healing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment of inflammation above the eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is a grayish swelling that occurs in the tissues of the eyelid above, and especially affects children. It worsens wounds and inflames their eyes, causing them to shed tears continuously; they cannot bear the light of the sun because of this.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	Therefore, they must keep their faces wet all the time and sleep with their faces down. Their eyelids have swollen eyebrows above them, which are already covered by inflammation, and there is a threat of inflammation in the eye; and when you press on that area with your fingers, you feel inflammation under it.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is a way to operate on this condition: have the patient lie down with their head tilted back, and cover them and the area with hot water. Then make a circle around the area according to its size, and place a bandage over it and press with your fingers from all sides until inflammation has gathered in the middle of the circle. Then open up the middle of that moisture with an incision made with a scalpel along its width, making sure the incision is not larger than one made in trepanation.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	"First, cover the patient's head so that you can reach their entire spine to achieve the desired arching posture, as in many cases it proceeds through a gap like a white-hare's form."
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	"Then, remove that cloth which you have wrapped between the patient's thighs and turn it back and forth between your right hand and left until it is dispelled."
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	"And make sure that nothing gets stuck in the gap, so that with the spatula you do not reach the wound and thus cause harm to them."
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	"But if it does not appear at the beginning of the gap, then insert a small instrument gently into the gap so that it proceeds arching. And as we have said, remove it thus; and also spread cloths soaked in warm water and wine over the location and strain out those with powders."
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	"And some people say that they sprinkle salt on it and pause there in the concavity of the gap so that the remainder of that humidity is absorbed."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And also treat them until they are healed."
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	"But if an abscess occurs in the location afterwards, then treat it with cataplasms made of Cedar resin so that it heals."
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods for examining the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of wounds are swollen due to the growth of hair that has not been removed, they then adhere to the wound and cause diseases such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and skin which may lead to destruction of the wound, which is called "tactinir" of the wound. It is treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with an acrid medicine according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done by incision and suturing; or by cantharides according to what I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore it is necessary that you stop the disease in its beginning. Also turn back the eyelid of the wound with your left hand, and if it is turned back, well then; but if not, insert a needle into that one in which there is a seam of pus beneath the eyelid, and make the needle pierce with the thread above, and go towards the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow, near the hairs, and pull out the thread upwards with the eyelid turned back with your hand.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And also open the seam beneath the eyelid where the hairs are attached with a sharp spatula inserted into the lacrimal canal major towards the lacrimal canal minor; and also extract the thread and place it away from the eyelid dusted with fine cotton or cloth, and then sew up the eyelid with a needle in such a way that it resembles the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for this already varies among people, because some require that a large amount be incised from the eyelid according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then open with the spatula along the two lines that you have sewn, starting from the lacrimal major towards the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural hairs, then it should be as thick as the thickness of a hair strand.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the onion at one of the two corners of the thread, and then cut off all the thread with scissors, and then sew up the two lips with catgut or fine silk thread, wiping away the blood. And make the surplus threads adhere to both eyebrows using some sticky substance if you wish, otherwise don't bother.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	"And then leave the stitches of the wound open for three or four days, and then treat it."
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	"And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitching it up and treat it with hot water that dries out and constrains it, because when the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the wound and its adhesion, stitching becomes easier."
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	"However, in this case, there was concern about the illness, it is a good operation, and there was no fear in him."
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	"And here is another way to stitch, which is to make cuts on the eyelid like a myrtle leaf and then lift the eyelid with three curved needles arranged in this way:"
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"But if this is not possible, hold the needles in place, and then take a needle with thread attached to it and insert it into the middle of the figure. Then insert another thread near the larger lacrimal gland, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal gland. Adjust these threads evenly, and then raise your hand smoothly while raising the entire chain upon which the stitching is done as we have recommended."
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then adjust both lips of the wound with stitches, and heal the area that has been stitched."
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	"But if an abscess occurs after your incision or cut, remove it with cerate and its similar substances, and cauterize."
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	"And sometimes it happens that the edges of the eyelid become inverted. In this case, you should use the technique we have described for incision, but stitching is usually more artificial."
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	"Stitching with catgut is done in this way:"
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	"And first you should invert the eyelid and cut the figure underneath as described above. Then, artificially prepare two needles or two slender probes whose length is equal to the length of the eyelid and whose width is less than the width of the palpebral fissure."
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	"And once you have made incisions at both ends where you have the threads."
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	"Then gently sew each part together over the excess tissue of the eyelid edge with subtle stitches. Tightly tie off the needles at both ends and leave it alone for a few days, as the chain will die from the tightness and fall out on its own."
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	"But if it is delayed, then break it with scissors, and heal the wound where it has healed."
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	"Therefore, once it is healed, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not touch."
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	"And this is how you should make two needles according to this method:"
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	"Make sure that the length and width are neither too much nor too little."
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	"On raising painful hairs on the eyelid using tweezers when the hair is coarse."
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	"When the hairs on the eyelid are abnormal, coarse, and painful, you should take a pair of fine tweezers and grasp each hair with great subtlety using cedar oil and lion grease. Then adjust the tips of the tweezers carefully."
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	"And make sure that the length of the threads is about a palm in quantity."
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	"Then quickly take another fine thread and tie it to one end of the hair if you wish."
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	"And then grasp the affected hair firmly with your fingers and place it close to the sun so that your work is clearly visible, as this is a delicate and precise operation."
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	"And then insert the tweezers into the root of the hair that needs to be removed, and quickly penetrate it through the eyelid until you can extract it from above the natural hair."
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	"And then pull out the hair above and insert another one in its place. Do this with one to three hairs at most."
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	"And then remove your hand with that hair outside the eyelid along with the natural hair."
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	"But if the hair is pulled out along with some eyelid tissue and not just the hair, then pull it gently apart from the sides using the thread that you had prepared earlier to ensure that only the hair is removed."
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	"And then close it with the eyelid tissue using vision to ensure that you remove only the hair and thread, and press gently and close the eyelid. Leave it alone for two or three days until the hair adheres to its original location and grows back."
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	"And if the hair grows back too quickly, then adjust one of the natural hairs that is longer and lift it with that, or leave it alone until it grows out some distance, and then lift it."
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	"On treating the inflammation that occurs on the eyelid from above."
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	"When inflammation occurs on the eyelid, it is caused by contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upwards, either to the right or left side, due to poor wound healing, sectioning, or cauterization. This is called 'lepra' and this inflammation can be natural or accidental, occurring from wound healing, sectioning, cauterization, or similar conditions."
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	"The treatment for this is to open up that consolidation and separate the edges of it. Then apply a piece of clean cloth soaked in warm water to it and tie it securely until it heals."
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	"And do not use treatments that cause drying or constriction, for if you do so, the inflammation will return worse than before and there will be no healing."
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	"Use treatments that soften it, such as fenugreek, and soak a cloth in warm water boiled with it or diachon ointment mixed with some oils. Then apply this to the inflammation and treat it with it."
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	"And the treasure of your treatment is to persevere until there is complete healing according to the form that was present at the beginning."
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	"And this operation we have described is merely a correction of inflammation that does not return to its original form."
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	"On treating inflammation that occurs on the inner eyelid."
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	"This inflammation that occurs on the inner eyelid, which is truly called 'alxacrati', can be either natural or accidental."
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	"However, accidental inflammation is usually caused by injury, incision, cauterization, or similar conditions."
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	"The treatment for this is to take a needle with a double thread and insert it into the flesh. Then pass it from the left tear duct to the right tear duct so that the thread comes out on both sides of the flesh."
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	"And then extend the flesh at its edges using the needle and suture it with the needle. Then incise widely with a scalpel."
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	"And then if the eyelid returns to its normal shape, that is good. But if not, take a probe and place it in the opened incision, and use it to turn the eyelid over. Then make two incisions on either side of the inner eyelid."
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	"And make sure that the ends of the two incisions meet at two angles of the incision you have made so that when they come together, they form a single continuous shape."
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	"And this shape is called the Greek letter lambda (λ)."
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	"And then remove some of the flesh from the sharp edge of the inner side of the eyelid, enough to completely separate the eyelid."
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	"And then approximate and suture the separated parts with wool thread. Then treat them with the softening medicines and fomentations until they are healed."
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	"And if inflammation occurs again due to an incision, suture, or cauterization, then make a flat incision over the skin of the eyelid as previously described."
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	"And then separate with a cloth between two lips as we have said."
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	"In the sum of the sermon on the cure for hernia when it descends or remains, let it run in its operation according to what is prepared in the form of alxacrati, and that is in the form of many diversities."
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	"And the skilled artisan always prepares in every possible manner that is possible for him to make the figure return to its natural form, or close to it, according to what suits the patient's operation and tools in the best conditions."
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter XV."
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	"Of adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea."
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	"When this adhesion occurs in many people so that the eyelid is stuck upwards with the eye albumen and hindered from its easy movement and natural functions, then you should insert the tip of a probe under the eyelid and lift it up, or stretch it out with a hook."
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	"And then you should cut the adhesion with a fine spatula that is not sharp for the incisions, having it blunt on one side so that the patient is not bothered by the operation, and remove the spatula without letting it scratch the eye with its sharpness."
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	"And make your incision such that it easily cuts through that adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed."
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	"And then you should put saltwater into the eye with which you wash it; or distilled water in which some rosin has been dissolved."
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	"And then separate the eyelid from the eye with a soft cloth and apply to the eye wool soaked in egg white, and on the third day use consolidating ointments so that it heals."
Capitol .xvi.	"Chapter XVI."
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	"Of Incision of Nail and Carnal Eminence of the Lacrimal."
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	"Know that nail can be of two kinds: one is nervous and resembles hard skin; the other is non-nervous and resembles compacted white humor. When you touch it with a scalpel, if it is forced to be taken with forceps, it should be cut off and the forceps should not be inserted into it."
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	"And in both species it begins from the larger lacrimal, gradually approaching the sight and blocking light and eye movement."
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	"But the manner of operating in its incision is that the patient should hold their head in the chair, and then you open the eyelids, elevate the eyelid with your hand, and grasp the nail with forceps of few folds and stretch it out towards its sides."
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	"And then take a needle and insert into it a thread of horse, cow, or ox hide, or something similar, or strong gut, or fold the tip of the needle little by little and insert it into the middle of the nail, pierce with the needle, tie the nail with thread; stretch it out towards its sides, and cut off the side of the nail that blocks the pupil with the thread."
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	"And so you follow it with the thread until its end."
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	"And then you incise the remaining nail at its root with a fine spatula or small forceps, and lift the natural carnal of the lacrimal in such a way that by cutting it there is no continuous flow of tears."
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And sometimes the nail is stretched out with one forceps or with thread, as we have said, and then it should be cut off with a lion-shaped spatula, of which this is its shape:"
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	"And take care that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and that it does not break in it, and that the pupil is pierced."
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"Then after the incision put a little salted water or fresh honey into the eye and leave it until the next day; then cure it with water that covers it until it is healed."
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	"And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle or grasp it with forceps, then this species of nail can be cured with medications and healed as I have said and written in the division."
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish to incise it, then open the eye of the patient and take a sharp lion-shaped spatula like this:"
am subtilitat.	"with great subtlety."
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	"And if it is rarefied and congested and pressed at its root, then distill some of your saliva into the eye with fresh honey or rose water or salted water, and cover the eye until the next day."
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	"And then repeat the operation until all that is of it has been removed, except for the counter-incision cautery in the eye, because when you leave it, cure the cauterization at its beginning until it is healed."
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	"And then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed."
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	"The emergence of the carnal lacrimal, if noticed in the eye by great harm, should be suspended with forceps; and cut it from there on one side, and do not extend the incision too much so that you do not cut off tear flow."
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	"And then distill rose water and fresh honey into the lacrimal until it is healed."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	"Of Incision of a Pterygium and of What is Born from Adherent Carnal in the Eye."
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	"Sometimes in the eyes of some people, rough carnal is born and it covers the pupil or approaches and presses against the eyelids so that when they close their eyelids are pressed together and assembled like a ballast."
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	"The operation for this is that the patient holds their head downwards and then you open their eyes and grasp all of that carnal with suitable forceps or a claw; then cut off the carnal at its beginning until it is finished with scissors, taking care not to harm the eye during your operation."
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	"And your incision should be with that which you cut off those or with the spatula that we have mentioned in the incision of the nail or with small forceps with which it is grasped according to its shape, as appropriate for this chapter."
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"Then when your incision is completed and all that carnal has been removed, then fill the eye with salted water or distill rough powder like that of corrosive medicines into it and compress it externally with egg white until it is securely cauterized."
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	"And if there remains some cause of the pterygium and it is slightly cauterized, and you fear cauterization, then leave the eye and cure that cauterization with what calms it, and then repeat the operation until it is healed, and do the same for adherent carnal that occurs in this type of eye."
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	"But you should always refrain from any cure of the eye by natural or accidental means with iron, and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that that member can withstand that operation."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter XVIII."
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	"Of Removal of a Foreign Body in the Eye."
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	"There are rough foreign bodies that stick to the eye and prohibit its vision for many days."
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	"Therefore, at the beginning you should consider if the eye in which there is a foreign body is strong and does not have any other illness besides the foreign body, then grasp that foreign body."
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	"And have the patient hold their head downwards and then suspend those veins with one or two forceps according to your discretion; and let that forceps be of subtle duplication in this form:"
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	"or two forceps graduating in one body in this form:"
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	"Now carefully tie those veins with fine forceps, with delicacy, and remove the blood immediately, before you see those veins becoming empty and turning pale."
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	"Be careful not to cut the blood vessels at the tip of the scalpel. And if your operation is done in front of the sun, make sure you are steady during the procedure so that you only cut those veins."
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	"And once you have completed this, then distill on the wound's chief vein some wine vinegar or rose water so that with its sharpness it may corrode what has escaped from the scalpel."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"But if this is not possible for you, then collect all of it at that moment and later apply on it whatever relieves the pain of it, and leave it alone for a few days until the pain has ceased and assured that no abscess forms."
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	"And repeat this operation over it according to the manner most suited until it is healed."
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	"And this is the method of the forceps:"
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter XIX."
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	"On the reduction of deviated nasal septum."
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	"If you treat a deviated septum with cautery or sharp medicine according to the report of it and it does not heal, then do not enter into it but rather make an incision over the abscess when it reaches maturity, and remove all the moisture that is in it until the bone appears."
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then, once the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the shape:"
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	"And it is named 'sharp head' and should be made of iron. It should have a round head, like grasping something which has been punctured with the point of a lime or subtly punched with an awl, as seen in the following shape:"
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	"And press that upon the location of the corruption on the bone, and then twist it between your fingers little by little until you know that all of the corruption has been scraped away."
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	"And do this several times, and then restore the location with drying and astringent causes."
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	"Therefore if the location is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it and the skin has separated from the healthy part and remains for forty days without renewing or becoming abscessed or having any accidents, then you know that it is healed."
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	"But if not, then do not enter into it but rather reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and do so in this manner: First uncover the bone with a saw or sharp medicine. Once the bone is exposed, then take a chisel of this shape:"
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	"The end of the iron should be triangular, and the shaft should be slenderly tapered towards the point, like this:"
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	"And then place it upon the bone near the lacrimal duct. Extend your hand a little way from the hole and then twist your hand with the chisel until all of the bone has penetrated, and that you can feel the pain by the air that comes out through there when you move your hand."
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	"Then restore the location with astringent drying medicines as you have been taught."
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	"So when the flesh grows and the location hardens, then the matter which was flowing outwards returns to the nose. Therefore, it is easier to deal with this condition."
Capitol .xx.	"Chapter 20."
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	"Concerning the reduction of the prominence of the nostril."
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	"When the nostril becomes prominent in its entirety and there is no apparent injury or diminution, then it is necessary to relieve the condition. Then follow this procedure: First shave the hair around the area without scarification and suck with good suction. Then place a liniment made of gum acacia, aloe, mallow, and tragacanth on the nostril, and finally apply a plaster made of fine powder."
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	"And the manner of making the powders is as follows: Take drachms of lion's mane, and fold each one in four pleats. Then pulverize them."
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	"And then place them on top of each other according to the amount that the nostril requires."
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	"And then apply a hard cloth with strong compression on top of them. Then repeat the suction cups without scarification and remove them, leaving the nostril pressed tightly day and night."
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	"But if the bandage becomes softened in the meantime, then it must be tightened."
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	"And remove the bandage day and night as we have said."
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	"And if sometimes the nostril is already reduced, that is good. But if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and compression and suction cups until it is healed."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter 21."
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	"Concerning the incision of the prominence of the uvula."
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	"When there is a disruption in the uvula and it becomes prominent and projects outside the eyelids like a grain of wheat, and has an elongated shape resembling that of a man, and you wish to incise it, then do so as follows: Insert the needle into the ridge of the uvula from below upwards. Then insert another needle on which there is doubled thread on the side towards the lacrimal duct. Make this penetrate and leave the first needle in its position. Then cut the location where the double thread is, and lift away the part of the uvula with that, following the course of the needle. Then pull it tight."
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	"And then remove the needle and place lanum infused in albumen on the nostril, leaving it there until the thread falls out with the uvula."
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	"And then heal the nostril with whatever comforts it until the wound is healed."
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	"And sometimes it happens that the entire nostril is swollen with a circular prominence. Then it should be punctured with a fine probe that comes to the front of the nostril, allowing the whitish fluid to run off, and the nostril will quickly descend."
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	"And then compress it until it is healed."
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter 22."
De curacio de alconati.	"Concerning the treatment of ophthalmia (inflammation of the eye)."
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	"This condition called ophthalmia is nothing but moisture that is accumulated in the nostril like descending water, and it is not this."
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	"But the manner of treating it is as follows: Make the person sit on a prepared and upright chair. Then take your head in both your hands and lift it up so that you see the moisture running down to the lower part. Then dry it quickly before it descends, and close the eyes, leaving them to see again."
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	"And if it does not run downwards, know that it is water."
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	"But if the descent of the moisture is not prepared as we have said, then make the person sit between your hands. Then take a fine probe and make it pass through the skin surrounding one little below the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic in the limbus (inside the eye), so that the moisture is removed."
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	"Then, once it has been removed, distill into the nostril warm water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey."
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with other causes until it is healed."
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter 23."
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	"Concerning the treatment of descending water from the nostril."
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	"We have already spoken about the types of moisture in the division and which one it is appropriate to pierce with speech, declaring that according to health."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	"Then you should make the person sit between your hands on a stool and pull their own nostril tightly with their hand."
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Approach and place your left hand near the eyelid of the patient's left eye, if their left eye is the one with water. Otherwise, use your right hand.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Approach and with your right hand take a cloth if the patient's eye is left; otherwise, use your left hand.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Approach and place the edge of the cloth near the corner of the eye, about the thickness of a thread away from the inner lacrimal lacuna. Then gently press the cloth with your hand in that spot.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then penetrate into the eye and feel that the cloth has reached the tear duct opening.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Make sure that the path of the cloth reaches the preconjunctival fornix as measured from the distance between the pupil and the end of the black part, which is the corner of the eye; so that you can see the pupil clearly through the transparency of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then keep the cloth in place where there is water. Then quickly pull it down once or twice more, and then if the water flows down immediately, the patient's visual acuity will improve immediately, and the cloth will be wet with tears.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then pause for a moment; then if the water has flowed down, pause once again but this time making sure that the cloth does not get wet.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	Then when it's dry and no water flows down, gently remove the cloth with your hand little by little. Then dissolve a small amount of gemstone clear salt in the water and use that to rinse the inside of the eye. Then wipe away any excess moisture from outside the eye using cotton wool or gauze soaked in rose oil and alum. Then close the patient's eye gently with a soft cloth.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But those who are of our time pause here, having completed this operation using a thread made of wool.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the cloth does not enter easily into the eye due to its stiffness — for some men have eyes that are very hard — then you must take a spatula called an "albreda" which has the following shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Then pierce with it the conjunctiva, and do not push your hand too far in, but rather make a pathway for the cloth to enter subtly if necessary.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the cloth as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	"You must prepare the final touches of your work: a sleeping area should be arranged for the patient, with dim lighting in a dark room where they can lie on their back. All movements are to be prohibited."
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	"And pause the nature of the water so its nature is clear and it does not harm their head on either the right or left departure."
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	"And arrange for the bandage according to its position within the third day."
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	"Remove the bandage in that dark room and expose their eyes to a gentle light, showing them some causes, and then return the bandage on the seventh day."
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	"And do not forget to do this during the hours of treatments or immediately after infusion."
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	"Be careful not to spill any water due to its delicate balance between calm and strong currents."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	"But if an abscess forms, you must remove the bandage on the seventh day, and apply water that softens the abscess."
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	"Then uncover the patient's eyes and pause over their mouth for several days so that they may regain their vision in a dark room."
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	"And gradually lead them out of that room, explaining the causes to them."
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	"But remember that in this state, it is not permitted for anyone to have visions, and therefore you must be careful about the operation."
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	"And now it has come to our attention that some people claim to have been initiated into the Art, and one of them said that fire was made in the Airy during the night, using a tube with which water is sucked up."
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	"But yet we have not seen anyone in our land who has perfectly achieved this, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancient ones; and therefore it may be a new invention."
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	"And these are the forms of the species of Magdalen that they claim to have above those who are ignorant of them:"
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	"And these are made of iron or steel properly tempered, and they have their extremities adorned with this subtlety triangularly, the pointed extremity thus like that one."
Capitol .xxiv.	"Chapter XXIV."
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	"Of the treatment of flesh eaten by the nose."
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	"When different kinds of flesh emerge from the nose, connected but with some cause that resembles a scorpion or polyp, this ailment is called 'polypus' due to its resemblance to said fish."
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	"The flesh [of the polyp] is cancerous, decayed, of dark color; yet it is flesh lion-colored not dark."
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	"Therefore, in that which is in these lion-colored flesh without deceit or cancerous growth, you should remove the ailment with your hands and place it in the sun, cover its nostrils, and pierce its throat there."
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	"And properly cut that at the parts of the body, and also separate what you have grasped with spatula sharp and subtle from one part until you know all flesh has been removed; but if something remains due to some cause where excision is possible, then remove it with one of the sharp instruments easily and skillfully until nothing remains."
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	"But if it is accompanied by blood or an aposteme cauterize it with what is necessary; but if it is of malignant apostemes then cut and cauterize there until it has been severed, cauterized, and all cavities opened."
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	"And properly let it be placed on the nose close to the incision with vinegar and water or vinegar."
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	"But if the nose is open and moisture proceeds from it into the palate, then you know that it has been healed."
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	"But if moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is flesh left in the pus-filled cavities of the nostrils which have not been reached by excision."
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	"Therefore you should insert fleece into it where there is any thickness, and pack it with packs, pressing between each pack the quantity of a finger or less, and generate warmth and insert one extremity of the fleece into the nostrils with the ray or with some other cause which is possible for it."
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	"And after that has been done, let him throw his breath into the nostrils until it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and let it be exhaled over the sieve, for many people have seen schoolchildren do this semblance, and it is a light cause for anyone who wishes to do so."
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	"And properly press the two extremities of the fleece, one extremity which comes out over the nose and the other which remains in the nose, and properly administer a lock of flesh with packs that are on the fleece, and do this until you know that the flesh is already with the packs of the fleece."
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	"And properly extract the fleece, and press it on the nose near the abstraction of blood once a day, and do this for three days or more until the salve has rotted everything that remains of the flesh."
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	"And properly at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed."
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	"But if you choose a drying cure, use that one."
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	"And this is the form of the head purging device with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:"
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	"It should be made of silver or brass, resembling a small open lantern like a small cauldron, and the mesh similarly."
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	"And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a pipe, and the cannula of the head purging device should be flat and open; on which you can hold it when you pour oil or water into it that you want from the juices and succussible causes."
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	"And these head purges are costly: take from beyond the castor oil, white balm, ginger, and saffron pepper long, scammony, myrrh, and spikenard of the East. vi. Combine them with beet juice and cabbage juice, and make pills out of them, and let one pill be taken with hot water, and let it be given into the nostrils of the sick person lying towards."
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter XXV."
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	"Of holes made in the extremities of the nose."
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times a thread appears on the outer edge of the nose, which becomes enlarged and inflamed during certain days when it is considered a bad omen.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	Therefore, you should insert that at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Furthermore, pause on the place where cauterization or burning medicine was applied, which is located there.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its incision is delayed until it becomes enlarged, then consider whether it is hardened, hard, of dark color and insensitive. In that case, do not touch it with iron for it is a cranky abscess; for many times this abscess was incised with great harm to the person on whom it appeared.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of lion-like touch and not of dark color, sometimes incision is possible there, so evacuate the illness and incise it without fear, and cure the place with something that dries and constrains until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Regarding the suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity is disrupted by plague or injury.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when disruption of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages (nose, lips, ear), you should not rely on this operation except with skilled hands.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you find such a cause in someone, examine whether it is fresh with its blood. Then join the two lips of the wound with stitches and cure it properly until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the disrupted continuity are already separated and each is healthy on its own, then you must cut each part from its attachment until bleeding ceases.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then join the two lips with stitches and strain them together. Sprinkle dragon's blood powder and frankincense on it, place a piece of diaphoretic plaster or another consolidating plaster over it, and let it stay for two to three days. Then remove the plaster and replace it. Let it heal by itself until the edges are united, and then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of stitching is that you should join the disruption of continuity either with needles as we have recommended for abdominal suturing, or join it with thread as you know how to do.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII:
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	"Regarding the extraction of those causes that appear in both lips within the intestines."
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	"Very often, many men have hard swellings in the inner parts of their lips, resembling kernels of grapes. Some are smaller and others are larger."
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	"It is necessary that you separate the lips and make an incision on each of those hardnesses wherever they are located. After the extraction, fill the space with a bandage soaked in hot water, wash the area with vinegar, and then apply a medicine that has astringent properties until it heals."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII."
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	"Regarding the incision of attached flesh in the gums."
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	"Often, there is a boil above the attached gum which ancient authorities called albulus. Therefore, you should suspend it with forceps or hold it with your fingers and incise it along its root, allowing the pus to flow out freely."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	"And afterwards apply a bandage soaked in hot water or other powders having astringent or absorbent properties."
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	"If that flesh returns, incise it again and cauterize it with a hot iron, for if you cauterize it, it will not return."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX."
De razo de dentz am ferr.	"Regarding the cause of toothache with iron."
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	"When the surface of teeth, both deciduous and permanent, as well as the attached gums become rough, reddened, and sometimes blackened or emit a foul odor causing inflammation in the gum tissue, it is because of corruption, and the teeth themselves are loose."
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	"And therefore you should make an incision between your teeth and grasp the head of the tooth with forceps to extract it. Clean the surface of the teeth where those rough patches appeared, resembling sandpaper, ensuring that there is no other cause for its removal. This procedure is necessary due to blackening or yellowing, and other alterations."
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	"So if you are not able to perform this procedure at the beginning of the extraction process, then repeat the explanation on another day and again on the second and third days until you achieve your desired result."
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	"And know that teeth require various types of forceps with different shapes and figures according to the preparation for your operation."
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	"And therefore the forceps used to extract deciduous teeth is different from those used to remove other teeth. You should prepare these various forms of forceps which you will see shortly:"
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
D’eradicacio de dentz.	"On the extraction of teeth."
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	"You should carefully examine the tooth causing pain beforehand and during every extraction procedure, for there is no reason why you would need to look at it again after its removal. This is because the extracted tooth is a sublimated substance that serves as an excuse in its extraction."
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	"But when the pain is so severe that it requires tooth extraction, you must be firmly certain about which tooth is causing the pain. For often, the pain may seem to come from a healthy tooth and you extract it, only for the pain to continue until the actual offending tooth is removed, as we have already seen in operations involving beards."
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	"So when you are certain about which tooth is causing the pain and know it well, then you should scarify the area around the tooth with a spatula containing some caustic substance to dissolve the gum tissue completely. Then gradually use your fingers or delicate forceps to widen the opening until the tooth becomes loose."
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	"And then apply forceps with a large mouth and strong grip for good purchase or strong leverage. Grasp the head of the offending tooth firmly between your thumb and index finger so that it does not slip away from you. Then gently pull out the tooth in a straight manner, taking care not to break it or cause unnecessary pain."
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	"And if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it on either side of the tooth with ease and force to facilitate its removal as was done at the beginning."
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	"But if the tooth is decayed or damaged, then you should fill that cavity with wax and strengthen it using a fine wire tip to prevent it from breaking during your gripping of it with forceps."
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	"And you should work carefully with your scarification around the entire area of the gum and guard against using too much force so that you do not break or fracture it. Then return to the offending tooth with renewed effort to remove it, for the pain caused by its removal will be greater than the initial pain."
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	"And beware of doing what many ignorant barbers do in their haste and arrogance regarding tooth extraction, without administering what we have recommended. For often they cause great illnesses upon people which are more difficult to heal than they were to cause. They leave behind root remnants or some of them, or extract teeth with pieces of the jawbone attached, as we have often witnessed."
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	"And after the extraction, wash out the mouth with warm water or vinegar mixed with salt."
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	"And if bleeding occurs afterwards, as it often does, then apply some powdered myrrh and sprinkle it over the wound. If this is not sufficient, cauterize."
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	"The shape of the delicate forceps and tenacula used to grasp the tooth at the beginning should be long in its tip, short in its handle, and thick enough that they do not bend when you use them."
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	"And they should have such a thick handle that even when you squeeze them with all your might, they will not bend or be shortened at their tips."
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	"And they should be made of Indian iron, carefully straightened at their tips. The tips of these forceps should have teeth that interlock with each other and grasp firmly when squeezed together. Sometimes the tips are shaped like the beak of a bird called the ciconia (stork), which is broad and has strong grasping power."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Chapter XXIX"
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	"On the Extraction of Teeth and the Removal of Fractured Jaw Bones"
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When extraction of a tooth that is firmly set requires some cause, then you should place yourself close beside it with your hand for one or two days until the area becomes softened; and then insert a sponge or tenaculum whose ends are assembled like the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, in this shape:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them are made within thus like a file or rasp.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not succeed with this extraction using these forceps or tenacula, then you should uncover the root and remove all the flesh and insert this instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should be of short thick extremity, not bent in such way that it is not firmly held.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore if by means of this the root is removed, good! And if not, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows: The shape of the first instrument is that of a triangular extremity with some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second tool should be triangular and have a very fine tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And once you've helped with this instrument, having two branches, one is shaped like this:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and there are other instruments that resemble teeth-cutters; for it is made with this instrument, which resembles an oven hook, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of a triangular tip that is bent or shortened, which should be somewhat thick, and not pointed so as not to be sharp.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments for removing teeth are similar in shape to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle craftsman finds suitable instruments for himself according to what is necessary for the operation and various illnesses. For there are certain illnesses about which ancient physicians did not devise or provide appropriate instruments due to their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are broken or dislocated, it is necessary to carefully examine that area with suitable instruments and forceps for extracting tooth roots, as we have mentioned previously. Here is a gesture that represents this action:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	"There may be some swelling present gradually, which should be held or compressed with the mouth to prevent it from escaping until all the bone is removed; then restore the area with appropriate medicines."
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"If there is a small wound in the bone, clean it thoroughly and remove any blackened tissue. Then dress it until it heals."
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	"Concerning the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others."
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent beyond their natural course causing disfigurement, especially in women and venerable old women; therefore you should consider: if the tooth is not close to another tooth, and cannot be straightened or pulled out, then extract it; but if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument which resembles a pig's bone, made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp tip.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And make your incision so that in three days you will have cut through the hardness of that tooth without affecting any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is an emergent tooth to be filed down, then file it with an Indian steel file which has this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be made entirely of Indian steel and very sharp-pointed; and let it have many small points like those of a file with which the teeth are filed little by little over many days with ease, so that no other tooth is affected or injured.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And finally smooth it off at the end and polish it with sharp razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth with one side chipped and irritating the tongue, then you should file down that edge until its roughness is smoothed out and flattened, so that the tongue does not stumble or speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of restoring broken teeth with gold foil or silver wire
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are broken by concussion or extraction due to a blow or fall and the patient cannot eat properly despite your treatment with astringent medicines, then you should restore those that have been damaged using gold foil rather than silver wire, because silver tarnishes quickly and becomes smooth in just a few days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the foil be of such fineness and thinness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; and the way to prepare it is to take the foil and fold it double in length between two healthy teeth, then carefully twist the folded foil between one or more broken teeth until the cloth reaches the healthy part on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then insert the wadding into the beginning of the broken part and gently press with your finger with skill until it is well placed without causing further damage.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your pressure be such that you push the foil deep into the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then trim the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors, and gather those in each place with wax, and hide them under the healthy tooth and the broken tooth so that they do not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let it set firmly like mortar.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it becomes loose or broken, press it again with more foil in the same manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the method of restoration for two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as shown in these illustrations:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one or two teeth return to their proper places after extraction and have been restored as recommended, but still feel loose
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Only a skilled and knowledgeable artisan can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a bone from an ox is prepared in the shape of a tooth and placed in the space where a tooth is missing, and it is pressed down as described earlier, and it remains there and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of cutting the frenulum that comes on the tongue and obstructs speech
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament, which sometimes naturally attaches to the underside of the tongue or is accidentally attached due to a healed wound, can obstruct speech.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the procedure for this is to open the patient's mouth with their head held back, raise their tongue, and then cut the nerve ligament diagonally until the tongue is freed from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is hardness or stiffness in that ligament due to scar tissue from a healed wound, then use tweezers and cut it diagonally until you have completely severed the ligament and released the stiffness.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Be careful not to make a deep incision in the front of the flesh, and cut carefully so as not to cause bleeding.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then rinse the incision site with warm water or vinegar or fresh water; then apply a linen bandage to the underside of the tongue. This is how the patient should hold their tongue in place at all times to prevent it from healing again later.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, apply a wet cloth soaked in vinegar to the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a hot iron specifically designed for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Removal of a ranula from under the tongue
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, tumors develop beneath the tongue, preventing it from functioning normally and making speech difficult.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation involves opening the patient's mouth wide while they face the sun, examining the tumor closely
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you find it dark or black in color and hard, such that the patient feels no pain thereupon, do not touch it for it is a cancer
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it appears white and wet, then you should place the cautery on it and cut that thin mucus membrane completely with a scalpel; but if blood appears during the operation, then pause briefly until the bleeding stops before applying the cautery
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work and complete it until it is healed with care using wine mixed with salt and water; continue treating it with the other cures until it is fully healed
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter xxxvi
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of tumors from the ears and those that are located in the throat, as well as other tumors.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When tumors appear in the throat area, they are usually glandular and consist of adipose tissue that extends outward. These are called "ears," and if you treat them with water as described earlier but they do not heal, then consider whether the tumor is hard, dark colored, and insensitive. If so, do not touch it with an iron instrument.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red in color and the root is large, then do not touch it with an iron instrument due to the flow of blood. Instead, wait until it matures, and then either extract it or let it break open on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white in color, hard, and has a thin root, then it should be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And before performing the operation on it, consider whether the tumor has already rested after being cauterized completely or if it has decreased in size. Then perform the surgery early in the morning and with the sun behind you. Hold the patient's head firmly in place, open their mouth wide, and have your assistant press down on the tongue using a fine instrument called a "mouth gag," which is shaped like this:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or bronze, thin as possible and sharp as a razor.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then, with the mouth gag in place and the tumor exposed, make an incision over it using your scalpel. Then grasp the tumor with forceps and hold it firmly in place while you cut away as much of its outer portion as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then, after cutting away some of the connective tissue, make a deeper incision into the tumor using an instrument shaped like this:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	This instrument resembles forceps, but its tips are curved so that the cutting edges of each tip face inward towards one another. It should be made of hardened steel.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	"If this tool is not available to you, then cut one using a spatula, the shape of which is as follows: sharp on one side, not sharp on the other."
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	"And since you have cut one hole, cut the other in this same manner of incision, and then rinse the patient's wounds with warm water"
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is bleeding, rinse with water of decoction of oak bark or myrtle leaves and similar remedies that have astringent properties to stop the bleeding, and then dress the wound once it is healed."
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	"Sometimes there are other abscesses around the wound, and you should cut those as I have described for the incision of two equal holes."
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	"And I had already treated a woman with an abscess that had grown in her wound, which tended towards a dark color and little sensation, the wound had already closed, and the woman was breathing with great difficulty, she had already been forbidden to eat or drink water, and she would have died if not for my care over one or two days."
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	"And the abscess had grown so much that it had sent out two branches through two passages."
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	"So I inserted a cauterizing tool and left it in one of those openings, and pulled out what I could, then cut off as much as possible from the other passage, and I opened that mouth and compressed her tongue to prevent her from swallowing her own blood."
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	"And so you removed a large part of it, and only a small amount of blood was flowing from it."
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	"Therefore, it is absolutely necessary to heal that woman immediately. She should start drinking water right away and then promptly take food. Even though the boil was incised many times over a long period, another boil appeared in its place, which continued to spread."
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	"So I applied a poultice and cauterized the boil on her, then added some more. And promptly, she got up and walked around, not knowing what God had done for her right away."
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the incision of a boil when it is swollen
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When pus comes out of the boil, and it is swollen and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; but if it is at the start quite thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with what we have said in the division [of medicine], and your remedy does not help, and especially if sometimes even after cauterization the boil remains hard and subtle, then you should incise that which is rounded and joined together; and if it is of that length, and it is bleeding, of dark color or black, and there is no heat in it, then you should be cautious about incising it, for there is danger over the illness.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you find it according to the manner that I have told you of its whiteness and length, then make sure that the illness is gone and press its root with an instrument whose shape matches it exactly, and hold the onion in the new place, and pull it downwards and incise it with one of the instruments mentioned for the incision of boils.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not incise it more than what is appropriate to its natural term without addition, for if you incise too much of it, you will cause it to speak [i.e., cause it to fester or become worse].
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And at the time of incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of boils, and treat it afterwards until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the illness is frightened by the incision of it, then you should use fire in its cauterization without fear, and the manner of cautery on it is not but with hot water, that is to say: you take hold of the head of the boil in your hand, and press its root with the instrument that we have mentioned, and then take some of the water that we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and apply it with that live fire, and pause on that neither thick nor thin, and fill with that the concavity of the instrument whose shape is this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of its concavity in which the medicine is placed be like the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the boil, and let the boil lie on its side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person does not fall into it through the inward medicine, lest some cause for harm come to it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the medicine, and squeeze it on the boil for about half an hour until you see that it has become blackened and softened by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the boil, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the boil with the cotton into a cannula [i.e., a hollow tube] until the cotton adheres to that cannula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the boil, and then leave it alone for about three or four days until it dries up and falls off.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, then repeat it, and at the time of cauterization clean around the boil with cotton dipped in border, and remove from around it what is of the medicine, and wash it with hot water, and afterwards treat it with embrocation, and finally guard it until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is safer than incision and cautery without fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the boil is cured with something so subtle that it surpasses cautery and incision, for it is treated by sublimation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, Arabic scented sage, chamomile, briony, and other similar herbs of this kind, and join together all those causes or some of them in a pan, and immerse them with sour wine, and boil them; and the pan should be well covered with decent clay, and in the middle of the pan there should be a tube, upon which is placed a concave instrument made of silver or brass whose shape is this:
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the extremity should be inserted into the mouth of the boil so that the steam can reach it through the cannula until the boil is completely obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this treatment many times until it is dry, and be sure that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, for it would be too intense on the abscess, and you should not do this but declare the cautery of the boil.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not at hand, then take a reed and make at its extremity a wad of wool, so that the mouth of the boil is closed because the wadding of wool prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVI
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Concerning the removal of splinters and that which adheres in the throat, and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times there adhere in the throat a fish bone or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	"Then you should remove that which is visible from them, over which the cat's eye presses, because you press the tongue with an instrument beforehand, so that what is in the throat may be declared to you."
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	"And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach, because very easily the cause annexed to the throat may be forgotten by vomiting; or else let the patient swallow a piece of bread or a mouthful of lettuce leaves or a cup of dry bread; or take a sponge moistened with lemon juice and tie that firmly to the patient's forehead, for when it reaches the place where its thorns are extracted, then they will be forgotten."
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	"And more you should take an eel and boil it with fennel tied on, and let it be within the table and suddenly it is extracted; or else take a jar and suddenly put it in and suddenly pull it out."
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	"And if those causes which we have mentioned are not forgotten, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:"
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	"And it should be thicker than a little finger, and at its end there should be concavity which you insert into the patient's throat with ease."
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	"And the patient should raise his head upwards and take care that he does not touch with his mouth of the throat, lest it go into his body with that which scrapes bone or spine, or else the physician with his hand."
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	"But nevertheless the patient should insert it himself, according to his knowledge of the place where the cause is annexed and scrapes downwards, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity which was prepared beforehand so that it may be forgotten."
Capitol .xxxix.	"Chapter XXXIX."
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	"Of the extraction of sanguisuga annexed to the gullet."
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	"When the sanguisuga is medicated with that which we have said in the division of cure with medicines and it does not confirm itself, then consider the throat of the patient towards the sun, because you should have prepared the tongue of him with the instrument which we have recommended."
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	"Therefore if you see the sanguisuga, extract it with a hook small or with a subtle gesture appropriately."
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	"And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that, then take a concave canula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and properly place in the concavity of the canula an iron wire heated, and do this many times (until the sanguisuga is dead and removed from the throat) and keep the patient away from water all day."
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	"And take a vessel full of warm water and place the mouth of the patient in it, and wash his mouth with that; and do not let any cause or water go through, but rub the water with his hand once again after another hour, because sanguisuga quickly feels the water."
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	"But if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with incense or with asafetida through the instrument which we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula."
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	"Therefore do this, so that he may be cured."
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	"And there is another way of operation in fumigation of that (sanguisuga), which is that you take an iron pot in which there are hot coals and the pot covered with a lid in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the extremity of the instrument at that hole; then give the fumigation from above; and make the patient put his mouth at the extremity of the canula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation may not be forgotten until you know that the fumigation has reached the sanguisuga, because sanguisuga will fall quickly."
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	"And if (the sanguisuga) does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times, and keep the patient from drinking, and let him eat salted foods and almonds, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that with this regimen it may be forgotten."
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	"And this is the form of the instrument with which sanguisuga is extracted from the throat when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, except that it has some curvature:"
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	"which is placed in the throat and the extremity of it is like a heron's beak, which is smooth, so that when it takes some cause, it does not let it go."
Capitol .xl.	Capítulo XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	"In this chapter is the sum of the sermon in opening of abscesses and in section of them."
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	"The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to how they are remembered of them, each one in this book."
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	"And they are diverse in perforation and section of them by two manners, of which the one is for the species of abscesses in itself putrefactive; and because of what it takes from humidity."
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	"And the second manner is proper to the places where they occur in the body, because an abscess that occurs in the head is different from an abscess that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy place is different from an abscess that occurs in joints; and each one of them has its treatment by operation."
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	"And more, there are some abscesses which should not be perforated but rather at the maturity of the sanies in those or completion of them."
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	"So there are other abscesses which should be extracted when they are hard, and not mature according to their completion, such as abscesses that are close to joints, because an abscess when it is close to a joint its being prolonged until it can putrefy what is in its circuit, and very often the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted by it, which causes contraction of that member; or it is an abscess close to a main member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is fully matured, no harm will come to the main member; or it is close to the buttocks, therefore perforate that not yet matured; and it is not necessary to perforate a hard one with incomplete digestion, but rather that which is close to the buttocks, so that you do not elongate the probe of it into the inner parts of the buttocks and make a fistula, or that it may be made in its term that cannot be healed."
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	"But you should know the hour of the perforation of the abscess, and this is when it is matured."
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	"And know that it is matured when there is relaxation of the pain and cessation of the fever, and rather the diminution of redness and pulsation, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and other signs."
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	"And because it is necessary that you know the perforation to fall in the place where there is little pus near the abscess and coming from the cure of the prominence."
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	"And perforation is always made along the length of flesh or skin if abscesses are in the parts of arms or legs and at the elbows, of nerves' tendons, of arteries; and finally in all places where there is no reflection; because those that are reflected use perforation according to that member."
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	"But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the perforation of it until its digestion is confirmed according to completion, as we have said; because if you perforate it beforehand, the skin around it will be prolonged and much dirt will accumulate, and often the lips of it will become hardened and its depth."
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	"But some abscesses are perforated according to the width of flesh or skin due to necessity, or according to what that member requires."
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	"And it is necessary that you make a small perforation in the case of small abscesses, and a large one with many sections according to the diversity of the size of abscesses."
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	"And other boils are those which require the chain to be hollowed out and cut when they are made thus that bread is made, as happened in times of plague and swellings."
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	"And those which are incised in section having three angles; and of these is one that is cut thus like the figure of a fir leaf, like the boils of the lepers."
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	"And those where round section and moon-like section are administered, resembling them."
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	"But that one to which it is not done like its superficial boils, for you must perforate it with superficial perforation or flat alone."
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	"And when the boil is large and has collected much pus, you should perforate it but not worry about extracting all the pus at that time; having extracted some of it one day, then apply a poultice to the boil overnight, and again extract more the next day, doing this many times according to its degree until it is completely opened."
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	"And especially if the patient is of cold virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an elderly person in decay, because many times the animal spirit is resolved with the exit of the pus, and the patient dies easily, and you operate on them."
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	"Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and especially the perforation where you perforate these boils. You must cleanse the wounds and examine whether the boil's wound is little or flat sectioned, then you should apply the poultices of lint or old cotton. And if the boil is large and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you should pause a moment in each draw until they come together."
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if in the boil a part of the skin is abscissed or has concavity that surrounds it, then you should fill it with old cotton or thread made from linen cloth without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day, and then proceed to heal it with what is needed for dressings until it is healed."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	"But if blood flow occurs during your operation, then you should apply water and vinegar in linen cloth, and pause it over the location of the bloody flow many times."
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	"But if the bleeding persists, then you should apply remedies and dressings and powders which are recommended in many places of this book and division."
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	"But if it is wintertime and the boil is located in many nerves, then you should apply powders made of hot wine and oil, and pause them over those locations."
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is summertime and the locations are fleshy, then you should pause powders mixed with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all of this should be done until the third day, as we have said. And then you should drain the boil and cleanse it and apply to its dressing what is appropriate for it until it is healed."
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	"And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of boils universally, but according to the way of distinction, I have already said how each boil should be treated specifically in its own chapter."
Capitol .xli.	"Chapter 41."
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	"Of the Incision of Boils which arise on the Neck."
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	"On the neck there are small boils, and they are like species of knots which contain tunics that are made from them; and their species are many."
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	"And among them are pimples, and those that contain moisture similar to lime."
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	"And those that contain moisture like dust, akin to them; and those that are stony, hard."
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	"And in the section of all, and in the extraction of these there is no fear, since their extraction does not cause any damage."
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	"And the operation in section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose shape appears as follows, which is called 'entromes', until you know what it contains."
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	"But if that which it contains is moisture, then cut it open along its length with a surface incision in this form:"
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	"And begin at the section of line B-E, then proceed to line G-D. Once the moisture is evacuated, then remove that which contains that moisture, and do not leave it any cause of pain, for wounded parts quickly return if there remains any cause."
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	"And if possible, immerse it in Egyptian gum, and if not available, in water and salt. Fill it with that and leave it for another day, for with that you will corrode all that remains of that skin."
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	"And if necessary, repeat the application of Egyptian gum on that part a second and third time, until you are confident that there remains no cause for that skin to heal. Then dress the wound with ointment until it is healed."
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	"And if an abscess contains hard knots, then cut into it according to this shape:"
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	"With a section having the form of a cross, and make incisions between the two lips of the section and scrape it from all sides, and use your strength to extract the tunic which contains that."
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	"But if your artery opposes you, then do what I told you first."
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	"And similarly act with an indurated abscess in section and cure according to what I have told you. And the incision on an indurated abscess is easier because it contains little blood and moisture."
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	"And sometimes there are such abscesses which occur in the head of some men who have little humidity; this cause is that once you incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and it becomes like deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if someone struck it with that, they would harm her."
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	"But in other accidental abscesses on the head that are not of this kind, such as those that appear on the heads of children and behind the ears, the section of these should be superficial."
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	"And pause the perforation of those in which the pus is low from below so that it may alleviate the body from the lower parts."
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	"And then dress those with what you consider appropriate for their cure."
Capitol .xlii.	"Chapter XLII."
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	"Of the incision of scrofula that occurs in the neck."
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	"Often these abscesses occur in the neck, armpits, and groin; sometimes they also occur in other parts of the body."
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"And those that occur in the neck are many and often generated among them. And all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, like the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have mentioned."
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	"And there are many kinds of these scrofula because some are indurated, others contain moisture, and still others are malignant and do not submit to cure."
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	"Therefore in that which you find in good condition at the Touching, whose color is similar to the color of bone, and it is enlarged in all parts, and is not annexed with the nerve of the neck, nor with the veins, nor with the artery, and is not hard, then cut into it with a superficial section from above to below on the body line from G to the line of B, scrape it from all sides, and extend its lips with incisions or several incisions if you need them, like we said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little."
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	"And more caution must be taken not to cut into the vein or nerve."
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	"And let the spatula not be too sharp so that you do not hurt yourself with the incision or cause harm to the patient. And cut into what is necessary to cut and avoid cutting into what is not necessary. For if you should cut into a vein or artery, then pause in the wet plaster of treacle or other powders which stop bleeding, and sprinkle the wound, and let it rest until the sharpness of the abscess subsides and the wound begins to soften and become purulent."
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	"When blood is separated."
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	"So return to your operation when that is accomplished."
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	"And then inquire with the little finger if there are any other causes of the remaining small scrofula. Then cut into those and clean them."
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	"And if it is at the root of a large vein, then do not cut into that scrofula from its root."
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	"Then wrap it with folded lint and let it rest until it falls off by itself without harm."
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	"And then fill the plaster with cotton wool which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment, and dress that wound."
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	"And if you cut into the entire scrofula, then bring together the two lips of the wound and dress it immediately so that there is no remaining emptiness."
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	"But if you find that there remains emptiness due to the size of the scrofula, then understand how to cut into its root, extract it and apply suture and what is said."
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And that of the scrofula which contains moisture, pierce it with a superficial perforation where you see its point of maturation. Pause piercing from that where the pus is low in the body, as we have said."
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	"And then apply a dressing with ointment and similar things to remove what remains of the corruption."
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	"And then when you see that the wound is clean, dress it with an ointment for generating flesh until it is healed."
Capitol .xliii.	"Chapter XLIII."
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	"Of the section of the piloth of an accidental abscess inside the cheek."
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	"The ancients called this section 'the epiloth,' and we have not seen any man in our land who has performed it."
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	"And this is the inscription of the speech on that."
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	"But in men there is squinting, therefore the extraction of the epiloth should be avoided because it does not bring any benefit since all the veins and large ones of the disease are here."
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	"But in those who have abscesses cauterized in the mouth or cheek or ears when the disease is not on the bone, then use the section of the epiloth to avoid the damage that would be caused by perforation."
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	"Therefore when we want this, let us cut the epiloth on the outer three circles of the circles of the epiloth, or four with a small section across its width between two circles in quantity. Let the section be made in the bone, not in the cartilage. This place is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and its blood vessels are removed."
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	"And if the physician is afraid, then let him extend the cheek of the cheekbone with incisions, and next cut into the bone until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if he sees any cause."
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	"And then cut the ciphalic as we have recommended, and it is signified above by the inflammation that issues from there with what is of its disruption and by the absence of voice."
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	"Leave the wound open for some time."
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	"Once the expected healing time has passed, add two lips of skin from the wound's edge and cut only the cartilage."
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	"And apply medicine that promotes flesh growth to ensure complete healing."
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	"Albuccasis said that the main point of this discussion is to open veins that some have closed due to these boils, as the patient has come close to death and their breath has been cut off. Some will go on to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the wound for a short while, thus saving them from death."
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And therefore command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil of it lasts for three days. And then afterwards close the wound, and care for it until it heals."
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	"And I have seen that a servant took a knife and cut his own throat, and I was called to cure him. When I arrived, he was groaning like a dead person, and when I opened the wound I found blood pouring out from it."
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	"Therefore I concluded that he had not cut any vein or artery, and the wind was coming out of the wound. And so I cured him until it healed."
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	"And it did not happen to the servant that he lost his voice, and after some days I returned to examine his condition."
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	"And now you say that in the section of the epiglottis there is no danger."
Capitol .xliv.	"Chapter XLIV."
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	"About the incision over an abscess that occurs in the throat externally, which is called a herniation of the throat."
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	"Hernia of the groin named apostema is a large swelling according to the color of the body, especially in women."
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	"And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally."
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	"It is not in nature to heal."
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	"There are two kinds of accidents: one resembling varicose veins and the other resembling an ulcer caused by the rupture of an artery. Fear is present in both."
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	"And only the one that is called for should be approached with iron, not any other."
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And if you find that one resembling varicose veins but not suspended from any vein, then cut it like nodes and remove it with water containing salt and turpentine. But first examine the whole of its being and apply appropriate treatment until it is healed."
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLIV
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	"On the sectioning of types of nodes."
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	"And concerning these kinds of knots, all their species have already been discussed in the division."
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	"Therefore, it is necessary that you explain here the difference between a knot and an exitura, as there may be doubt about this."
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	"Therefore, I say that an exitura is characterized by heat and fever with intense pain until the boiling of the surplus has been quieted. It is a completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat."
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	"But a knot does not have heat or fever or pain. It contains only chyle in its own sac."
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	"The condition of the body and its onset resemble that of a pig, with swelling similar to an empty barrel, large or small. There are two types: one is fatty and contains moisture, and the color of this moisture varies as I have described in the division."
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	"Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a nodule, examine it and ask about its beginning, which is called 'intromes', according to what form it takes as described in this chapter."
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	"And this is the manner of inquiry for apostemes and all kinds of nodes: take this instrument and insert it into the moist place that you find in the aposteme, then slowly turn your fingers with it until you know that the instrument has pierced through the skin."
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	"And finally, press your hand down according to the size of the aposteme, then extract the instrument and observe what has come out in its wake."
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	"And if the current moisture is forgotten, regardless of its color, then cut it with a superficial section as I have said for other apostemes."
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	"And if there is no moisture from the trail of the instrument, know that it is fatty."
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	"And if you dry it with a section having the shape of a cross in this form:"
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	"So do it as you've been taught, suspend that limb with its tip pointing downwards, and carefully cut the cord on all sides. Guard the placenta or sac if possible over that and extract the afterbirth by pulling on the umbilical cord."
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	"But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that afterbirth, and many times it stays there. Therefore you remove it piece by piece until there is no more cause for it."
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	"And if any part remains, little or much, the cord will return according to its own manner."
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And if you find that a small piece remains, then sprinkle some powdered corrosives on it, burn the wound and cover it with a hot cautery to heal. Then treat it with other cures until it is healed."
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	"And if the cord is long, then cut both lips of it and cure it as it is."
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	"But if the umbilical pulse is against it, or non-pulsating, then cut and cauterize the place where it was attached with a hot iron. Leave that area alone for two or three days until the wound heals and the bleeding stops; then return to cutting what remains of the cord."
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	"Concerning the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation."
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	"These are the shapes of inner organs, and they are of three kinds: some are large, some medium-sized, and some small."
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	"The shape of the large inner organ is as follows:"
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	"The shape of the medium-sized inner organ is this:"
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	"The shape of the small inner organ is this:"
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	"They are made of iron, aluminum, and carefully crafted extremities, so that they can be inserted into the wound without causing pain."
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	"And these are the shapes of experiences, called albereds; one of them is called berid."
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	"And they are of three kinds: some are large, medium-sized, and few."
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	"The shape of the large experience is shaped like a moon:"
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	"The shape of the medium-sized experience is also shaped like a moon:"
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	"The shape of the small experience is also shaped like a moon:"
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	"It is convenient that they are used for wounds, exits and fistulas, and buboes, since among those there are also cases of bones and other causes."
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	"And they are made redondas, thick, pointed, just like large needles with which the sutures are sewn, and they are made of citrine glass, or of iron, or of silver; but the best ones are those made of citrine glass."
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	"And they are made of black feathers, which agree that through them the fistulas are opened in whose concavity there are reflections, which are reflected with their own levitation with those reflections."
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	"And they are of three kinds: some are long, others medium-sized, and still others short, depending on the quantity of the width of the fistula and its stricture."
Forma del experient gran de plom:	"Shape of the large lead experience:"
Forma del experient migier de plom:	"Shape of the medium-sized lead experience:"
Forma del experient petit de plom:	"Shape of the small lead experience:"
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	"The shapes of the hooks are of many kinds, for some are simple ones that have only one curvature, and they are of three sizes: large, small, and medium-sized."
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	"And among them there are curved hooks, and they are of three kinds:"
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And among those that are curved there are some with two curvatures, and they are of three sizes."
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And among them there are some with three curvatures, and they are of three kinds:"
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	"All these things are necessary in their place."
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	"Shape of large simple hook, shape of it:"
Forma de unci simple migier:	"Form of medium-sized simple hook:"
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	"A single claw-shaped form, a form of it."
Forma de unci orp gran:	"An ear-shaped form large."
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	"An ear-shaped form smaller, its form."
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	"A small ear-shaped form, its form."
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	"A large claw shape with two curves."
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	"Smaller claw shape having two curves."
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	"Small claw shape having two curves."
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	"A large claw shape with three curves."
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	"Smaller claw shape having three curves."
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	"Small claw shape having three curves."
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	"And these are the shapes of the scalpels used to cut and scrape off nodes and scabs, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small."
Forma de scapel gran:	"Large scalpel shape"
Forma del scapel migier:	"Medium scalpel shape"
Forma de scapel pauc:	"Small scalpel shape"
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	"The tips of those used for sectioning are sharp and the others are not sharp but blunt, not in such a way that it may cause injury to veins or nerves during the scraping off of nodes, and so that healing may be promoted and tranquility obtained through the abrasion which follows the scraping off of the scab."
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	"And these are the shapes of forceps, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, as you can see."
La forma de magda gran:	"Large forceps shape:"
Forma de magda migier:	"Medium forceps shape"
Forma de magda pauc:	"Small forceps shape"
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	"They are made of iron and resemble rods with which alcohol is distilled."
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	"And at the end there is a hollowed-out point covered with a spatula and on both sides there are partitions inside and outside, as you see."
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	"The shapes of spatulas, which are used to hide between the aforementioned devices during the perforation of scabs and not perceived by the sick, come in three sizes: large, medium, and small."
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	"And these are the shapes:"
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	"The shapes of forceps used to absorb blood flow and come in three sizes: large, medium, and small."
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	"They are made of citrus iron, round with some length, and they are thin."
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	"And it is necessary that these sizes of forceps be available to you in large, medium, and small, so that through them blood flow may be absorbed quickly in case of necessity, and also when medicine is not immediately available."
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	"But do not use them to absorb blood in all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy places, such as in the armpits, groins, breasts, belly button, buttocks, and similar moist flesh."
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	"And sometimes these instruments are made in another small shape similar to tweezers according to this form: through which blood is absorbed when it is done by phlebotomy or incising veins or arteries."
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes they are made round like this:"
Capitol .xlvii.	"Chapter XLVI."
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the care of the breasts of men which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some men's nipples may become erect during sleep due to the coldness and they may appear similar to those of women, becoming tumescent.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And with regard to that which you have read above, if it occurs on the lunar section according to this shape, from line B to line G, and then remove all thickness, and then fill in the wound with medicinal wax, and then join the two lips of the wound with stitching, and care for it until it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the nipple declines towards its sides and becomes softened by its size like that of women, then it should be cut in two on both sides with two sections resembling a crescent moon shape, each contained within the other at their ends so that the major line contains the minor according to this form from line B to line G. Then remove the skin between the two lips of the wound and cleanse it, administering what has been said regarding suturing and powders as necessary for its healing until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not perform the incision of that which ought to be incised due to the restlessness of the illness and flow of blood, then you should fill in the wound with a cotton swab dipped in corrosive ointment and let it remain until it has eaten away all that is rotten from its thickness, and then care for it until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the perforation of boils that come up on the testicles.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These boils that arise on the testicles are of the species of scrofula, hard ones which contain a head that can be squeezed out.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And those which contain moisture should be incised with a crescent moon section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And once everything that is inside the boil has been evacuated of its impurity, then fill it with cotton wool and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Then remove the cotton and care for it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	"If the aposteme is of the species of knots, and of scrofula, then you should incise it as we have said in the section on unequal scrofula."
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	"If the plague has spread to such an extent that there is putrefaction, then you should apply a caustic as we have said earlier."
Capitol .xlix.	"Chapter XLIX."
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	"On the section of apostemes that occur by chance or by vein."
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	"When an artery is broken and the vein above it is thrombosed, often an aposteme occurs. The signs by which it is known that inflammation and aposteme are due to an artery or a vein: for when an aposteme is due to an artery, it is elongated towards the chest; and when you press on the aposteme with your fingers, you feel stridor."
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	"And that which is due to a vein is round in appearance."
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	"And the section about this aposteme is erroneous, especially in those that are on the left side of the belly, and in the anus, and neck, and many other parts of the body; and it is very large, therefore its cure with iron should be avoided, and that which is on the extremities or on the head should also be avoided."
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	"Moreover, about that which occurs due to inflammation of the orrifice of the artery, cutting into the vein section in its length; and approximate the section with hooks and approximate the artery, removing the tunics until it is exposed."
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	"And approximate thus: place that needle and make it penetrate through to the other side; and then twist the artery with doubled silk thread in two places, — which causes you to see how to extract both arteries which are located on the temples."
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	"And approximate thus: puncture the location that is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood present there is discharged, and so the aposteme will be dissolved."
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And approximate thus: apply treatment that produces pus, until the ligaments fall; and then cure it with proper dressings until it is healed."
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	"And if it is an aposteme due to a vein section, then you should have with your hand whatever is possible of the aposteme with the cord, and approximate the needle from the side of the location that you have held in your hand, making it penetrate; and place it in doubled silk thread so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligate the aposteme with good ligature according to what I told you about the grapevine, on both sides with two extremities of the thread."
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	"But if you fear that the thread may be extracted, then insert the silk thread with that needle from both sides of the whole aposteme along the incision of the first needle, and twist your threads in four places."
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	"Then dry the aposteme in its middle part until when it is dried out whatever is present in it, then incise the superfluity of the cord, and leave what is tied of it."
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then pour over it powder that you have submerged in wine and oil, and then apply the treatment that is done with compresses and dressings until it is healed."
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	"Chapter 1 about the aposteme that occurs due to torsion of nerves."
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	"Just as an aposteme occurs in the artery and vein, likewise it also occurs in nerves when they are struck or occur due to excessive labor, and for similar reasons."
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	"And the majority of them occur in the locations of the tendons or the heel, or in any location where joints are movable."
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	"And it is a severe aposteme, resembling the color of other flesh, and its disposition is mostly without sensation when it is squeezed with violence, there is in it a similar sensation to stupor."
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	"And it is not an aposteme attached to the chest wall, and therefore it is detached from the cord, and it moves with all its parts but does not move forward nor backward."
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	"Therefore, those that are in joints should not be bandaged with iron, because it would cause severe contraction."
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	"But that one which is on the head or forehead should cut off the cord with a scalpel."
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	"But if it is a small aposteme, then take it with forceps and excise it with razors."
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is large, then suspend it with forceps and scrape it out, and then cauterize it; and adjust the wound with suture, and treat it until it is healed."
Capitol .li.	"Chapter LII."
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	"About incision of an aposteme that occurs due to cholecystitis that occurred in the abdomen."
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	"Therefore, some people observe in the bellies of those and in the other parts of their bodies certain fungous-like tumors, which have a fine root and a large head; whose lips are turned inward, and they are both small and greatly magnified."
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	"And I have already seen one, in whose belly there were two tumors resembling fungi, and there was no difference between them except that they were white with fine roots."
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	"And the lips of those were turned inward and parted, and moisture flowed from it constantly."
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	"So I incised them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces and the other six."
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	"And during the operation of incision, if you observe that the pain is humid and the color of it is white and humid with a fine root, then cut it with a wide scalpel and have ready cautery in the fire nearby, because many times much blood will be expelled from its section; and if blood flows out, cauterize it."
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	"And if the pain is fearful and dreadful, guard against incision with iron; but instead take fresh lead wire and stretch it over that tumor in the manner which we have said; and leave it for two days."
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	"And then adjust in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore do not cease to stretch the lead until it is entirely cut off and falls away by itself without working."
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	"But if the tumor has a coarse root, then during its incision there is some cause for fear and dread, especially those that are in the belly."
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	"But it is possible for you to incise most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	"And then treat it until the wound is healed."
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	"And guard yourself against presuming to incise a tumor that is of dark color, with little sensation, and regularly observed, for it is an abscess."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	"And I recall here a case of cancer."
Capitol .lii.	"Chapter LII."
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	"About treatment of herniation of the umbilical cord."
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	"Herniation of the umbilical cord is caused by many things: either by fissures of the ciphac that is on the belly, or by the tissue or bud that ends up in other ruptures; or by blood flowing from vein or artery, as mentioned earlier, or by constricted wind."
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	"If it's due to an opening in the hip and discharge of fluid, then the color of the abscess is like the color of the body; there is no pain, and it appears suddenly."
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	"And if it's due to an exit of the bowel, then its position is much more varied than what we have described above. When you press on it with your fingers, it hides and suddenly returns; its sound is loud, and it causes much greater pain."
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	"If due to moisture, then there is no pain, and when you press with your hand, it does not hide, nor is it tense or swollen."
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	"And if it's due to blood, then the abscess appears blackish."
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	"But if it's due to raw flesh, then the abscess is hard, thick and firm, and it is filled with a considerable amount."
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	"However, if it's due to windiness, then touching it causes no pain."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	"And the operation in this case is that you should consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial or venous blood, or windiness. However, you should refrain from treating it, because there is fear and danger in this case, as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses caused by arteries and veins."
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	"And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowel or the tissue, then you should command the patient to lie on their back with their arms extended. Then, signal with your finger around the entire navel area, and next command them to turn onto their hands and knees over a pillow placed under their buttocks. Next, circle the navel area with a broad spatula, pressing on the spot you signaled with your finger. Then extend the swelling of the abscess upwards using a large spoon; finally, ligate it around its base using strong thread or string, tying in the proper manner."
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	"And then, grasp the middle of the extended abscess with your hand and introduce your finger into it, seeking the bowel. If you find it and grab it with your finger, then carefully extract it and push it back inside the abdomen."
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	"But if you have found only tissue, then grasp it with a spoon and remove its excess."
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	"However, if it's against your artery or vein, then encircle that spot and return to your operation. Then take two needles and insert them into two strong threads. Insert the needles into the circle you made around the abscess in a cross-like manner, making sure they penetrate. Finally, stretch the abscess in four directions over the needles."
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the stretched skin to fall back into place. Or, if it's thin enough, cut it when it has become suppurated and can be removed, and then treat it with water that is suitable for healing wounds."
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	"If the prominence of the navel is due to fat or humidity, then you should treat the abscess as we have said and remove the blood or moisture that you find inside it. Then treat it with water suitable for healing wounds and consolidating the area."
Capitol .liii.	Capítulo LIII
De curacio de cranc.	Aquí está el texto en catalán medieval:
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	"We have spoken, in the division of kinds of cancer and the manner in which it is approached for treatment with medicines, that surgery can be avoided to prevent ulcers; we have spoken of cancer generated in the breast and caution in its treatment."
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	"And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where eradication is possible, as with cancer found in the breasts or in the skin and around the limbs, especially when it starts out small."
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	"But once cancer is advanced and grave, there is nothing that can be done about it, for I have never seen anyone cured of it nor heard of another who has."
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	"And the operation on it is as we have said: you should precede by removing and cleansing away black humors sometimes, and then cauterize it if there is manifest tumorous swelling."
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	"And prepare the patient with preparations appropriate to where it is located for operation, and then prohibit certain foods which are harmful to that person, and also cauterize all parts with a hot iron after good excision so that there remains no cause for cancer's return."
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	"And let the blood flow freely, and do not remove it too lightly; express the places and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument which is at your disposal among the instruments."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is difficulty with thick blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize it until the flow of blood has ceased, and then treat it with another treatment so that it may be healed."
Capitol .liv.	"Chapter 50"
De curacio de ydropici.	"Of the Treatment of Dropsy."
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	"We have already discussed, in our division, the varieties of watery dropsy and their symptoms, as well as treatments for them using medications."
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	"And that which is treated with iron is only the species of hydrops alone, and it is not appropriate to approach with iron the species of tympanitic dropsy or the species of hypochondriac dropsy, for these are fatal."
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	"And when you have treated this tympanitic dropsy species with medications and find that your treatment is ineffective, then consider whether the patient has already reached debility from it, or if there is another kind of dropsy present, such as in cases of coughing or abdominal distension and similar ones. Then be careful not to treat it with iron, for fear of harm."
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	"But if the patient has an abundance of strength and there is no other illness present besides simple dropsy, neither infantile nor senile, then the manner of its operation is as follows: elevate the patient between your hands, and have the assistant press the patient's abdomen with his hand, pressing out water from it near the navel, and then take a pointed spatula in this form:"
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	"It should be long and pointed at both ends like a spatula; however, it should also have some shortness little by little, so that during the operation with it you do not pass into the bowel and thus damage it."
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	"And then consider whether the dropsy is generated from the bowels, for if it is, then you should make your incision along with the navel by three digits' breadth towards the sides, on the right side above the pubis."
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	"But if the dropsy is caused by an illness of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three digits."
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	"And if its cause is from the spleen, then your incision should be on the left side."
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	"And do not make your incision over the side where you want to draw off the fluid, so that it does not run back to that spot."
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	"And then perforate the entire cord with the instrument and enter through that incision. Then elevate your hand with the spatula between the cord and the syphon, and draw it out; and if there is a quantity of one fingernail or less."
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	"And then pierce the syphon within until the spatula reaches the desired spot, and this is where the water is located."
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then remove that one (the cord) and insert an instrument of which this is the form:"
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	"And it is similar to a thin silver cannula. It is made of silver or brass or lion's hide, and at its lower end there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other. And its tip is cut obliquely like a feather quill."
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	"And at its upper end there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that water will immediately rush out onto the instrument. Therefore, be careful not to evacuate too much water at once, because if you do so more than necessary at that time, either the patient may die from dissolution of his vital spirit, or he may become unconscious and approach death."
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	"But evacuate according to the quantity of his strength, and also consider the disposition of the illness, the strength of his pulse, and his general condition."
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	"And then remove the instrument and retain the water that is drawn off, because immediately it will be retained by the cord which retains the hole that is above the syphon, of which you should pierce it in this manner."
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	"And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient tolerates it, and draw off a small quantity of water. And do this for several days in succession out of fear that there might remain only a little water."
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	"But if you are afraid of harming the patient and draw off too much water, then treat him with a burial in hot sand, and give him a bath with plenty of salt, and expose him to the sun for a long time. And also treat him with drying medicines until he is healed."
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	"And cauterize the stomach, spleen, and liver near the site of water removal, as I have described previously in this book."
Capitol .lv.	"Chapter LIV."
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	"Of the treatment of children who are born withimperforate urinary openings."
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	"Sometimes, some children are born from their mother's womb and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or is drawn too narrow or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, you must cut it immediately after it is born with a very fine spatula following this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then pause in the draw a subtle lead awl and tie that, and leave it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate let them move away and piss; then return that (i.e., put the awl back in its place).
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	But if you do not pause with the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over that place will not let this close.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that one whose draw is narrow should be treated with a lead awl, as we have said, for several days until it becomes widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the draw is not in its place are said to be led, whose cause is that some, at birth, have the end of the penis crooked due to which they cannot urinate correctly, until they raise the penis with their hand towards the top; and this is not due to generation because sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and it is a very serious illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation in this case is that the sick one should be placed on his back, and then stretch the head of the penis with your left hand with violent traction, and cut off the end of the head of the penis from the opening of the urethra with a sharp spatula, just like plucking a feather, without removing any part of it, so that the middle of it resembles the head of the penis and the draw falls into its proper place.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful during your operation of blood flow, because many times this happens; pause at the point where you cut off the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LV
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of whiteness which occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of roughness and blackness and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Often this whiteness occurs on the penis and it is a fleshy protuberance.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of that one, some are malignant and others are not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	The non-malignant one, it is necessary to suspend with a fine hook and cut it off until it is completely removed; then pause on that cut with cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with soft ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the whiteness is malignant, of a dark color, then you must apply cautery immediately at the incision and removal of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the whiteness is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised head of the penis, and one part of the whiteness is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the whiteness that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; then you should cure what is outside because if you cure both together with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be gripped.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And it often happens in the groin and foreskin blackness and roughness, then you must remove everything that is already darkened and about to corrupt or has already corrupted; and then line over it with honey, which is thickened with ground millet flour and three parts of well-sifted barley flour.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	"But if blood flow is excessive, then administer a cautery lunar according to this form:"
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	"The cautery jugulare consists of two positions at the same time: one for blood flow and another for the plague when it is putrefied."
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	"And if the head of the glans is destroyed and all in one hour, then you must insert a lead cannula into the meatus of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it."
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the glans (and this adhesion occurs only in those for whom the foreskin is short, and over it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to plague or abscess) you must excise with a blunt spatula until the adhesion is dissolved and the head of the glans is completely freed from all parts."
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	"And if it is difficult to distinguish those parts precisely, then you must excise with a spatula some cause from the head of the glans and foreskin, and this is how: when the foreskin is thin, it is easily perforated by its thinness lightly."
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	"And then separate the foreskin from the head of the glans with thin thread, which has been moistened in warm water so that they do not adhere again."
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	"And then it should be treated with astringent wine until it is consolidated."
Capitol .lvii.	"Chapter Fifty-Seven."
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	"Concerning the care of children and the treatment of what occurs during their circumcision."
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	"Circumcision is not a cure for continuity like other plagues: yet since it is our operation and done willingly, especially in the case of children, it is necessary that we assign to this procedure the best method and easiest path so that they may lose their health."
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	"I say that the ancients did not call it circumcision in some of their books because they did not use it in their laws. This is because, through experience, we have discovered this practice, which I have found most artisans and barbers use for circumcision and purification with a razor and torches; and they also use liniment made from pitch and make an incision with the nail."
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	"And I have already tried all these methods and found that purification with forceps, liniment made from pitch used for purification with the nail causes many escapes because the frenum of the foreskin has two tunics, and the inner one remains after the outer one is removed. It is very difficult to make another incision safely without causing pain."
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	"And in the purification that is done with forceps, which is called digital, used by the Sabbath-keepers, it is not assured that the incision at the tip of the male member will be made safely because it often goes into the tissue."
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	"Moreover, in the operation done with a nail, often blood will flow and spoil your operation."
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	"And the child's spine is naturally short, and many times it appears in this manner so that there is no need for correction, and I have seen such."
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	"Moreover, with respect to the correction that is done using forceps and ligatures with pitch, the good quality and experiment demonstrated to me that these forceps have proportional incisions because the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below. And therefore when you press your hand so proportionally on both sharp edges, you will cut evenly according to a comparison in one time; and there will be compression of the pitch with a figure containing the spine of the whole cord, with which there can be no error at all."
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	"And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie on its back if it is one of those who understands a little, so that you do not do anything else except cut the skin over the spine and leave it to heal for another day."
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	"And properly do thus as much as is possible according to what you have received of his understanding."
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	"And properly make him lie between your most prepared assistants, and let there be no noise or fuss; and hide the forceps in your hand or behind his head so that the child does not see them nor anyone else of the instruments."
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	"And properly put your hand on the spine of the child and blow on the cord, and pull that part out which is above the head of the spine, and properly cleanse it from what has adhered to it from dirt."
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	"And properly tie the place marked with a doubled string, and then below it tie the second ligament tightly, and properly take hold of that place with your thumb behind the ligament with good retention, and cut between two ligaments."
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And properly lift the cord gently and extract the head of the spine, and let the blood flow little by little, for it is better so; and put powder on it and over the powder put a cloth on which is sprinkled ground mallow seed cooked with rose oil; and leave that there until the next day; and treat him with treatment until he is healed."
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	"The form of forceps for cleansing is as follows:"
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	"Let the outer ones be not-cutting and sharp, so that the branch of the key is not seen outside, and let their length be as much as the length of two equal handles."
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	"But the error in cleansing is when you pull out the cord too strongly entirely or partly from where it was cut."
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	"Therefore, you should stretch that out with your thumbnail in front of the aposteme of the place and cut it evenly."
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	"And if you cannot hold it with your thumbnail, then extract it with forceps and cut it."
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	"But if three days have passed and that which is inflamed behind the spine remains, then you should let it be until the aposteme is cauterized, and remove it easily, and cut it according to what has been prepared by you."
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	"And beware of the head of the spine, for it does not have any fat on it."
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	"And then treat him with what the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders."
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	"If it is cut evenly and you follow the sections above, there will be nothing wrong with it."
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	"But also treat him with what we have said until he is healed."
Capitol .lviii.	"Chapter LVIII"
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	"Of the treatment of urine retained in the bladder."
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stone or congealed blood, or by poverty or debility, and it resembles that which we have mentioned concerning the methods of treatment in this section.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and retention occurs due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over onto their hands and knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the patient's weight on their hands and stretch out their belly as much as possible below their back, and have the patient strain their anus as much as they can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, if the neck of the bladder is constricted, there will be expulsion of the stone towards the parts behind, so that the urine may pass out.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the urine is not dissolved even with what we have said above and there is still retention in the patient, then it is necessary to perform extraction using an instrument called a syrinx, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be very fine and smooth, like a quill pen with subtle thickness similar to half a palm, at whose head there is a fine canal.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of using this instrument to extract urine is as follows: Take the thread doubled and tie it at the extremity of the wick or cotton with a good knot; then insert the extremities of the thread into the part below the syrinx, and cut away any excess cotton with scissors, but insert the thread into the canal with vehemence. Then proceed to introduce the syrinx gently along the border and with oil.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And then lie the patient on their back and insert the syrinx into the bladder along with olive oil and warm water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then gently introduce the syrinx until it reaches the bottom of the bladder; and then bend the patient's back upwards at the level of the navel; and then push the syrinx down into that; and then push it further until it reaches the bladder, and when it feels that the urine has reached its cause, withdraw it in this order, but if there is difficulty due to tortuosity, change the position accordingly.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly pull out the thread along with the wick little by little, because the urine adheres to the wick.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove that and perform treatment with urine, using the syrinx until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Capitol .lix.	Capítulo 9 (LIX)
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of catheterization of the bladder using a clump cedar and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When it happens that there is ulceration or an abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood appears in it, or it becomes obstructed by stones, and one wants to drip water and medications into it, then it should be done using an instrument called a clump cedar, which has this form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but at its extremity, it is blunt, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And it has three holes: two on one side and one on the other.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	"In the beginning is the hollow place where this thing called 'whirlpool' resides. Its quantity varies according to what enters it without addition; when any cause draws out its humidity, let it be drawn out. And when something is expelled from it, with that, let it also be drawn out. The longer it expels, the more like a clapper it becomes, with which naphtha is struck in the battles of the sea."
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	"Therefore, when you want to expel humidity from the bladder, insert the tip of the syringe into the humidity and draw with it that which is expelled upwards, for the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the syringe."
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	"And likewise insert the tip of the syringe into the urethra as we have described in the operation. And similarly expel the humidity with that which you expel, for that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the illness ceases thereby."
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	"And this is the form of the subtle syringe with which the bladder is rinsed:"
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	"Let there be made from silver or lead, of which the end should resemble a small feather, and place it within."
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	"And then take a bladder from the animal, place in it the moisture you wish to crystallize, tie the mouth of the bladder tightly with strong thread doubled over, and heat that moisture over the fire."
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	"And then insert the tip of the crystal into the crucible."
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	"And then, with your hand on the bladder containing the stretched moisture, wait until that moisture has completely penetrated into the vessel."
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	"But if you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make from it a circle; pierce that circle throughout its entirety; and then insert strong thread into those perforations, so that they may be rotated; and then attach the circle in such a way that it is attached as aforementioned, because you will place in that one what you wish to extract moistures from, oils and waters."
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	"And then tie that (sc. the circle) onto the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and press with your hand until the moisture has penetrated into the vessel."
Capitol .lx.	"Chapter .lx."
De extraccio de peyra.	"Of extraction of urine."
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	"We have already spoken in the division of the species of urine and cure with medicines, and the difference between urine generated from the kidneys and urine generated from the bladder, and the signs of that."
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	"And we have said about urine in which cauterization and section are operated."
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	"And the urine generated from the bladder properly speaking is that which remains in the bladder."
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	"And I now tell this story with manifest exposition and abbreviation."
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, stones generated in the bladder mainly affect children. And among its symptoms are that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety and appears in that region; and the patient rubs their genitals, often pants, and is suddenly erect. At this point, the anus becomes open to those things.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	"And it would be easier to heal children of that illness who have reached fourteen years old; and difficult cure in the elderly."
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	"But among young people, this is halfway between those things."
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	"And from that one where the stone is greater and its cure easier. But if it is small, it is contrary to this."
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we arrive at the treatment of this, it is necessary at the beginning that we cleanse the patient with a clyster that draws out all the feces that are in his bowels; for that crack sometimes prevents the descent of the stone due to its examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	"And then let the patient be taken with his feet and stretched out and shaken until the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or what comes out of its place sometimes."
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	"And then let that clyster be administered between the thighs, and more of it be poured onto those things there, so that the bladder may be entirely inclined towards those parts."
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	"And then let him urinate and all of that deficiency."
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in its place, immediately cut over it with an incision.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot grasp it all with your fingers, then you must anoint your left index finger (if the patient is a child) or your middle finger (if they are an adult) with oil and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	"And then let him urinate until it stays there with your fingers."
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	"And slowly bring it out little by little through the neck of the bladder,"
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	"And then press on it with your finger and expel it to those parts outside where you made the incision."
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	"And command the minister to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand draw back the cord that is below them, towards the place where the incision is made."
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then introduce a spatula beveled thus:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	"And cut into him what is between the buttocks and genitals, not in the middle place, rather towards the left side; let the incision be over that bone, and keep your finger on the anus during the incision, making it transverse so that the outside is wide but inside narrow according to how much of the bone can be safely removed without compromising the integrity of the anus."
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	"And know that part of the stone has some angle and edge, making its removal difficult because of this."
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	"And of that which is like an acorn, round, easy removal can be made from it."
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	"Therefore if it has angle and edge, adjust it into the groove."
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	"And if it is not thus forgotten, then press upon that with a suitable gesture decently, the end of which should be like a chisel with which you press upon the stone, and do not let it slip away; or else insert that subtle instrument with curved extremity into it."
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	"But if you cannot press upon that (the stone), then widen the incision a little; and if you see flow of blood, cut deeper upon it with a sharp lancet."
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	"But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning press your hand upon the mouth of the bladder and cut above it; and press a little on that; and similarly act if there are many more than two."
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	"And if it is a large stone, then ignorance would be to cut upon it with a large section, for the sick person suffers from one of two causes: either retention or inflammation due to continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not entirely consolidated."
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	"But if expulsion of that which is forgotten inside cannot be achieved, then use forceps within the fracture to extract it in pieces."
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	"Therefore once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with powder of Aloes and dragon's blood, and press upon it."
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	"And place over that cloth infused in oil and wine, or in olive oil and washed with water, so that the wound may be sealed against inflammation."
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	"And then let the patient lie on his back on a bolster for three days without allowing him to get up from bed."
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	"And when that air is released, envelop the area with hot water and much oil, then treat it with fine ointment of dragon's blood until it is healed."
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	"But if in the hernia there occurs an aposteme that is hard and corrosive, like when blood congeals in the bladder (and this is known by the exit of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the hernia and remove that blood, because if it remains it will provoke corruption in the bladder and from there putrefaction."
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then wash the hernia with vinegar, water, and salt, and use an opposing remedy according to what is appropriate for its cure until it is healed."
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	"And during all the hours of the treatment, you should lie down with both knees raised and adjust the medicines that were placed on the affected area."
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if the stone is small and it is in the middle of the urethra, embedded there, and emission of urine is prohibited, then cure that with what I recommend before you come to incision, because many times this cure has been attributed to incision; but now I will tell you about it: take a fine iron probe, which has this shape:"
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	"of triangular shape at the end, sharp, inserted into wood."
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	"And then take a thread, and tie it with that around the urethra on the side of the stone so that it does not return to the bladder."
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	"Then carefully insert the iron into the foreskin, piercing it gently until the piercer reaches that point."
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	"Slowly rotate the piercer with your hand in that point, and continue piercing until you feel it come out on the other side; for urine is about to be released."
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	"And now press your hand over what has been torn from the foreskin's departure point; for it is clenched and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed."
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	"But if this procedure is not suitable for some reason which prevents it, then tie one string below the foreskin and another above it."
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	"And now cut the foreskin between those two ties."
E aprop extratz aquela.	"And now remove that (the foreskin)."
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	"And then untie the thread and cleanse the clotted blood, which has formed in the wound."
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	"And there is no need for the lower string around the foreskin except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the upper string only serves to keep the wound open when it is untied near the exit of the foreskin."
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	"And therefore, when you have tied the string above, it is necessary to elevate the penis upwards at its base so that it does not return to its original position and close the wound as we have said."
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	About the removal of foreskin from women
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	The foreskin in women is rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	"If any stone appears in that region, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods."
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	"One of them is if the woman's thighs are very close together."
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	"And another one is if you cannot find a woman who knows how to uncover whether she could have sex with the doctor when she is chaste, or if she is among married women."
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	"The third one is if you cannot find a woman who knows this craft, especially the operation concerning men."
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	"And the fourth one is that the location of the section about stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so it requires a preliminary section, and there is fear in that."
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	"But if necessity forces you to do this, then you should take a female doctor who knows well and is rarely embarrassed."
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	"But if you are deprived of that [a female doctor], then seek a clever and subtle physician, or present a mature midwife experienced in the deeds of women, or a woman who has some partition in this craft."
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	"So have that one [a female doctor or midwife] present, and command her to do all that you will order, from the examination about the stone at the beginning; for this reason: so that she may observe whether the woman is a virgin. If she is, then it is necessary that she puts her finger in the vulva of the woman and seeks the stone."
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	"So if she finds it, then remove her finger, and then command her to insert [a catheter] over that [the stone]."
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	"But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and examine for the stone, because by placing her left hand on the bladder, she will understand it well."
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	"So if she finds it, then gradually move her finger from the opening of the bladder to its parts, with the sum of her strength, until she arrives at the reason for the matter."
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	"And then insert [the catheter] over that position of the opening of the vagina where you have stopped and found the stone, and do not remove your finger from the stone until it has been removed."
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	"And the incision should be small at the beginning. Then insert the catheter over that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the size of the incision according to the quantity that you know will be expelled from there."
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	"And know that there are many species of stones. Some are small and large, some are round and sharp, some are long and round, and some have branches."
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	"So you will know how many species there are from that which you specify about what you want."
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	"And if you see blood flow, adjust the position of the catheter and leave it there for an hour until the blood has been absorbed. Then return to your operation so that the stone is expelled."
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	"And make sure you have prepared all of the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them during your operation."
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	"And if you see blood flow and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that has been cut, then place powder over that location and strain it with a fine and tight bandage. Do not repeat this; otherwise the woman will die. Leave the stone there and do not extract it."
E aprop cura la plagua.	"And then dress the wound."
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	"So once the acute bleeding has stopped some days later and the location has healed, then you return to your operation so that the stone is expelled."
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On Incision for a Strangulated Hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is an accumulation of moisture in the white cylinder that is left by the cord of the genitals containing the egg, and it is called cylinder.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes it is located within the abdominal wall itself, which nature prepares in advance at the time of birth of the child or before another pregnancy; and it is the cord of the genitals between the white cylinder we mentioned earlier, but this is not all.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The cause of this hernia is weakness in the area where it occurs, allowing the contents to protrude through and sometimes occurring due to blows received on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This moisture has various colors; it tends towards yellow or reddish or red, or it is black and earthy, or watery-white. This is what happens most often.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	The signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water has occurred are as follows: if it occurs in the white cylinder mentioned earlier, then the swelling appears elongated and somewhat inclined towards the length, like an egg shape, and the genitals appear because the moisture contains them on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the moisture is located in the abdominal wall itself, then the swelling appears round and separate from the testicle, and it is believed that it is another testicle.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the moisture is between the cord of the genitals and the white cylinder, then one can feel both sides clearly.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	To determine the color of the moisture, you should examine the color of the moisture in the swelling using a fine probe whose shape has been prepared. Based on what is seen at the tip of the probe, you can judge the nature of the moisture inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to treat it with iron (i.e. bloodletting), it is necessary that we command the patient to perform a thorough cleansing of their bowels if possible, and also to drink plenty of fluids.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And let him lie on his back on some causecloth, slightly elevated, and cover him with blankets.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then sit on the left side of the patient and command your assistant to stand on his right side. The assistant should stretch out his arm across the patient's groin towards the navel of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	"Then take a wide spatula and cut through the median raphe of the scrotum along its length near the penis."
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	"Then make an incision according to the method described above, keeping a sufficient distance from the line that marks the skin of the scrotum, until it reaches the white line encompassing the opening."
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	"Then strip him, observe and note well that you do not incise there; and when stripping him, part the skin as much as possible and examine it carefully with your eyes according to what is possible."
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	"Then make a wide perforation through the scrotum full of water and extract all the water."
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	"Then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps and stretch open the scrotum from above; and do not touch the median raphe of the scrotum, making the incision in such a manner as is possible for you."
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	"Then cut along its entire length or in pieces and especially if it is thick, for unless you examine the incision carefully, there is no guarantee that water will not return."
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	"But if the wound extends beyond its midline during your operation, then after you have completed the incision of the scrotum, return inside it and immediately join together the two lips of the median raphe of the scrotum with sutures, and then dress it as with other wounds until healed."
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	"And if you find the wound corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you ligate the vessels that are near the suspensiony ligament and remove the wound, and afterwards dress it with what has been said."
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	"But if water collects in two separate parts at times, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore incise that part according to what you have done with the other similarly; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then perform it."
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	"And then cleanse the blood and enter into the incisions with wool submerged in oil or rose oil. And pause outside with other wool that you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles and the miracle of the abdomen (the navel). And place it upon doubled cloths and powders, and tie those above with ligature made in this way:"
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	"And then take two cloths and fill them with wool carded in this way: and make the ends with which it is tied of cotton or wet wool, and attach them with a bandage to the fly of the breeches, and one of the ends shall take hold of the buttocks within the other, and the second shall take hold of the partition of the perineum, and two endings on both sides and two other endings above the thighs, and all tightness is adjusted in the fly of the breeches."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of an incision with iron; and take a scalpel-like cautery and incise the median raphe of the testicles with it, and heat it according to what has been recommended until the white scrotum containing water is revealed, and then take cautery in this way:"
e es asemblat a letra greca.	"And it resembles the letter gamma."
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	"And then pierce with that cautery, and heat until all moisture is discharged."
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	"And then stretch the scrotum with forceps and scrape it with forceps, and scrape it with a fine heated cautery; and incise it according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all moisture; and guard yourself that fire does not touch the wound."
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	"And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting without bleeding, and better than an operation with incision."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	"But if it happens to you that there is an aposteme caut in the time of incision or in the time of cautery, or bleeding occurs, then you should cure what opposes you for this, with cure which is suitable according to what has been said."
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	"But if the patient is timid and does not hope for a second operation because of its horrible nature, then perform perforation according to what has been recommended for this. And this is when you are certain, by that which has been said about significations, that that hernia is hydrocele."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	"And then you should make the patient sit upon some elevated chair, and then perforate the aposteme in its lowest part with a broad spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body."
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	"And let the opening be wide enough so that all water may run out."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	"And then press upon the place with cotton and tie it, and leave it, so that the remaining water may drain."
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	"And then dress it until the wound is healed."
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	"But if there is opposition to the evacuation of water at that time you perforate it: and this happens only because the white panniculus in the opening of the wound opposes and prevents the exit of water. Therefore, you should place a wick or instrument with which water can be extracted from hydroceles, as described earlier; or adjust a small tube into the opening of the wound."
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	"And know that water returns, and it becomes absorbed in about six months or less; and when it has become absorbed, then it should be perforated again in the same manner, for the patient will thus pass his days."
Capitol .lxiii.	**Chapter LXIII.**
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	"On Incision of a Carnal Hernia and Its Cure."
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in the section concerning this hernia, there is fear of losing it due to danger in most cases; therefore, I have seen its dismissal and it should be saved by this remedy.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you are reminded of the operation performed on that one and the species of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses are born in the bodies of those whose veins are compressed and this happens for many causes: either by acute painful congestion or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess follows the color of the body, but it is not accompanied by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	A thick yellowish abscess, whose color is dark and which has no sensation when touched
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it happens due to blockage of the arteries or inflammation of those areas that have already been perceived as having memory of it, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But what happens due to inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers, without needing to touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But what happens due to inflammation of a vein does not disperse from it for any reason despite compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species there may be an incision made and on the other flesh; and it is done thus: you incise the chain of veins and then stretch out the skin upwards to its openings, and remove the white matter from it, loosen the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them up, and also cut away the suspensory ligament that has been loosened from all its attachments to the skin.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the skin is already adhered to those flesh parts, then you must remove the skin and make an incision there.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion inside for any cause of the white matter, or between those that are between the vessels, then you must remove all that adhesion and make an incision with a round cut
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is native flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind it, then you must cut all that which belongs to it, and remove the skin as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, once your operation is completed, then you should fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and wine; and also cure it with another ointment inside so that it may heal.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of hernias that are due to wind.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Wind is an abscess enclosed by some enveloping substance like a bud with softening of the testicles. It becomes difficult to perform exercises and walk around due to this condition.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And the treatment for this ailment is through fear of that from which it is preceded by recall.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I must say operation in that according to what was first said.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should make an incision on the hernia above an elevated thigh; and then peel away the suspensory ligament of the testicles from its attachments on both sides; also tie up the chain of veins with your fingers, taking care not to squeeze them too hard. Then have another assistant help you extend the scrotum vigorously.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	"Then make an incision with a sharp scalpel through a transverse section on the right side of the vessels where they are exposed."
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	"And then remove all parts that we have mentioned earlier in the extraction of arrows, which are located on the temples."
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	"And then place in that area a needle with doubled thread and tie it at the first point where you saw the wound, and tie it again at the last one."
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	"And then cut that area in a straight section along the length of the body and remove what has accumulated from the foul and corrupted humidity."
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	"And then treat the wound with cure for other wounds where you want healthy flesh to be generated, because veins which nourish one of two testicles are affected by this."
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	"But if all the vessels are affected, then it is necessary that the testicles be removed or that they be tied off with the vessels, because they should be deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they should be cauterized, or else they will not be useful."
Capitol .lxv.	"Chapter 65."
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	"Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernias."
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	"The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation that occurs on the diaphragm expanded over the abdomen by the angles of the hole in the abdomen, allowing some intestines from that rupture to protrude through it."
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	"And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of an incision in it, and these two kinds occur due to many causes: namely, percussion, blows, coughing, crying out loudly, elevation caused by some heavy cause, or sneezing."
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	"And the symptom of that, when it is due to an extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly. It becomes a swelling inside the abdomen because the diaphragm presses upon the intestines."
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	"And the symptom of it is when it is due to a separation of the diaphragm, because at the beginning it suddenly causes intense pain; and it becomes a distinct swelling apparent near the navel or apparently gone, which is due to protrusion of the intestines, with the body of that protruding through the defect in the diaphragm."
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	"And sometimes the intestinal tissue is forgotten outside the intestines and this type of hernia is called 'incarcerated'.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	"And sometimes there is flatulence, and sometimes the intestines slip through the hole in the abdomen and get caught there, which causes great danger of illness. And sometimes it causes very painful pain, especially when pressed upon."
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	"And in the treatment of these kinds of illnesses with iron, there is fear because care must be taken not to cause further injury in that place."
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	"And the manner of operating on this is that you command the patient to reduce the intestines with his own hand into their natural position if they obey, and then cover them up quickly with a dressing between your hands, raising the edges."
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	"And then, after that, you stretch the cord which is above the cord of the testicles to that side and incise it throughout its length, and then place two clamps on both sides of the incision according to your needs to open the incision with them."
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	"And if the incision is made as much as is possible so that no part of that wound may be forgotten."
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	"And then, you dissect away those membranes which are near the cord of the testicles until the white, hard abdominal wall is discovered on each side."
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	"Then you insert your finger into that which is the testicle, between the white abdominal wall, which is near the wound of the cord and behind the second membrane, and separate with it any adherence that may be there."
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	"And then move with your hand the cord of the testicles to its proper place, and at the same time extend the white abdominal wall upwards with your left hand, elevate the wound with the membrane at the side of the incision; and command the assistant to extend the wound upwards while you dissolve any adhesions behind with cold water."
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	"And then carefully examine with your fingers that there is no cause of the intestines being wrapped in the white abdominal wall."
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	"But if you find any cause there, then remove it to the abdomen outside."
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	"And then you take a needle with a large thread of catgut through which you pass it behind the membrane, which is below the cord of the testicles, and cut off the ends of the thread that protrude from the membrane so that there are four threads. Then place some of them over each other in the form of a cross; and tie with them the membrane of which we have spoken, which is near the cord of the testicles, with strong tying of two parts."
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	"And then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them with a strong knot, ensuring that none of the vessels that nourish those parts can transmit any cause through which an abscess may arise."
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	"And then place another knot over the first one at a distance of three fingers; and then these two knots will leave behind the membrane which is near the cord of the testicles as much as the thickness of your finger, and cut off the rest around it in a round manner, leaving the wound open."
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	"And then make an incision on the side of the cord of the testicles through which blood and pus may flow out in the manner that we have described earlier."
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	"And then apply lanolin soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the stitching that we have recommended (and sometimes cauterize the white membrane which we mentioned near the incision of the blood vessel, for many times this happens) and leave the stitches so that they fall by themselves."
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	"But if the closing of the wound is delayed, then hot water should be poured over it and placed on it until it falls according to what we have said."
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the wound with other methods for treating wounds until it is healed."
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI
De hernia ventosa.	About ventral hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, there is nothing that can be burned with hot irons to treat it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	"The first days said that it is done thus as we have recounted in the case of hernia with urine; which is to tie the vessels near the section with ease and speed; and immediately seal in the middle place around the abscess with whatever works that."
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	"And treat the plague according to what we have said until it is healed."
Capitol .lxvii.	"What is chapter lxvii?"
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	"The dressing done on the veins"
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	"Sometimes there is rupture in the veins as we have said, and inflammation occurs."
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	"And do not give any cause for the bowels to the jenny; and if you do, it is little; and returns in all hours."
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	"But if the time is prolonged with this, an adjusted fissure occurs in the scrotum through which the bowel enters the scrotum; and this happens because of the extension of the scrotum which is in the veins as we have said, which causes the scrotum to be softened, and the place becomes abscessed and inflamed."
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	"And the treatment for this is with caustic as it is preceded by its narrative."
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	"And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: that the patient lies on his back between two pillows, and immediately cuts off the swollen area of the ruptured abscesses inflamed by section through the width of three fingers."
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	"And then strengthen the scrotum with cold water that is below the neck until it is exposed."
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	"Then take a piece of cloth and place it over the inflamed area of the scrotum, and press it against the front of the abdomen."
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	"And then cut off both inflated areas at the end of the scrotum's vein, and adjust them with stitching one to the other."
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	"And then extract the end of the vein, and do not insert anything into the scrotum at all, nor extend it, nor any other cause such as you may know in the treatment of intestinal hernia."
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	"And then cure it with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the skin, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the scrotum is contracted and the swelling of rupture is not adjusted."
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	"And caustic is better in this location, because it is closer to health."
Capitol .lxviii.	"Chapter lxviii."
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	"On the softening of the neck of the testes."
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	"Often in some men, the chain of the testicles is softened because the flesh between them is softened. It is said that this is the cause."
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	"Therefore it is necessary for the one who seeks care to make the patient lie down on their side, and cut away all the softened chain above the natural one; then immediately join the lips with stitches."
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	"And if desired, first excise the excess of the softened chain with three or four stitches and firm suture."
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	"Then cut between the sutures, and afterwards cure it with treatment for other sores until it heals and the skin falls off."
Capitol .lxix.	"Chapter LXIX."
De castracio.	"Of castration."
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	"Know that castration is condemned in our law, but for the sake of knowledge it is permissible for me to remember this in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two methods, one of which is so that this may be known by the science of medicine when it happens, how the treatment of it should be performed; and the other method is because we often have need of castration in other beasts for our own profit through them, as with dogs, goats, pigs, and similar beasts."
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	"And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by tearing or by cutting with an incision."
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	"But in the one which is performed by tearing, the manner of performing it is that we seize the beast in cold water until its testicles are softened and relaxed and hanging."
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	"And then take them with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear loose from the touch."
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	"But in castration performed by incision and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand."
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	"And then cut the suspensory ligament, and make an incision above each one with a single cut so that two openings are produced."
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	"And then cut those that appear protruding."
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	"And do not touch the scrotum with any instrument, but only use the sharp scalpel which is on the vessels."
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	"And this manner of castration by tearing is better because it leaves no cause for the testicles so that the beast desires copulation."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	"And then dress the wound so that it heals."
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of Hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	"Hermaphrodism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in what should be the space between the testicles, where there are two testicles that resemble a vulva with skin at their base."
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	"And sometimes urine flows from where it should be the cord of the testicles."
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	"But in women, it is one type: that is when the vulva over the pubis resembles two testicles of a man, somewhat diminished at their connection to the fornix like the penis of a man and two testicles."
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	"And its treatment is of three types: two for men and one for women."
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	"And it is necessary that you make an incision in those attached flesh where the opening appears and then dress it with the dressing of other wounds."
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	"And in the second type of men where urine flows from where it should be the cord of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation for it."
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXII.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of Lentigo and protruding flesh due to causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	"Freckles are naturally attached and appear as raised spots, which are caused by gazing too much and observing carefully. And sometimes they are larger in some women to the extent that they are spread out like those of men and even enter into copulation."
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, it is necessary that you grasp the excessiveness of freckles with your hand or with an ointment and cut them.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	"And do not finish cutting off completely, especially on the surface of the skin, so that bleeding does not occur."
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	"And then dress it with the dressing for wounds so that it heals."
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But flesh that is born is flesh that grows in the horrorific of the mother until it fills that space, and usually appears at the fornix according to its resemblance to excrement (and for this reason some people first called it “excremental disease”); therefore, we should cut it like we cut freckles and dress it so that it heals."
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	"Hemorrhoids are when the vulva is not perforated or when it has a small opening."
E es o natural o accidental.	"And they can be either natural or accidental."
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	"Accidental hemorrhoids are caused by previous illness and are made either by attached flesh that is born or by a thin scalp or thick skin."
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	"And they are formed either on the surface of the mother's pudendum, or on its sides, or above it, or below it, and prevent copulation and pregnancy and childbirth, and usually prevent menstruation."
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	"And the diagnosis of hemorrhoids is made by observation of the vulva if the opening is visible, but if not, you should examine it with your fingers or with a speculum."
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	"But if the opening is due to a thin scalp and appears between the two lips of the vulva, then you should cut it with scissors."
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	"And if it is paused on both sides of the pudendal lips, then press your fingers at both sides close to its edges."
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	"And the woman should be on her back with her buttocks spread wide, and then extend both lips of the vulva with force so that the thin scalp is broken and the opening is uncovered."
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	"And then take some wool moistened in oil and press it over that place, and leave it there overnight so that the wound does not adhere."
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	"But if the scalp is thick and coarse, then you should cut it with a broad or sharp scalpel made of myrtle."
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	"But if the opening is due to attached flesh, then suspend that with an ointment and cut it."
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	"And use medications that stop bleeding without biting, such as aloes, dragon's blood, and mallow mixed with egg white."
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	"And then insert a wide lead cannula to prevent the wound from adhering lightly."
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	"And keep it like that for several days and apply a poultice of dried flaxseed."
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	"And then dress it with the other dressing for consolidation until it is healed."
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	"But sometimes it happens that during childbirth other flesh grows naturally in the mother's pudendum, and then you should cut it like this:"
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	"But if this is due to a hard boil in the mother's pudendum, then do not use any iron instrument in any way."
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids and tail and red boil that occur in the vulva of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	"Hemorrhoids are caused by many veins in that area, from which blood flows continuously; and when these hemorrhoids become old and hard, they are called piles."
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	"Now I have mentioned the types of hemorrhoids and their characteristics, and let me say which ones require treatment and which do not."
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	"I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are in the front of the anus and cannot be felt, there is no need for treatment with iron."
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	"But those which are at the opening of the anus and can be felt, are those that require treatment."
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	"And it is necessary to put the woman in a warm bath and then extend her anus with tweezers or rough cloth, and incise those with the scissors."
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	"And then sprinkle over them the flows of blood from one of the incised veins without biting it, such as cinnamon and similar to that."
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	"And then let her rest on her back for an hour, and then immerse her in warm water."
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	"And if the bleeding persists, then make her drink a decoction of sumac and buckthorn and oak bark and similar things."
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	"And also take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with that over her back."
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	"And if the bleeding is stopped, then it is good. And if not, then make it adhere with two compresses, and to the nipples without incision."
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And also take wool and immerse it in juice of coriander or juice of rue or juice of guaiacum with white wine, and make it adhere to the place. And then cure the place with egg white until it is healed."
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	"But if it is of harsh regard, then you must incise that which appears to you of that which I have said in the above manner."
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And cure it until it is healed."
Capitol .lxxiv.	"Chapter 74."
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of a hollow accident in the hand.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many kinds of accidents happen in the hand, such as cancer and stone apostumes and ulcers and adhesions and serpents and fistulas and hemorrhoids and wounds and other apostumes.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	"And I have already said these illnesses and their kinds and their signs and their cures in the division."
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	"But it is necessary that I say in this treatise of cauterization how one does it when it happens in the hand if it is of those apostumes that heal, and if you want to know in what manner the operation is done with iron."
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	"Therefore you must consider if the pain of the apostume at its beginning is sharp with percussion and swelling and fever, and if it becomes reddened and if it seems to catch on something, then do not cut it with perforation, but cure it with what helps maturation until the sharpness of the accident ceases."
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	"But then you must make her lie on her back on two pillows; and let her recline on her two sides and adjust her feet toward the foot of the bed a little below the navel, and let her thighs be expanded, and tie her arms away from her breasts, and bind each with cloth appropriately."
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	"And then the midwife follows on the right side and administers the instrument with which the perforation of the hand is done, whose form will come in those causes that they will do later."
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	"And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you put on the wrist of the woman's hand, and only let what enters the hand from the instrument be the wrist of the hand and the sick part."
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	"But if the instrument is larger than the wrist of the hand, then you must put poultices on the texture of the wrist of the hand so that it may be prohibited the entrance of any instrument into the wrist of the hand."
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	"And it is necessary that you put the point of the instrument on the left side above and that the one administering holds the instrument and turns the point until the perforation of the hand is done."
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	"And when the exit appears, and it is touched with the hand and is swollen and moist, then you must dry it with a linen cloth."
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	"And when the healing is evacuated, then you must put in the wound a wool wick immersed in rose oil or green oil with some astringency; and press the bandage on the section of the wrist of the hand."
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	"And then put on the hand, and on the wound, clean wool immersed in water in which mulberries have been boiled."
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"Then let it be cured for two days with this ointment that is convenient until it is healed."
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	"And sometimes the hand and the wound are washed with water and honey, and sometimes with water in which rose leaves or long pepper has been boiled, and then it returns to the ointment."
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	"And if the wound is deep in the hand and infected, then you must be prohibited from curing it with iron, having cure of it with what we have said in this division."
Capitol .lxxv.	"Chapter 75."
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	"To teach midwives in what manner they should medicate the living babies that come out deformed according to figure."
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	"It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs, and it is that when you see the woman pushing at the openings below and desires to smell the air, and then she is comforted by what is coming out on top of her, and hastens the exit of the baby, then you would know that this birth is according to nature's figure, and the baby exits headfirst, and the second one with its arms or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord."
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	"Therefore when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the belly of the baby be pressed so that the embryo comes out gently when it comes out headfirst, and the second one with its arms or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord, and is cleaned from those superfluities with good cleansing."
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	"But that which is other than this birth is unnatural and blameworthy, for when the baby comes out on its feet and its body comes out in front of its head and its feet, and one hand or the foot is out, or the head and one hand are out, or the belly is out, and it turns its face up and has similar blameworthy figures."
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	"It is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and guard against error and deception."
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	"And here we show all figures of those, and what kind they are in those so that it may be signified by this and stood upon."
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	"When the feet are out headfirst by nature's error, and that one is violent on the woman and its birth is difficult, and you see its strength already weakened, then do this: have those women hold it, and evaporate its congealed blood with ground fenugreek and moist oil."
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	"Then the midwife should insert her little spatula and split it with that, or cut it with her nail until what is in it of moisture comes out."
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	"And press the woman's belly until the fetus comes out."
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	"But if it does not come out, then have the woman be rinsed with poultice of pitch and poultice of fenugreek with hot water."
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	"And then command her to be pressed again and have her sneeze with condition; and close its mouth and nose for an hour, because the fetus will soon forget."
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	"If both hands of the patient are forgotten at the beginning, then you must return them gently, one by one."
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	"But if the patient does not obey, then pause the woman on one knee and lift her feet up, and then quickly hit the knee on the ground. And the woman must be careful not to fall due to the blow."
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	"And if the hands are not properly returned and the patient dies, then cut them off and remove the remnants of the fetus or tie the body with cloth and remove it evenly, because that will be forgotten."
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	"Of the extraction of the embryo from its seat."
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	"When the fetus is lying on its seat, then you must push those down, and immediately turn the fetus gently, and immediately that you equalize it, and immediately that you grasp one foot and gradually extend it."
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	"But when it is extracted inside the womb, then you must command the patient to squeeze, and make that sneeze with condition, because she will be forgotten if God wishes."
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	"And if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then you must gradually return the fetus inside until you pause it according to its natural figure, because that will be forgotten at that time with easy extraction."
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	"And if it is prohibited with all that we have recommended, then take some muslin and dissolved gum Arabic, and grind them well in the mortar with good percussion, and immediately line the woman's womb, the lower part of her belly with it."
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	"And immediately make that sit in warm water until she achieves hypothermia."
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	"And when the parts of it are cleaned, then do fumigation with myrtle and immediately apply compresses to her."
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	"And when she has had fumigation for an hour, then make her sit on a chair and immediately make her sneeze and extend the mouth of it, and remove that, and apply gentle pressure to the lower part of her belly with a compress, because the fetus will be forgotten shortly."
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	"Extraction of the fetus on its fontanelles and membranes."
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	"When the fetus is extracted in this manner, then gently insert its membranes gradually; and also let the woman lay on her back with her hips raised up, and that should be lying on the bed, and complete its membranes."
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	"And also press gently on her belly gradually, and also extract what is left behind her ears until it is prepared in the lower part."
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	"And if the fetus is not forgotten, then take her hips and move them violently, and also press what is on the hypochondria gradually until the fetus comes out from above."
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	"And also insert its membranes and gently twist the fetus gradually, and command the woman to squeeze until the fetus is forgotten."
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	"Lateral extraction of the fetus by one of its membranes."
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	"It should be gently reduced with her hand, but if she cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and make her walk."
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	"And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and strike her buttocks violently with your hand, and immediately administer remedies that you know and have recommended of mucilages."
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	"And if childbirth has come, then make her sit on a chair and immediately study the reduction of the hand and twist the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to press herself until it is forgotten."
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	"Extraction of the fetus over the occupit with its membranes expanded and its face towards its mother's back."
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	"It is necessary for the midwife to have her hand on the fetus and also turn it little by little, and make that come out with ease."
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	"And when it is coming out and when it has been twisted, then pause on its crown what we have recommended of oil and of mucilages."
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	"And also command her to push little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sit on a chair and command her to lean over the right side, and also command her to press herself; and make her sneeze conditionally."
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	"Prepared exit of the fetus over the side [of the uterus]."
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	"When it becomes horrible for the mother in this manner, consider her and then incise the second one with your nail until it is emptied of humidity."
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	"And if the fetus is suspended over its face and occupit, then incise that of the amniotic sac so that it may not be retained and die."
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	"And also push the fetus downwards until it pauses according to what is necessary, and command the woman to press herself several times, and it will be forgotten with gentle extraction if God wills it."
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	"Exit of twins or multiple fetuses."
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	"Know that many times twins are born, and sometimes three or four, but that is strange and rarely happens; but their cause is natural and not violent."
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"And count them if they are multiplied, there should be one amniotic sac for each of them, and they are separated by chiasmus, distinguish them by the ligament in the umbilical cord of each of them. And sometimes they come out just like one fetus through natural gentle extraction, and sometimes they come out through non-gentle extraction as we have recommended."
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	"And if some of them are difficult to deliver and come through what we have said about the unnatural figures, then care for them as we have recommended."
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	"And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with diligence, and acts according to all figures as it is prepared for her in leading towards health."
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	"Reminder of what forms in the matrix from embryos and aborts."
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	"Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten are formed in the mother's womb, and it has been verified that one woman aborted seven, and another ten all formed, which cause was made by the measurement of the glorious wise men."
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	"And also it is necessary that the midwife knows well how to examine this small form and therefore pause according to what is necessary."
Capitol .lxxvi.	"Chapter 76."
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	"Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead."
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	"When you care for the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it has not come out yet, and you wish to use an operation by hand, then it is necessary that you consider if the woman is of sound virtue and not affected by any of the accidents by which she might suffer harm."
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	"Then it is necessary that the woman be placed on the bed on her back and her head reclined downwards and her buttocks raised."
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	"And the assistant should hold her from both sides or be lying in the bed to prevent the body from stretching out during the extraction of the fetus."
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	"And also you should moisten the mouth of the mother with oil and mucilage of marshmallow, fenugreek, and linseed."
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	"And also the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucilages, and also insert her hand gently into the mother's womb, and also search with her hand for where the hooks will be placed on the fetus."
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	"And the convenient places for this are: then you should consider if the fetus is prepared to be delivered headfirst, and therefore place the hooks in its heels, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or jaw, or furcula, or nearby the ribs, or below the hypochondria."
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the discharge is over his feet, then in the groin or middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And one must have the hook in the right hand and pause its curve in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, inserting the hand gently and keeping the hook in one of those places we mentioned earlier until reaching the cause of the blockage.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then pause and place another hook, or the third one if necessary, in such a way that there is attraction equally on all sides, and not only extension according to its own rectitude.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be moved in every part so that the discharge of it is alleviated just as it is done in the extraction of a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary that the extension be softened in water; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife must grease some of her fingers with oil and insert them carefully and move them around with the water that is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore if the part of the fetus has been expelled, then the hooks must be changed to one that is larger; and do this until the entire fetus has been expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is already expelled but cannot be reduced by traction of it, then a cloth should be wrapped around that one and immediately cut it at its junction or at the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And similarly you must do with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large or there is difficulty in its expulsion, or it is in a caput fixed position, then one must insert spatulas between those bones and cleave the head and extract the water, or dilate that with an instrument called "alundat" whose form will come along with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which follows this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do if the fetus is naturally large headed: and then you must cut it with an emollient or dilate it with an alundat as we have said; and immediately extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is expelled but is obstructed by the foramen magnum, then you must cut it until the humidity that is in the pituitary gland is drained out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if there is no complication or obstruction to its expulsion, then you must cut the head as much as it is possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the left side of the abdomen is inflamed or it is in a hydrops condition, then you must pierce it until the humidity that is within it is drained out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is lying on its back, then the traction of it will be easy and directing it towards the mother's vulva will also be easy.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is obstructed near the abdomen and the pituitary gland, then you must extract that with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and then cut the abdomen and the pituitary gland until that water flows out of them.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are obstinate and the head returns back, then insert your left hand; but if the mother's vulva is obstructed, then insert your hand into the lower abdomen and encircle the head with it, and pull it towards the mother's vulva, and immediately insert a hook or two hooks and pull it with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's vulva is obstructed by a hard clots of blood which has accumulated there, then you must not rub it over it. Rather, you must administer an injection of hot water to dissolve the thick and fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply plasters; and follow up with the patient in waters that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is lying on its side, then if it is possible, you should turn it; and administer to it what we have said for a live fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	But if that is not possible, then cut it in pieces and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And you must not leave any cause behind in the uterus.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, then administer to her what we have said about the treatment of hard clots of blood that may have occurred in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is bleeding, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman whose uterus contained a dead fetus, and later she became pregnant again, but the second time also the fetus was dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened that for a long time there was a hard clot of blood in her uterus; it became inflamed and started to expel, but the fetus died.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat her for this, and treated her for a long time, but the illness did not improve.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied to her some plasters with strong attraction, and about three days later she expelled one bone, and after a few more days she expelled another bone. And I was greatly amazed, because there are no bones in the uterus.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore I healed her illness and extracted from her many bones, the woman living in good health ever since, except for some slight bleeding.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not affirm that this is strange, but rather it shows the knowledge and skill of the doctor who with his hands administers treatment to cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments necessary for extracting the fetus
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of forceps with which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a forceps in which the tongs are attached to two pieces of wood.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this forceps must be more slender and made either of iron or brass or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let each piece of wood be two fingers wide and the edge of each one a finger's width apart, and its length one and a half palms; and in the middle of the two pieces of wood there are two joints for fitting together these pieces of wood which are already fastened, and their length is about one and a half palms, and their width two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mother's vulva so that it is opened with them when you turn the two prescribed forceps.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form, but more slender and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Let it be made of brass or boxwood according to the shape of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But instead at its end let there be two additions like this: and the length of each addition is about one palm, and their width two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with these, then have the woman lie on her back with her feet raised up high, and open what is between the lips of it.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps attached according to how much you want of the opening of the mother's vulva where you want the uterus to be opened.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of forceps described by the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of a probe with which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of a hook with which the large head is grasped
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is like a forceps with teeth at the end like this: and sometimes it is made long like this forceps according to this form, like this: with teeth like those of a rake with which it is inserted and grasps.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of a small hook:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	"A shape having a spine."
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	"A shape having two spines."
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	"A forceps with teeth that close and hold the baby's head in place."
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	"A spatula having two ends where the head is severed."
Forma de dos espatums latz:	"Form of two spatulas lying side by side."
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	"The more these instruments are exercised, and the more species of them there are prepared by the artisans, the easier their operation becomes, and the greater the number of people they benefit."
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	"And you should not neglect any of those instruments, for the need for them is not excusable."
De extraccio de la segondina.	"For extracting the afterbirth."
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	"When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you must order the midwife to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with conditions, and press your hand over her mouth and nose. If it comes out by this means, so much the better."
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	"And if not, then take a cloth and pierce it with a hole in the middle, and put it over the mother's mouth, having first burned some herbs such as calamint, rue, aneth, chamomile, Arabic scordium, cassia wood, and Saint John's wort."
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	"All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the cloth, and then placed on the fire."
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	"And immediately place a reed cane into the mother's mouth, and hold it there until the steam comes to the concave part of her."
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	"And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the afterbirth will be expelled with great speed."
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	"But if even with this treatment the afterbirth is not expelled, then you should order the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or an emulsion of althea, and then insert it into the womb and search for the afterbirth with that, and when she has found it, take it out little by little. But if it is adherent in the entrance of the mother, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the afterbirth, remove it little by little according to rectitude so that the mother does not suffer from violent traction."
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	"It is necessary that they be changed on the right and left sides with ease."
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	"And then it should be adjusted in the amount of traction, for it will obey and evacuate itself from adhesions."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	"And if the mother's mouth is obstructed, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and the medication of the cloth with herbs."
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	"But if it is not expelled with all the causes we have recommended, then be sure not to weary yourself in repeated attempts at traction, but rather what has come out from there to the mother's mouth should be placed on the thing of the woman, and then dress that with grease and tetrafarmacon; for that will cause it to rot there after a few days and will be dissolved and expelled."
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	"But when it has rotted, it causes bad odor to the head and stomach, and that leads to illness. And then fumigations and appropriate remedies should be administered for that."
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	"But some of the Ancients used fumigation with nasturtiums and dried figs."
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	"Form of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated due to the retention of menses and afterbirth:"
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	"It should be made of glass or earthenware."
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	"And the subtle extremity should be placed in the womb and the wide extremity over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed on the embers of the fire."
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	"And keep that there until that fumigation is consumed, and repeat another one."
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	"On the treatment of the unperforated anus of a child:"
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	"Many children are born with their anuses unperforated, which are often narrow and closed."
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	"Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to perforate that closure with her finger; and if not, then perforate it with a sharp spatula, being careful not to touch the intestine."
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	"And then place over it wool soaked in wine and oil, and treat it with grease until healed."
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	"But if you fear that it is closed again, then place in the anus a cannula for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate."
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	"And it also happens that the anus becomes closed due to consolidation of a plug or an abscess. Therefore, that consolidation should be incised and then treated with what we have said about treatment and lead."
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	"On the treatment of fistulas that develop in this place:"
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	"The fistulas that develop in the lower part of the buttocks are usually hard and thick, which develop near the anus or in the space between the two buttocks."
E es una fistula o motas.	"And it is one fistula or more."
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	"And when that hardness has become ancient and corroded by moisture, it is usually accompanied by offensive white pus or subtle putrefaction. And sometimes there are penetrating fistulas in these fistulas."
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	"And these penetrate through what comes out of them through the exit and through windiness. And sometimes the condition is that of exit, and often worms come out from them."
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	"And sometimes there are penetrating fistulas in the space that penetrate into the bladder and into the urethra. And these penetrations also occur into the junction of the vulva and into the anus."
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	"And that which indicates a penetrating fistula into the anus and a non-penetrating one is when you insert your finger into the anus, and when there is not tortuosity, insert a thin probe of earthenware or iron into the fistula."
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	"But if there is tortuosity in that one, then insert into it a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair on your finger."
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	"And if you do not feel it at all and there is no evidence of exit or worms or windiness from the anus, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating. And then proceed to treatment."
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	"And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra, then its sign is the exit of urine from it. And prohibition of it until that place has healed with medicine."
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	"But if it is penetrating into the vulva or into the bone and accompanied by pain in the area, then its sign is that a probe passed into it here does not have tortuosity. And there is pain in the area of the bone; and there is always putrefaction from it; and no medication is beneficial for it, nor can it be consolidated with grease."
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	"And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure. And the treatment of these is difficult and beyond the ability of many physicians."
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	"But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is hoped for according to what I will recommend to you, and what I have already said and proven."
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	"And it is that the condition affects you between your buttocks, mainly over the two bones, elevates the cheeks of the buttocks internally, and inclines the vulva towards its belly. And then insert a probe of lead or earthenware if there is tortuosity in the fistula, until you know where the probe passes."
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	"And if that condition affects around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into the anus."
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if you feel the probe already penetrating through your finger itself, other than what you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then know for certain that it is penetrating. And do not treat it there, because there is no healing of it, as we have said."
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	"However, some say that it is beneficial in certain cases."
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	"For the treatment in which improvement is hoped, you should cauterize with fire subtly according to the width of the fistula, as is described above, and insert that heated metal into the fistula until it reaches around the bone; and repeat this process two or three times until you know that all those flesh tissues surrounding the fistula have been burnt, which resemble a bird's feather quill."
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	"And then dress that with damp cloths wrapped in wool until all those burnt flesh tissues have healed, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it has healed, good; but if not, at that time it will not heal with any other treatment."
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	"And if the probe enters and does not penetrate within the aforementioned opening which is in the anus, and there is between that and the probe a veil of skin or membrane, then close up that fistula so that its surface area matches the thickness of the probe; then cut off the probe at the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it dried with the probe inside the fistula until the section reaches the place where the end of the probe had reached, and through the probe it is freed and removed."
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	"And then cleanse those flesh tissues that resemble a bird's feather quill with the cautery without breaking any of them due to some cause."
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	"But if pus starts flowing between you and your operation while dissecting those flesh tissues, then it is good that it should be cauterized with fire or with a sharp instrument, because cauterizing with fire has two advantages: it is an adjustment of those flesh tissues that have adhered, and it is evacuation of the pus, and drying of the moisture."
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	"And then treat it with damp cloths wrapped in wool or fine linen until the place becomes warm, and at that time treat the wound with soft flesh-generating and consolidating ointments."
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	"And these are medicines in which astringency and drying are predominant; when the wound has healed, it is restored and there will be no recurrence."
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	"But if the fistula has already reached the perineum and is elongated from the surface of the skin, then insert the probe into the anus and explore with it."
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	"And then if the probe meets and there is between it and the veil of skin or membrane an obstruction to penetration, then it is not an operation on that site but rather through trust and hope."
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	"And there are three ways to deal with this: either cauterize it in the way we have described; or dry it up until it achieves concavity so that you can enter your probes and perform the cure proposed; and do not proceed with cutting lest you injure the contents of the colon, and thus cause discomfort through a surgical intervention without consent. And then treat it with what has been said because it will be healed quickly if done correctly. Or else dissect that veil and clean out that pus which dries up within the anus in the way we have described, either with a probe or with another instrument of sharp point; and then cleanse those fistulous flesh tissues which are in the section through cautery. And then make sure to restore all the wound with cutting, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open at the partition of the anus, and pus continues to flow from it."
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	"And some fistulas are ended in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it goes towards the side of the anus around the surface of the skin with the cord and the margin of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated tip, which is like a needle for preparing hearts in this shape:"
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	"and insert it into that vein wrapped in veins or around those; and then insert the probe with a thread into the fistula until it achieves concavity."
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	"But if it penetrates into the margin of the anus backwards, then you extract that thread from that tract in such a way that you insert your little finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and tie the two ends together, and burn each one separately, and leave it like that for one or two days. And when you incise the thread in the flesh, burn it well so that those flesh tissues which are between the two ends of the thread and which have been injured may be healed."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	"And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed."
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way you are prepared to do so, but do not do it too deeply into the perineum, lest you injure the colon. And then treat it until it is healed."
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	"The shape of the spatula used to split open the fistula is like this: its curvature is very sharp and the other end is not sharp, so that you do not injure anything unnecessary, as happens sometimes."
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	"About the suturing of hemorrhoids from which blood flows in the incision of those."
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	"Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: for some are between the buttocks and resemble coal, or else those which have the appearance of fatty tumors."
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	"And some are small and large, and blood flows from them continuously, and they are singular or multiple, and they are outside the anus or at its extremities."
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	"But those hemorrhoids that are outside the anus are according to the laws of little moisture, from which yellow water or a little blood flows continuously, and they are according to the color of the body."
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	"The treatment for those hemorrhoids that are inside the anus is to have the patient sit down and squeeze so that the anus empties out and the hemorrhoids appear to you."
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	"Then you take hold of them with forceps or with your fingers and suspend them, and then incise them at their roots."
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	"But if the forceps do not hold them because of the moisture and softness of those hemorrhoids, then take them with rough cloth or with cotton or with a wool pad, and extract them with your fingers, and then incise them and sprinkle some powdered myrrh on them at the incision so that they may adhere to them instead of cauterizing; or else cauterize them according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterization."
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"And then treat those with another cure until they are healed."
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	"And if the anus does not obey to evacuation, then have the patient rinse with a small rinsing syringe and wash it with water that is in the anus so that it may easily evacuate when the patient squeezes."
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is light, and it is because you take them with your fingernail or with forceps and incise them, and then treat them with what has been said until they are healed."
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	"And if you make an incision, then you must administer a suture to them in this way: take thread wrapped and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from the parts above and make the thread penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap both ends of the thread around the part below the needle, and tie the hemorrhoid tightly, and cut the thread."
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	"And do this to all of them, and leave one and do not tie it, so that the excess blood may flow from that one."
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	"And then apply over the anus a cloth dipped in rose oil or cerate, and have the patient rest on their back."
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then let that one enter what box; and when it's closed, care for those with gentleness or with another cure until they are healed."
De curacio de fistulas.	"On the treatment of fistulas."
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	"Very often, fistulas occur due to excessive dryness or by nature's constriction."
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	"And since those remedies are old and do not work in this medicine, you should now use a spatula point or your fingernail to penetrate into the fistulas so that they become humid and then remove the pus on top of them, which prevents consolidation. Then treat them until they are consolidated."
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	"Now you remove as much pus as possible with the first entrance so that it does not sanctify and they are healed. Then treat them until they are healed."
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	"On the treatment of haemorrhoids, this is the key:"
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	"Know that haemorrhoids are like keys and if they are not red, they resemble the head of a nail. They occur throughout the body but more so in areas near the buttocks and genitals, where they cause pain."
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	"And then you should excise what resembles the head of the key with scissors or a nail clipper, and remove it from its root. Then treat it."
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	"If you wish, cauterize the second one that is precedent in its chapter."
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	"Verruca is a small, rough, fistulated elevation on the surface of the body, often seen in many children."
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	"The treatment for it is to stretch and excise that, or shave it with a file or tweezers until it bleeds."
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	"And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or with an acute medicine, as we have said."
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	"And already these growths and non-growths should be eradicated using the instrument that I will now mention."
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	"Molluscum is a small, fatty or fistulated elevation on the surface of the body, occurring mostly on the face. When it is rubbed against, it feels like an ant bite and it spreads around the body."
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	"The treatment for it is to take a quill of an owl or eagle feather and make it strong. Place the feather on the molluscum so that its circle encloses the parts around it. Then rotate your hand with the quill to excise what is around the molluscum, pressing down on the skin, and eradicate the molluscum from its root."
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish, do this using a needle made of bronze or iron as follows:"
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	"The opening of the urinary canal should be drawn out with care, closed (so that it is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that the said part can be washed and rinsed."
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	"And if you wish to cauterize the wound as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery."
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	"Regarding the shape of the instruments used for giving Communion."
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	"Some Communion wafers are made of silver or pewter or melted lead; and sometimes they are made in various sizes according to those who are administering them, for the one used in the care of small children should be small; and those for sick people or the dying, their wafers should also be small."
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	"The shape of Communion wafers is large and few:"
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	"The head of the cannula through which the purse is tied should be wide in this manner; and let it be at that distance where the purse is tied, as you see fit."
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	"And the bottom end of the probe, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (i.e. not open) with a certain amount of subtlety; and on one side of it there are two grooves, and on the other side there is one groove, and the width of the groove should correspond to the thickness of the ray or probe, according as it is thicker or thinner."
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	"And let the bag in which medicines are placed for urinary tract disorders or made from sheep's skin, and its opening should be one palm wide."
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	"And let it be pierced with many holes as it is rolled up; and the space between the holes should be about the thickness of a finger."
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	"And appropriate put into those holes strong strings of flax thread which are made of ten threads, or wind them around them; and fasten the bag with that; and when the bag is placed in it, tighten it at the head of the wafer between two distances with strong constriction, and crimp it with that each string: But know that the quality of crimping it is such that you fill the medicine bag which has been heated according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and see to it that it is not too hot nor too cold."
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	"And then the patient should lie on their back and elevate their hips up high, and place beneath them one cover upon which will be the bed or cloth; and appropriate anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or egg albumen or fenugreek mucilage or similar substances; and appropriate insert it into the anus gently; and then the assistant takes the bag and squeezes it strongly two or three times until all that is in the probe is expelled from the bowel; and then remove the probe, and the patient lifts their hips up against the wall."
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	"And if the medicine forces that out, hold it until it stops flowing; and if they sleep with it like that all night long, it is better for their recovery."
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	"But if you cauterize it in cases of diarrhea and abdominal pain where the cautery comes out with pus, then repeat the cautery until it is healed."
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	"And if there are hemorrhoids or ulcerated anal fissures, then the probe should be very fine and smooth like those with which children are cauterized."
De curacio de las plaguas.	"Regarding the treatment of plagues."
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	"I have already said in the division on the treatment of plague what was necessary for the book, and I say thus the treatment of those with more severity and medicines according to their degree."
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	"Therefore, I say that plague is differentiated according to what part of the body the plague affects and according to the location on which the plague appears."
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	"And the causes for which plague often occurs are such as injury by stone, or incision by sword or knife, or piercing with lance, club, arrow, or other similar causes."
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	"But plague that occurs in the different parts of the body are such as plague that affects the head, neck, chest, belly, thigh, and similar to those of the limbs."
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	"And I am recounting the treatment of some plague because this reasoning and rule apply to other plague as well."
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	"And I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory of those that are compound will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	"Therefore, I say that when a simple head wound occurs and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from an injury by stone or similar, and the chain has broken only on one side and it is large and you suspect that there may be an abscess forming later on that patient, then immediately perform trepanation of the cephalic vein and flebotomy; do not delay this. And extract from that blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other cause prohibits flebotomy, especially if little blood comes out of the wound."
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	"And the flebotomy should be on the opposite side from where the wound is located; and keep the patient from being hit, drinking wine or strong drinks, and eating heavy foods."
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	"But if due to minuteness you prohibit any cause, then reduce the food and do not approach it with meat or wine."
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	"And pause over the wound if an abscess forms later on; cut off the hair around it and apply hot oil or wine in which has been steeped some styptic substance."
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	"But if you are sure of an abscess forming later on, then pause over the wound while it is still fresh with its blood and before the air has changed that powder which I will recommend to you appropriately."
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	"And if the air has already changed it, then pause over the abscess until it is healed."
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	"But if the wound is large or it is from an incision by sword or similar and the edges are not adapted for pus, then adapt those edges with sutures according to what I will recommend regarding the suture of wounds."
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	"But if the wound is already exposed to bone and membrane, and there is only a small suspension of it, then incise that and appropriately treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in place of chain; and command the patient to be fed on foods that are coarse: heads of cabbage and similar ones until it is composed."
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	"And if you find putrefaction in the chain and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that is rotting and throw that out, and appropriately treat it."
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	"But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and it is not severed by medicines, then inquire about the artery; and if you find that it has not been incised, then incise that with a spatula or ligate it. And if necessity provokes that what we have said does not conform, then cauterize until the blood is severed."
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	"And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is light. Therefore, you powder those with this powder, for it solidifies that before the air changes it."
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	"And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of sesame one part, dragon's blood three parts, and un-extinguished incense five parts; grind it all together and sift it, and with it fill the wound, and constrain it well until it adheres to it, and coagulate it with the blood."
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	"And appropriately constrain that from above with powders and leave it; do not remove it while it is like this until it becomes an abscess because the medicine does not eradicate it before it is healed."
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	"And sometimes you can use just cautery when you do not have incense and dragon's blood available."
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	"During great plagues, perform this operation: place and tighten them over those areas; these recent plague sores have not been altered by the air."
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"And if the air has altered them, especially in summer time, it is not intended to use this powder. Instead, treat those with the remedy we mentioned earlier: apply a poultice made from honey and flour mixed with water or apply an ointment made from these ingredients. Also treat them with another cure until they are healed."
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	"And if there happens to be a small bone fracture during the plague, then do this: extract it using gestures."
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	"And you should say that there is no cure for skull fractures in this case."
De las plaguas del col.	"Regarding plague of the neck:"
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	"But if the plague happens in the neck, there is no difference in treatment between that and simple head plague."
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	"But if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, there is nothing to be done except to avoid treatment with anything that causes vehement constriction, such as zinc and vitriol. These things resemble them in color and can cause paralysis."
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	"And do not apply any treatment for plague caused by heat, because the substance of nerves is hot and their continuation is with the brain, which is the source of all members."
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	"And if it is treated with light medicines, such as washing with sweet water, sometimes mixed with rose or non-rose oil, and turpentine when washed with sweet water, and other stones ground in this way, and moistened."
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	"But if the plague is large, then stitches should be applied, or the lips of it closed, and afterwards treat it with powders until it is healed."
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	"But if there is depth in the plague or it has happened at a low point that has become corrupted, then perforate it where it is most pressed."
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	"But if an artery has been cut in the plague and there is bleeding, then separate or dry it out, ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary to provoke it."
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the vertebrae of the neck have been injured or all, and if the veins of the neck are saved, then sew up the lips of the wound over the spine of the neck and do not touch that; afterwards equalize it and reduce it to its natural figure, and then strengthen it with decent strapping, leaving it for a few days; afterwards treat it with things that have constriction and excitation until it is healed."
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	"But if the plague has already reached the bone and caused damage, then percuss it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what cannot be removed, leave it until the plague putsrefies, separates, and its inflammation is alleviated."
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	"And if the plague is fresh, then powder it with that powder which I have recommended to you."
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	"But if there is a fistula in the plague, then treat it with what is remembered above in its chapter."
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	"About plague of the neck or similar ones when they occur between the shoulders and are made with a razor or with a knife or with a lance or similar."
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	"If it is a wound from a lance or a knife and the depth of it is not known, then consider whether there is wind coming out of the plague when the patient breathes; if so, know that the plague is mortal."
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	"And if it is not deep and the plague is fresh with its own blood, then pause in it for the first hour with the powder recommended above, and do not strengthen it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and does not return to the heart and aggravate the illness, but rather pause in it with attractive ointment, and cleanse it twice a day."
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	"And if the ointment is not available to you, then pause in the opening of the plague with cotton moistened so that it may absorb what comes out from the humidities; and make sure that the patient sleeps on the plague so that what is collected in it may flow."
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	"But if three days or more have passed since the plague and no spasms or palpitations of the heart or constriction of the lung occur in the patient, and all other conditions are good, then know that the plague is saved; and therefore treat it with poultices and the other treatment until it is healed."
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	"But if its healing is delayed and a long time has passed, then know that there is already a fistula; therefore treat it according to its chapter."
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	"And if the plague is from an incision made with a razor or a knife and is simple on the surface of the flesh or the back, then treat it with what has been mentioned above about suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small."
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	"But if there has already been damage to the bone and small pieces have formed in it, then turn the plague inside out and try to extract those pieces if they are separated."
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	"But if they are not separated, then leave them until the plague putsrefies, as extraction of them will be alleviated."
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	"And for other accidental wounds in the other members, their treatment is the same as what has been said above."
De las plaguas del ventre.	"About wounds of the belly."
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	"The condition that occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or moderate."
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	"From the great openings viewed are seen the bowel or nerve of the bowel, for which is made intrusion of them and the suture of them to be more vehement and more subtle."
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	"Request for disruption is made difficult by another manner, and so it seems that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not immediately return them to their own place, because they break and swell up so that the introduction of them becomes difficult."
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	"And therefore the best disruption is middle, because in that one the reduction of the bowel is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species before mentioned."
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	"And know that suture of the belly is done in four manners, but two sutures are common that are useful in sutures of the other wounds of the body."
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	"And the two other proper sutures communicate with others, but however they are more proper in the suture of the belly."
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	"And I recount to you each one with exposition and declaration."
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	"Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the bowel comes out through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two manners: either by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the bowel has come swelling up because of the coldness of the air."
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	"And therefore when this is so, it is necessary that you scarify that until you immerse a sponge or wet cloth in hot water only, or you take it in water with soap, and cypers, and spice, and embrocations with that the swelling may be resolved."
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	"And sometimes this is done in wine, where there is astringency, and it is better that the water alone in the resolution of the swelling."
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	"And therefore when you see that the swelling is resolved, then you moisten the bowel with water in which white althea and mallow are cooked, because by this it is eased from within with few causes."
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	"But if the bowel has not been emptied from its contents by this treatment, then incise the disruption a little with an instrument with which you can cut out hemorrhoids."
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	"And the first cure is better when it is appropriate that there is no sectioning, and there is no occupation to cut off except necessity and deficiency."
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	"Regarding the instrument, see its form:"
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	"The one end of it is cut acute and the other not acute, and the extremity is subtle but not too much so as to be like a spatha, rather let it be blunt somewhat."
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	"And therefore when the wound is enlarged and the bowel comes out, then its reduction should be according to its natural form, in its proper place if that is possible, because it is better."
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	"But when the disruption is large and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on his back and raise his hips up as high as his head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should raise his head and place him on his side."
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	"And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the belly, then you should always have your intention and consideration towards this so that the part where the wound is may be raised up more than the other."
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	"And thus it is necessary that you administer this in large wounds and in medium-sized wounds."
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	"And in small wounds, pause what is prepared for you, and let it be that the minister between your hands is between the most skilled ones, who will hold the disruption entirely with his hand and adjust the lips of it, and let him uncover from this to that which secures some cause or other."
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	"And this is the common way of suturing: one that you take the needle or count of needles according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound; and then leave it at the extremity of the disruption from the ring finger, and thread the needle through once, but do not put a knot on both ends of the cord, with two ends of the ciphac which is left the cord of the parts within, until you have made that penetrate that part; and you already have four orders done."
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	"And then thread with double thread around the needle, and sometimes two parts together, and then join both lips and the wound by a decent joining; and then leave the thickness of the finger and place another needle in that, and then tie it with thread like the first one with the needle; and do not cease doing this until you have completed all the contraction of the wound."
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	"And let the needles be medium-sized between thickness and subtlety, for thin needles cut through the flesh too lightly; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the cord, therefore it is necessary that they be medium in thickness and subtlety."
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	"And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed too much in both ends of the cord, so that the flesh is not cut lightly and the wound closes before its consolidation."
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	"And do not make stitches too long lest the wound be hindered from healing."
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	"And also cut the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient during his sleep; and you will place over the stitches powder spread out from every part, which will hold the ends of the needles; and leave those until you know that the wound has already healed."
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	"And this kind of stitching with needles in whatever way is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices to use one needle or two or around those."
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	"But the second stitching is like this: it is that you administer with stitching the four ends, of the cord and both ends of the ciphac, at once, with a needle in which there is thread wrapped around it in subtlety and thickness."
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	"And then when with the needle you have penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that same part from which you began, so that the thread draws back from the uppermost part of the wound to the lower part, so that the stitching is like stitching cloth in which the cloths are stretched."
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	"And place between each stitch the thickness of a little finger."
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	"And this stitching is known to men."
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	"And with such stitching I closed a wound that had happened to a man in his belly, which had been caused by a knife, and the disruption of the wound was more than a palm, and it extended from the bowels around two palms of the bowel of the middle place, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it after twenty-four hours since the bowel had been forced out by the wound."
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	"And the wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or so, and he was cured; and this lived for many years, and is still conversing in his dispositions."
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	"And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle it was, for I did not cure him with ointment, because it was in a place where no ointment nor any medicine could be applied, but I placed cotton on the wound twice a day and washed it assiduously with honey water until it was healed."
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	"But I will tell two kinds of stitching proper according to the narration of the Word."
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	"And it is that you begin with stitching the cord, and then enter the needle from the outer part to the inner part."
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	"And then with the needle penetrating into the cord and in that part where it enters, according to its length and width throughout the body, leave the end of the thread in which you have entered the needle; and make the needle penetrate from within outwards in the other end of the thread."
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	"Once you have inserted the needle, then insert it again in the same point of the skin from without to within; and let go of the extremity of the sinew that is on this side, and insert the needle into the other extremity of the within part towards without."
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	"And make your penetration such that you penetrate into the sinew at its extremity which is in the within part that everything penetrated."
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	"First start from this side and pierce with the extremity that is on the other side of the sinew, remove the needle from the cord that has been penetrated, then reinsert it into that cord and join it to the extremity of the sinew which is on the other side with this extremity of the mirror; then remove it from the cord which is from there."
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	"And do this once or twice, and do it once again inside out as you see fit according to that example."
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	"And the summary of this manner of suture is that you should use suturing with silk thread, so that you pierce the sinew once from the side of the cord's extremity and leave it for another time to complete it."
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	"But the second species of suture which Doctor Guainerio describes explicitly is that you should pierce it according to semi-circumference, as some physicians do. Thus they join each part to its corresponding part conveniently by nature; and they apply one extremity of it to another extremity and the other extremity of the mirror to another extreme, and this is done according to how you recommend."
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	"And that you leave the needle in the extremity of the mirror near the part outside, and make it penetrate into the inside of that part, leaving two extremities of the sinew; and then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from outside to inside at both extremities of the sinew."
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	"And then turn those loops around and make each loop penetrate from inside out into the outside of that part at both extremities of the mirror, except for those on the opposite side."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	"And this manner of suture is better than common light suture, and it is the suture which was previously mentioned."
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	"This is the speech of Guainerio"
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	"And some say that abdominal suture is rectified with two needles, so that you insert into each loop a thread and begin with needle insertion from the side where it should be done, making it penetrate inside to the other side according to the suture of those who sew the bowels together."
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	"And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other places of the abdomen."
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	"But the judgement of treatment of plague is judged by other plagues."
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	"Which is why, when you first notice a wound with blood clots due to altered air, reduce the hernia and cover it properly, then apply healing powder."
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"If the wound has already become inflamed, then cover it with an egg membrane that you have at hand. Make sure they are fresh and clean, dry them thoroughly, and examine them carefully; apply the same treatment as for other wounds until it heals."
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	"But if you are not present, then apply this treatment immediately, as the wound begins to form blisters and scars. Change the dressing every two days, just as you have taught, until it heals, since simple wounds require no other medication in many cases."
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	"But if you fear that the wound may communicate with the main limbs, then you should soak lion's wool in high-quality olive oil or rose oil and apply it to the area between the joints and arteries."
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	"And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, as often happens, then apply black stiptic powder with wine. Especially if the decay has reached the intestines and requires urgent evacuation from within the concavity."
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	"And know that wounds of the large intestine are easier to heal than those in the small intestines."
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	"And it is difficult to heal the wound that affects the "cecum," as no healing can occur if it cuts into it. This is due to its large number of veins and size, as well as its delicate nature and proximity to nerve tissue."
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	"But if the injury affects only the skin and you can reach it easily, then cut around it according to your discretion, carefully reducing the intestines."
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	"But if the wound has spread widely and appears black or livid, then apply a poultice of bran to the discolored area to draw blood from it, since there are veins and arteries in the skin."
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	"And then cut away anything that is attached to it, and tie off the two ends of the thread from which it hung before removing the wound, so that when you have eased its attraction, you can cleanse the skin and express the fluid from the wound."
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	"
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	"When rupture occurs in the intestines and is small, it may be possible for some people to recover. For example, I have seen a man who was struck on his right side by an arrow, causing a wound in his stomach that had healed over time but still had a fistula opening. He was able to manage it with medications and diet."
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	"So I advised him to cease trying to heal the wound further once it was clear that it would not be cured. Instead, he should focus on cleaning and bandaging the area so that it could consolidate."
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	"And I saw that once the wound had healed over, he suffered no further illness due to the injury in his stomach. He did not complain about any discomfort and maintained good health by eating well, drinking moderately, bathing regularly, and exercising."
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	"Some experienced practitioners have said that when a small rupture occurs in the intestines, it should be treated in this manner: take figs with large heads and place one on each side of the wound. Then wrap another fig around both sides of the wound so that its mouth is open. When it absorbs onto those sides and tightens its mouth, cut off its head, as it adheres but does not dissolve."
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	"And then place another fig near the first one, and continue this process with figs until all of the wound is covered according to its size."
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	"And then reduce and sew up the wound. Leave those attached heads inside the intestine until it has healed, without causing any harm or discomfort."
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	"And it is possible to suture the intestine with a fine thread made from the gut of an animal, as it is more like a needle. You should take the end of this gut thread and make sure it is well-scraped, then tie one end of it around the end of the intestine with a double knot. Then pass that tied end through a needle and suture the intestine back together at the site of the rupture."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	"And this method of suturing with figs is merely a matter of trust and hope."
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	"But if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, then suturing alone will not suffice, as it will only result in a fine scar without healing the wound completely."
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	"On treating fistulas and abscesses:"
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	"Know that all plague and boil when it empties and becomes ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and gives off a bad smell at all times, then in any member it is universally called fistula, which we call azukem."
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	"According to truth, fistula is a hard, rough, white nodosity that causes no pain and has concavity like the concavity of chicken bone; therefore it is called that swollen tumor, which means chicken bone."
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	"And in some people it is moist, which gives off a bad smell; but when the moisture is cut out in certain hours, it becomes firm."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	"Sometimes this moisture is thick, scant, coarse, and subtle."
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	"And I have already said before in the division, when I talked about ulcers that all ulcer that is not healed or is not on bare flesh, is so for one of these nine causes: either because of lack of blood in the body; or because of its malice; or because between it and the lips there is hard skin preventing the growth of new skin; or because it is too deep; or because that ulcer contains pus and the matter sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine used for healing it is unsuitable; or when corruption occurs in the region, and there is pestilence; or because of the property of the region, like at Saragossa where difficult digestion of illnesses occurs, and healing of boils is delayed by nature; or because there are bones in it, or many bones."
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	"I have already shown all those causes, and the signs of them, and the treatment of them with medicines in the division."
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	"And therefore I will tell you about the treatment of fistula which is done by operation with my hands."
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	"And you should know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body: for there are fistulas that pertain to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the compound joints formed by composition like those of the hand and foot; and there are those that occur near the principal member and similar ones."
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	"And therefore those of these fistulas that are according to this manner are difficult to heal and do not receive treatment; occupation with them is hard work and ignorance."
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	"And if there is any of these fistulas whose depth does not reach those places that I have mentioned, and you hope and trust in its healing, and you want to find out about it, then take a thread or an iron probe and try to feel it with it."
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	"But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a lead probe, because lead with its weight and malleability is straightened out and curved along its twists."
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	"And if the fistula has many horrible openings, it will not be possible for you to determine anything about it with a probe."
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	"Then close the opening by its openings, because the humidity with which you perform the clyster will go through the other openings and come out of them."
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	"And therefore investigate carefully to find out in which way it is possible for you to know if here there are arteries or nerves and whether the fistula is long or short, or whether it has many openings and is located above all this with the greatest effort of your strength, with your examination, with which you examine the illness, and the discovery of pain through compression with your hand on the place, and similar signs and causes of accidents to ulcers."
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	"And when you have examined all those causes with true observation, then come to the treatment according to your judgment: and it is whether you consider now if it is an apparent fistula near or in a healthy place, long or far from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the places that I have told you about."
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Then dry the fistula according to what has been said before about its narration, and remove whatever is in that filtration and of decaying flesh, and whatever is born in the opening of the flesh or of bile and similar things, and cure it inside until it is healed."
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	"But if the fistula is of great depth and is straight, then you should insert it into the probe as much as possible, and clean it thoroughly of all its decaying flesh; and apply dressings wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula that you have pierced with iron."
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	"And do this several times inside until the sharp medicine burns away all the decay in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption."
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	"And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed."
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	"But if it does not heal with this, then cauterize it according to what we have recommended."
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	"But if the cause of the fistula is bones and you are certain of this, then investigate it and dry it according to what we have recommended, provided that you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said."
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness in it, then scrape that inside until all the corruption is removed; and cure it with something that will make it flesh again until it is healed."
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	"And if it does not heal and throws out again as it did before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore expose it again and carefully do the reasoning about it and the cleaning of it with your strongest forceps, and then restore it."
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	"And therefore if it is healed, good. But if not, then know that the corruption is in the deep and distant part of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore in this case there is nothing else to do but leave it alone."
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	"And if the corrupted bone is small or if you are able to pull it out, then pull it out with fine forceps that are suitable for that."
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	"And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any cause with your strength."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	"But if you encounter any difficulty with the humidity and there is no fear or mistake in its incision, then cut those membranes or flesh if it is here, and free the bones."
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	"But if you are not able to expose the bones at that time, then press on the wound whatever can cover it and leave it there until that is around those bony flesh and membranes, and guard the wound so that it does not heal and so that the section that you have cut in your operation is kept open."
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	"Have them, if you fear, compress it with a cotton cloth soaked in olive oil, or cotton cloth soaked in Egyptian pitch, or in one of the green ointments, because when these membranes dry out and the bones are separated from each other, the extraction is made easier."
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	"But if it is a large bone like the thighbone or shinbone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape that inside with sharp steel only until that blackness and corruption are exposed, and then restore the wound."
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	"But if most of it is corrupted and the corruption has reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close that and cut it open where the corruption has reached, and then treat it until it heals."
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	"I advise you to have someone help hold that man in place so you can perform your operation."
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	"A young man of about thirty years old was brought to me complaining of pain in his groin. An examination showed that the swelling was on the inside of the lower abdomen and had extended into the scrotum, forming an abscess with a large amount of pus, which was not caused by any external injury."
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	"And thus much time passed with that abscess growing larger because of the error of some physicians. Much matter accumulated, and its treatment was delayed until a fistula formed in the skin, through which all sorts of pus and moisture from the body could flow."
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	"And then many doctors tried to treat him over a period of two years, but none of them had any knowledge or skill in this area until I was called."
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	"I saw the fistula in his groin and the abundant matter that flowed from it over a large area. His body was already greatly emaciated, and his complexion was yellowish."
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	"And then I inserted my finger into one of those fistulas and reached the bone."
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	"Examine all the openings promptly and find those that come from every part of the chamber."
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	"And then you will cut and open one of those openings where you discovered a fracture in the bone, and you will find that it is rotten, and already earthy and decayed; and a part of the chamber through which it has entered is also decayed."
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	"And then you shall close what was revealed to me about the discovered bone."
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	"And you ensured that it was not the bone but rather that decay which you cut and closed, and you had already cleared it."
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	"Indeed, the treatment of plague with medicine has been paused for a long time, and it is not yet consolidated."
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	"Indeed you investigated again and discovered on the bone secondly on the first discovery, and you found continued decay with the bone."
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	"And closed what seemed to me from that decay, and indeed you were perforated fairly the cure of it and restoration, and it is not restored."
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	"And then you discovered again on it and did not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and persistently pursuing its restoration, but it was not restored until you incised around a palm's length of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and indeed restored it with medicines, and it is now lightly consolidated and healed."
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	"And iteration in the operation and section of it is not necessary except for the disposition of its fragility and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, for it has drowsiness at all times due to superfluity of evacuation and bad syncope."
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	"And healed is for complete healing, and nothing remains in place of hard flesh; the disposition of it in its body is good and has returned its virtue; it is converted into its dispositions and does not do anything contrary to it in movement nor harm in any cause."
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	"But if it is prominent in place of the body already troubled, then you should cut that according to this manner: and thus take linen and strengthen that at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that in his hands; and pause that linen with wool thicker than the first linen; and indeed tie that over the flesh which is next to the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh away from its sides, and uncover the flesh on the place where you want to saw so that the saw does not touch the flesh."
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	"And pause a bench or table next to the bone properly placed, for when you do this it prevents the saw from cutting the corrupted flesh."
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	"And the sawing must be done little by little on the place of corruption, for if it is in the concavity of the bone where there is decay and does not appear in its appearance to touch, then it must be sawn again."
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	"And if the bone is decayed but not prominent, then one part continues with the other, and the decay is in the middle place or at its end, then uncover the flesh from all sides; and indeed pause a bench next to it, and indeed saw that from the first part where there is decay until it is continuous with the sawing of the other part."
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	"And let the sawing be according to the place of corruption, little by little, as we have said."
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	"And if the decay is at the joint, incise that decayed joint, and saw the bone where it continues with the other part."
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	"And if from the decay there is continuity between two joints, then it is not in its ratio but ingenious."
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	"And if the decay is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless you must inquire how the decay appears to you, and abrade that, and cleanse that according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with every ingenuity let it be rectified by you when it does not do harm to vein or nerve."
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	"And know which are the incising tools and saws for incising these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore you must prepare all kinds of suitable instruments for that operation."
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	"And know that this operation implies to you about the kind of instrument which you need; for when you have great learning and long knowledge and experience in the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of illnesses, then already you had by yourself what is convenient for it among the instruments for each illness."
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	"And here I give you forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will pause with these simple ones with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience on the others."
Forma de serra:	"Form of saw:"
Forma de autra serra:	"Another way of cutting:"
Forma de autra serra:	Another form of saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	"Another form of large saw:"
Forma de ray:	"Form of a ray:"
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	"The head of this ray is in the shape of a star-headed key, and its points are in the shape of asterisk."
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	"And it would be convenient if with that [saw] the heads of the joints could be rubbed together when they are broken or if the mouth is too wide."
Forma de razori major dels autres:	"Form of a larger razor than the others:"
Forma de razori menor:	"Form of a smaller razor:"
Forma de razori lat:	"Form of a broad-bladed razor:"
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	"A well-made saw in another form: let it be made as curved as possible and its edge sharp like iron, and its handle made of good-quality horn, well-fashioned."
Forma de lu:	"Form of a sickle:"
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	"Form of a razor with concave edge:"
Forma de razori autra subtil:	"Another form of subtle razor:"
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	"Form of another razor with curved tip:"
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	"A small form of razor resembling an arrowhead:"
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	"The form of a cutter used for cutting bones."
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	"Another smaller form of cutter:"
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	"Form of another cutter; this one resembles a saw, with its tip like a serrated edge, and it is used in many places for cutting bones."
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	"The form of a saw which is convenient for cutting through bones that have been drilled."
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	"And its tip is triangular and sharp-pointed."
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	"And it is made of Indian steel, similarly suitable for all the uses that we have mentioned concerning razors and cutters and saws."
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	"For cutting into bones and for sawing through them."
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	"Extremities decay either from an internal cause or from an external cause. If you have treated that decay with medications and the treatment does not help, sometimes the decay may spread to a nearby limb without any apparent cause. In this case, it is necessary to cut into that limb where the decay has occurred, so that the disease may be cured by cutting out that part which is causing death or harm, as this is the greater remedy for the limb."
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	"And the sign of this is that the limb becomes black where it has been burned, even if there was no fire to burn it, or the decay approaches the blackness so that putrefaction reaches throughout that limb and spreads throughout the body. Therefore, it is necessary to cut into that."
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	"And similarly, if decay is caused by the bite of some venomous creature like a scorpion or a viper or a rat or similar."
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	"If the decay or bite is at the tip of the finger, then you should cut off the finger and not give space for the decay to spread into the hand."
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	"And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you should cut off that part of the wrist, so that decay does not spread into the forearm."
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	"If instead it reaches the arm, then you should cut off the arm at the elbow joint."
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	"If decay passes beyond that and sometimes reaches around the elbow joint, then in such a case death from the disease is inevitable. And administering any other cause for cure besides amputation at this point is merely a matter of quantity of virtue."
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	"And similarly, if decay reaches the toe of the foot, then you should cut off that toe at its joint."
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	"If it affects the heel of the foot, then you should cut off the whole foot."
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	"But if it can reach the knee, then you should cut off the leg at the joint of the knee."
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	"But if decay has already reached above the knee, then there is nothing else to be done but to let it take its course and leave the disease to its natural death."
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	"The manner of cutting off or sawing through a limb is as follows: first you should stretch the ligaments on the side where you wish to cut, and then stretch another ligament above that place. Then the assistant should extend one ligament towards the sides, and the other assistant should extend another ligament upwards. And you should separate the flesh which lies between two ligaments with a broad knife so that all the flesh is exposed. Then it may be cut or sawn through."
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	"And care must be taken to apply a bandage of linen to all parts so that the place is not touched by anything else, and so that the wound may heal properly with an appropriate scar."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	"But if bleeding occurs during the operation, then you should cauterize the place carefully, or apply some powders that will arrest the blood. Then return to your medication until it is completed."
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And afterwards bind up the limb with a bandage at its proper place, and care for it until it is healed."
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	"And I will tell you what happened to one man in his foot, which I and you are discussing, namely that he suffered an accident where the blackness appeared on his foot with burning such that it resembled fire-burnt."
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	"And this decay first affected his toe so that it spread throughout the whole foot."
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	"Then that man prepared for himself puts on a plaster where the cure goes to the member with the intensity of its heat that overcomes pain and burning, and he enters that foot into the joint, and it is healed."
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	"For a long time, it happened that this plaster fell into corruption in his hands."
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	"Then it came to me, and so I was perforated by that superfluity with the water that I had placed on his hand for the medicine, near the purification of his body; and the superfluity was not contained and began to go to another finger where it began in his hand."
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	"And he told me to incise his hand, but I did not want to do that hoping for the containment of that superfluity, and more than that I feared for the incision of his hand death, because the power of illness was strong."
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	"And although he persisted with me, he returned to his land and it came to my knowledge that this man prepared and incised all of his hand, and he was healed."
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	"And I have not recorded this narrative except to serve as an aid for what may befall from this illness, and that there may be significance for which it is signified and according to which it operates."
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	"On the treatment of sinus conditions and the quality of enemas with medicines."
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	"When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends until it makes collection of pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus comes out from it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the cord that is above it appears thus like a thin cloth, and no corruption has reached behind, and does not impress on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula."
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	"But if the space extends within where corruption impresses on some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus."
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	"And its treatment is to incise that cord entirely as it appears, especially when it is thin and made like cloth, and you ensure that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption."
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	"But if you hope that the cord will adhere and that corruption has not yet reached behind succession, and there is secretion from the face of the cord, then treat it with an enema."
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	"And if you consider the sinus and then it is large and the arm that extends has a foul odor, then apply an enema with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil, sour wine and cinnamon powder, mixed equally in one vessel and cooked over the fire until it reaches the consistency of honey."
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	"And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and apply the enema with that to the sinus, and strengthen the opening of it, and leave the medicine in it for the duration of two hours."
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	"And then remove that with a probe; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the corruption is removed."
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	"And sometimes an enema is applied with water of ashes when this medicine is not present. And if you take the ash of grapevines, put it on the water, and then boil that and apply the enema with it until you are satisfied that the sinus is cleansed."
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	"And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then apply an enema with water and honey mixed together three times, and also apply one with wine and honey mixed, because the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is surplus of astringency and dryness in the wine."
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	"And when you do this several times and are satisfied that the sinus has been removed, then apply an enema with what causes flesh to grow in it."
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	"And if you take some diaphoretic unguent and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or apply the enema with other medicines and unguents that have the properties that have already been written in the treatise on unguents."
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	"And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the cannula of the enema, then dilate it gradually with a small iron probe, and pause in it with warm water wrapped in Egyptian unguent or basilicon unguent until it is dilated."
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	"And similarly, if the opening is wide, then gather its lips with a suture and leave in it the quantity that is between the enema without addition."
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	"And if the opening of the sinus from which the arm emerges is elevated above the parts above it, then close that in the pus below its place so that the arm may run down easily, because when the arm is compressed by the narrowness of the sinus, flesh can be generated there."
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	"And if it is not possible to close the sinus in the pus below according to what you wish, then prepare the member with preparation so that the arm may run out of it lightly as it appears to you and that there is no cause of the arm retained in it."
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	"And take consolidating medicines that are applied over the sinus conveniently according to what you wish, and extend them over a cloth of lint."
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	"And let the cloth be of such a size that it covers all the sinus; and then incise with forceps on the right side of the opening of the sinus a path somewhat wider than the opening of the sinus, and extend over another cloth of lint the lion medicines according to the quantity of the path, and apply it over that at a distance from the opening of the sinus so that the exit of the arm from it may be alleviated and not disturb the cloth too much, but only for a few days once."
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	"Remove that which is over the opening of the sinus, which removes it at all hours so that it does not hinder what is adjusted in it regarding the arm."
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	"And so that you may know if what runs out from the sinus of the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or undigested:"
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	"And with this consider also the place of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the apostema."
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	"And when your treatment has lasted in this manner and you see that the matter which is cast upon the opening of the sinus is already adhering or begins to adhere, then remove it on the third day, and when you remove it, then change the cloth for another and renew the unguent."
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	"But if the sinus already has some subtle virus, then do not despair of its adhesion, because its healing is approaching, for there are some people in whom the generation of flesh takes a long time in their wounds, and among those there are also those in whom it happens conversely."
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	"And if the arm is undigested from the sinus for many days, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then adjust drying medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they become dry like lion unguent when there is an excess of addition of zein."
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	"And the last thing with which it is treated is that you take lion unguent and dissolve it in rose oil, and put old, thick wine into its substance, and then apply it over there, and use it."
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	"And it seems to me in that action, when there is no arm, to use lion unguent with honey when it is cooked until it is thickened, and apply it; or you may take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind all of them together and powder over the honey when it is on the fire, and then spread that over a cloth and apply it over the sinus; and also spread that with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and powder over a cloth and apply it."
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	"And sometimes, a long-winded discussion and cutting of celestial lilies (and these are celestial lilies) along with acorn flour and centaurea is administered, and use is made of those simples or adjusted ones, crushed them and sifted them and powdered over the honey that has been recommended; and thus it is done."
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	"And if the pain continues and is not cured by this treatment, you will know that the corruption is in the head of it, and then make inquiry into the bones or other hard members or membranes. Then you treat it with a fistulous cure, as was said above."
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	"For the treatment of blisters, crushed onion and adding garlic juice and cutting the finger."
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Wart is an aposteme that appears under the nail of the big toe of the hand or foot, and often appears on other toes as well. When it becomes prolonged and its cure is less desired, it is called a cauterized aposteme, or it is corrupted and emits a fluid that corrodes the root of the nail, often corrupting the entire nail. And sometimes this corruption reaches the bone, which then has a foul odor, making the tip of the toe red and the color dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so, when you have that which we have spoken of in the division and your cure does not take effect, then it is necessary for you to incise around all the superfluity that remains from the nail and properly cauterize the wound around it, for cautery is very helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the corners of the nail begin to press on the flesh inside, causing pain and discomfort, then it is necessary for you to make a small incision at the angle of the nail that is pressing on the flesh, and gently lift up that edge and cut away the excess flesh with ease. Then apply medications that are corrosive and burn away all that remains of the excess flesh. And properly dress the wound with ointment until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then it is necessary for you to cut into the bone and remove it, for there is no time when the bone can be healed once it is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption have reached the finger, then you should cut into it on one of the joints according to its memory, and properly dress the wound until it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail has suffered percussion or attrition and there is severe pain in that area, then at first you should gently bleed the affected part. Then carefully cut across the nail from top to bottom with a sharp spatha, taking care not to let the cut reach the flesh beneath the nail, for this would cause severe pain and result in the birth of excess flesh in that location. And then dress the wound with something that will relieve pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	A finger that is well-formed, the flesh of which is thick and fleshy, and the bone of which is strong and hard, or a nail that is hard and tough.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some are born at the root of the joint, or else their birthplace is in some of the joints of these fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	"Yet he who was born in certain joints of the finger does not suffer pain, but he who is born in strong joints suffers greatly."
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	"And among those that are born flesh-colored, the section is light, and you should incise it with a broad blade."
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	"But of that which is born in the joint's root, cure is difficult; therefore guard against its incision."
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But in that which is born in those fingers, it is necessary to incise at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw with one of those suitable saws for that purpose, and then cure it so that it may heal."
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	"But consolidation which occurs in these between their jointed bones or by the birth of man that is born so, or by consolidation of phlegm or combustion of fire, or by similarity, then it is necessary to cut away that consolidation until the said joints return to their natural form."
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	"And then pause between their membranes of the lungs with rose oil infused so that they may not become consolidated lightly, and separate them one from another, or place a thin plate of lead between them so that it may be consolidated as necessary."
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	"And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of these with the palm, then cut away that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the member."
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	"Of incision of veins, there are many ways."
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	"Veins are many and there are large veins wrapped around thickly filled with superfluous black bile which come out in the joints of the limbs of the body, and their greatest abundance is in the thighs, especially in those of travelers, laborers, and porters."
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	"Therefore it is necessary to administer purgation of the body from black bile several times with strong evacuation, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein."
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	"But the cure of them with iron is according to two ways: one way is that it should be incised and that black blood should be drawn out, and another way is that the vein should be raised up and all should be extracted."
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	"The section of the leg is according to this way: first anoint the beginning of the thigh with cold water much so that thick blood may be resolved, which is sediment of the thigh, and then bind the thigh of the sick from the upper part of the hipbone down to the lower part of the groin with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place or two or three with broad section, and then raise out black blood with a sponge from below the part above the thigh into it up and down so that as much blood as you wish may be taken away and that times may suffice, and which may tolerate the virtue of the sick."
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	"And then bind it up and command him to abstain from foods generating black bile."
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	"And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when veins are full and as much as is necessary for the sick person."
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	"But the elevation of them is according to this way: you who raise up the thigh of the sick one, if there are knots on it, and then place him in bath and anoint his thigh with cold water until it reddens and veins become prominent; or have him exercised by strong exercise, if bath is not present, until the member becomes hot."
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	"And then cut the cord in the right of the vein by section in the long or last of it you should do to the groin, or in the upper part of it you should do to the heel."
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	"And then tie up the cord with forceps and strip the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and it should be the appearance of him who often that vein asks declining towards blackness."
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	"And then when you evacuate, tie up the cord again with white wax which should be hard."
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	"And then place below that part until it is elevated and thrown off from the cord, and suspend it with anointed wool or lint."
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	"And then cut another section close to that section by three fingers, and then strip the cord from the part above the vein until it appears."
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	"And then elevate that and cut it in last section towards the heel, and then extract that and elevate that until it is taken away by second section, and then extract that from the section which is above it."
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	"And do thus until you extract that from the section which is above or beyond all sections, until all is taken away; and then cut it."
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	"And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and ligate that and extract it, or insert below the part and turn your hand around until it is thrown out."
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	"And be careful that it is not cut; because if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate much and harm will come upon the sick one by that."
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And when all is completely thrown out, then place on the place of the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and unroasted oil and oil roasted, and cure it until it is healed."
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	"And if the vein is contracted having no tortuosity at which there may be encirclement to parts, and not being according to rectitude as we have said, then you should cut over that through all part of tortuosity of it and in places of encirclement of it, and then suspend it with forceps until you elevate that completely."
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	"And be careful to make your section so as not to cut the vein and not to wound that because it will be difficult for you to elevate much; and use your wisdom in this."
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	**Form of the incident with which vein is cut:**
Forma de unci orp:	"Shape of an ointment horn:"
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	"It is not sharp like needles and it does not have a pointed tip so that it doesn't harm the vein. It is thick but flexible, because if it were thin it would pierce the vein due to its thinness. As we have said, it has an excess of thickness."
De extraccio venae cruris.	"For removal of varicose veins."
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	"This vein originates in the legs, both on the land of Arabs and in the lands of India where it is hard and dry with little tenderness, where there is neither grass nor shrubbery."
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	"And likewise, it also arises from other parts of the body besides the legs."
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	"And its formation comes from putrefaction which arises from the spine, just as venom inside the body produces snakes, worms, crabs and worms generated between the spine and the flesh."
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	"And a sign of the onset of this condition is when there occurs inflammation in the leg that becomes swollen and red, from which the vein starts to emerge like a plant root."
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	"And when it appears at the end of this condition, then you should wrap around that one pound weight of lead which is the weight of two dragons; and tie it there, leaving the lead suspended from the leg."
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	"And whenever you notice that some part has moved outward due to this condition, then wrap it in lead and tie it there."
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	"If it is prolonged, then you should cut off one part of it and wrap the remaining portion; but do not cut so deeply that it remains inside, for if you do this it will contract and enter into the flesh causing inflammation, putrefaction and a bad ulcer in that spot."
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	"Therefore it must be treated gradually and extracted little by little until all of it has been removed from the body, so that none of this condition remains inside."
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	"And there are some men in whom this vein is as long as two hands and ten fingers, and I have heard that one man had it up to twenty hands."
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	"And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert a probe into the channel and pierce it with a long probe through the body until everything that is in it has been evacuated. Then apply putrefying medicines to this area for several days, and also treat it according to the cure for apostemes."
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	"And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and it comes out with many openings, each branch having its own opening."
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	"And therefore treat it as we have said in the division above, using the methods that have been described previously."
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	"Regarding cutting for worms generated under the skin, which is called bovine ailment."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	"This ailment is called 'malautia bovina' in some lands because it often happens to oxen and it is a worm that is born between the spine and the flesh, it spreads throughout the body going up and down, causing the limbs to become paralyzed one by one until it breaks the spine and comes out."
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	"And its generation occurs through putrefaction of certain humors, just like what happens with worms, serpents, earthworms and ascarids in the belly."
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	"And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes into the body and rises up to the head, reaching the brain, then it violently enters there and destroys it, causing many deaths."
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	"And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, first find out its movement and appearance by sensation. Then grasp what is above it and what is below it with bandages and tight ligatures, dry the area above it, and extract it."
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if it is embedded in the flesh and cannot be grasped, then apply a hot cautery to the area where it dwells until it dies. The main cause that is feared is corruption of the area, as we have said."
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	"If you want to treat someone who has reached the brain near the head, then grasp above the eyebrow with a tight bandage and dry it off. Then extract it; and the patient must undergo purgation of their body using medicines that evacuate bad humors, and they should avoid foods that cause putrefaction."
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	"Regarding cutting for the ailment called nafir."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	"This ailment is called 'nafir' in our land and it is a pain that appears in some limbs and also changes from limb to limb."
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	"And you have already seen it described as I will tell you."
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	"I was called to see a woman who was ill in a certain village. When I uncovered her arm, I saw a small inflammation on the vein of the elbow joint. After about an hour, I saw that inflammation move like a worm crawling towards me, but more slowly than it should be, as if it were alive silver flowing from place to place."
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	"And then the pain moved to that area and fixed itself in the muscle for about an hour."
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	"And then it ran through the other arm until it reached the other elbow joint."
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	"And she told me that she felt it moving throughout her body as I saw it. She was amazed by the way it moved and its speed from limb to limb."
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	"And I had already seen something similar in my patients before that time, although I have not seen many cases where the pain moved from limb to limb."
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	"But I did not see it happen like this in other patients as it happened with this woman."
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	"But I thought that this was because the woman was elderly, with dry skin and visible veins, which is why we could feel that moving wind."
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	"It is necessary that it does not appear according to this description in those who are delicate and have moist skin with hidden veins."
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	"And when you want to treat it and the patient feels that pain, if it is not apparent on the skin as we have said, then grasp over that area gently and dry it off until that constrained wind has come out. Then cauterize the area."
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	"But if you cannot feel it with your hands in that way, then treat it by purging the body and using whatever expels wind. Also use pills made from foul-smelling plants and those containing saffron and similar substances."
De extraccio de sagetas.	"Regarding the extraction of arrows."
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	"Arrows are diverse according to their species and the parts of the body where they strike. Their diversity is such that some have large points, others small, concave or blunt ones. Some are solid, while others have three edges, tongues, or barbs."
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	"And those that strike limbs or major parts of the body are of two types: some strike vital organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, and bladder. In these cases, if it appears to you that death will ensue, which I will describe later, then it is necessary to avoid extracting that arrow in those instances where death may occur more quickly. But if you do not see any of those signs of death, and the arrow is not deeply embedded within the limb, then extract it and treat the wound."
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	"And the signs of a wound to the brain are when an arrow strikes it and passes through the bone, causing shock, darkness before the eyes, dizziness, redness in the face, inflammation of the tongue, spasms and confusion of the mind, vomiting of bile, difficulty speaking or loss of speech, and there is white fluid resembling dust issuing from the wound, with the surrounding area appearing wet like flesh."
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	"And therefore if you see these signs, then abstain from treating and extracting the arrow, unless it is superficial."
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	"The signs of the arrow when it enters the heart are such that it is near the left nipple, and it feels as if something hard has been placed there, not a hollow cause. And strong and sudden movement of the arrow is like the movement of the pulse, and flow of black bloody plasma, and that chill in the extremities, sweat, faintness; thus you would know that death descends suddenly without warning."
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	"And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are: frothy bloody spittle from the mouth, and vessels near the neck become congested, and the color of the invalid is changed, and they expire with a great sigh or gasp for breath."
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	"And if the arrow pierces the pleura which is in the chest, there will be pain near the little ribs at once, and a great difficulty of breathing with violent pain and sighing, and all the members are paralyzed."
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	"And if the arrow pierces the stomach, immediately there is a strong flow of undigested food from the mouth."
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	"And if the arrow pierces the belly and is stuck there, some wound or tear of the flesh or bowel, which has been broken, will occur, and there is little hope for recovery from this, even if the arrow were extracted."
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	"And if the arrow pierces the bladder, urine flows out immediately, and there follows inflammation of the surrounding parts, and strong pain is felt at once, so that you will know it to be a fatal wound."
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	"But the other limbs such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, and ribs, spine, collarbone, and hip bone, and their likeness of members are saved according to the best conditions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not poisonous."
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	"And I will tell you what I have seen concerning these arrows, so that you may know how to treat them."
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	"That is why, in the case of a man who was pierced by an arrow in the lachrymal bone of his eye socket near the root of his nose, I extracted it from the other side leaving behind the gristle of his ear, and he recovered without any injury to his eye."
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	"And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in the gristle of his eyelid, leaving behind the eyelid itself and the arrow was already hidden, and it was not possible to seize hold of it except for a little point by which it adhered to its shaft, and it was one of those sharp arrows of the Turks with a lion's head on which there were no feathers."
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	"And the Jew recovered, without any harm to his eye."
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	"And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had fallen into his throat; it was an Arabian arrow with feathers on it. And then I made an incision over that between two guides and it was already submerged in the throat. Then I carefully extracted it with forceps and pulled it out, and the Christian recovered."
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	"And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been pierced in his belly and thought that he would die from it. And after thirty days had passed with no change in his condition due to his natural disposition, I made an incision over the arrow and extracted it, and he recovered without any harm."
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	"And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck his back and the wound had healed over it. And after seven years had passed, the arrow emerged at the root of his hip."
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	"And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had struck her belly and the wound had healed inside her without any change in her condition. And the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions."
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	"And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck his face and the wound had healed over it, and then the arrow broke off without causing much pain, resembling these ones."
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	"And I extracted the arrow from the face of one of the king's princes which had struck him in the middle of his nose and was already inclined slightly to the right side. The whole arrow was hidden."
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	"And I was called for his treatment as soon as three days had passed after he was struck by the arrow."
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	"And then I drew out the arrow very straightly; and then I explored it with a subtle tent, but did not find it; yet he felt a prick coming from behind his right ear, and then hoped that this prick was because of the tip of the arrow."
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	"I plastered the place with plaster in which the attracting and digestive virtue was found, believing that this place would be suitable for it to appear to me where the arrowhead was, so that it could dry over it."
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	"And it did not happen that the arrow had reached that spot by chance; and I continued applying the plaster there for many days, but no accident happened; and the wound had healed in the meantime, and the illness from the injury of that place disappeared over the course of many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and recognized it as such."
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	"And then I applied medicine that was corrosive and sharp to the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe I felt around that place, and grasped the tip of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the shaft."
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	"And thus I continued applying that sharp medicine to the opening of the wound until the tip of the arrow appeared visibly to me, and I spent four months with that for the duration of time."
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	"And then when the wound had become enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I seized that with them, but I could not remove it immediately, so then I did not cease subtly manipulating and inventing ways of doing so until one day I began to do so with a device made by hand, which will be described at the end of this chapter, with which I extracted it; and thus I restored that wound."
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	"And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, but I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the illness was healed entirely, and there remained nothing in it on any account."
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	"And I recount to you the method of extracting certain arrows because it is appropriate and significant that which I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood with narration nor comprehended by this book."
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	"And the learned artist compares little about much; and what is present with what is absent, and he finds new operation and new instrument in the descent of foreign causes of the art when it happens."
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	"And therefore I say that arrows are not ejected from the members into which they are inserted, except in two ways: either by attraction of the place where it intersects, or by the contrary part."
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	"And that which is ejected by the place where it enters, it is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place and is drawn out."
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	"And if it does not obey extraction at the moment that you catch it, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it softens and its attraction and exit are alleviated."
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	"Similarly, if it is inserted in bone and does not obey extraction, then leave it for a few days and repeat that with attraction and motion each day, and it will be ejected."
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	"And if it does not obey extraction even after a few days, then you should pierce around the arrow in that bone on all sides with a subtle drill until the place is enlarged by the arrow, and thus extract it."
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	"And if the arrow is inserted in the skull bone and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of those accidents which I have mentioned appear in the illness, then abstain from extraction of the arrow and leave it until its being is equated after a few days; for if the arrow reaches the pharynx, then death will not be prolonged."
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	"And if the arrow is inserted only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the pharynx, and the illness remains for a few days without any cause of those accidents occurring, then you should devise the attraction of the arrow and its exit."
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	"But if it is deeply inserted and does not obey extraction, then you should apply drills around the arrow as we have described, and thus cure the place until it is healed."
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	"But if the arrow is deeply hidden in the place of the body and is hidden from sensation, then you should search for it with your finger; and if you feel it, then attract it with some instruments that are convenient for its attraction."
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	"And if you cannot reach it because of the narrowing of the wound and the length of the penis, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein here, then incise on the wound until it is enlarged enough for it to be possible to extract the arrow."
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	"And if it is held by the ears with which it is gripped, then release the flesh in which it is inserted on all sides with whatever art you can devise; and devise about this: if you cannot succeed through evacuation of the flesh in fracture of the ears or torsion of them until it obeys."
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	"And when you perform extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then use torsion of your hand with forceps on all sides until it makes that obey; and be subtle with extreme subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and is made easy for its difficult attraction and extraction."
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	"And if you cannot succeed with that at your moment, then leave it for a few days until the parts around it have softened, and thus repeat it; for now it will be alleviated."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	"But if you experience contrary flow of blood, then perform what we have said about cure in its chapter."
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	"And guard your virtue of incision of vein or nerve or cord, and devise in every possible way for evacuation of the arrow with facility, tranquility, slowness, and steadfastness as I have recommended to you."
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	"And then cause the arrow to contract in such a way that the illness follows the figure according to which the case of the arrow was made for it; for this is more beneficial."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	"But if that is not possible for you, then perform what is possible for you according to the figures."
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	"But the arrows that are ejected by the contrary of another party, or from which some part has already proceeded into its outer parts, or cause swelling in the extremity of the arrow through sensation of the flesh above the wound and thus enlarge it; then cut over it; and let the section be according to the quantity taken by the forceps; and thus extract it, for it is made light for extraction."
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	"But if it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand in contrary direction until the arrow impresses on the bone, and thus amplify its entrance, and thus extract it."
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	"And otherwise, leave it for a few days, and thus repeat it until it is extracted."
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	"And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then push it out with it."
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	"But if the shaft is broken and you wish to perform pulsation, then introduce it and that if it is hard; use a concave instrument so that it enters between the concavity of it and the end of the arrow, and thus push it out with it."
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	"But if the arrow is concave, then push it out with a strong instrument entering into that, for the arrow is alleviated by that."
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	"And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you incise all the flesh around where the wound is, if this is possible for you; and thus cure it with what is appropriate."
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"If the arrow strikes the foot, belly, bladder, or side, and is close enough for you to touch it with your hand, and if it's possible for you to cut around it, then do so carefully, avoiding veins or nerves. Extract the arrow, and cover the wound with a poultice if necessary. Care for the patient until they are healed."
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	"Forceps-shaped instrument used to extract arrows:"
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	"The ends of these are shaped like bird's beaks, which become serrated when they grip the arrow so that it is not released."
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	"And among these there are many types: large, small, few, and medium-sized ones, according to the quantity of the arrow's size and its thickness, and the width of the wound and the tightness of the flesh."
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	"A concave form of this extremity shaped like a bird's feather is used to facilitate the insertion of the arrowhead into the flesh and to push it out."
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	"Form for pushing with the blunt end:"
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	"Like this: <diagram> so that it may facilitate the entry of the flesh into the arrow's concave cavity and be pushed in with it."
De fleubotomia de las venas.	"Regarding venesection (flebotomia):"
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	"The veins usually opened during phlebotomy are: sixteen in the head, two pulsating veins near the ears, called temples; two veins apparent on both temples; two veins located at the corner of both eyes, called lacrimal veins; one vein prepared at the middle of the forehead and one at the tip of the nose; two veins at the neck; two veins at the upper lip; two veins at the lower lip; and finally, two veins behind the tongue."
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	"The veins opened during phlebotomy in the arms are five: one is the cephalic vein which runs over the wild side (lateral side); it's called 'the head vein' and it's deaf; it's also a median vein composed of a branch from the basilica and another from the cephalic vein, which people call 'the vein of the whole body'; the basilica is the vein situated on the domestic (medial) side, known as 'cubital' or 'elbow vein' in common language; the funis of the arm runs over the elbow and is where phlebotomy takes place; it appears visibly on the wrist; the salvatella is the vein located between the auricular bone and the little finger's metacarpal, which divides into two branches."
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	"And in the thigh and leg there are three veins: one of them is located at the curvature of the kneecap on the lateral side (outside); the second is called saphenous, located near the bend of the inner thigh (medial side); and the third is the sciatic vein, located behind the outer thigh (lateral side). In the leg there are other veins similar to those mentioned."
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	"The benefit of opening veins near the ears is for ancient catarrhs, migraines, headaches and ulcers on old wounds."
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	"And the procedure for opening those veins is as follows: the patient should be lying down with their head tilted towards the occiput (back of the head) in a comfortable position. Then, wrap a cloth around the patient's head, making sure to cover both veins near the ears and the location between them on the forehead. Tighten the cloth gently but firmly, then feel for the pulse of the veins with your index finger. When you've found it, make the incision."
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	"Then, take the lancet, which is used for incising. Insert it into the vein in the elbow until blood flows out."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	"And elevate your hand with the vein and elbow upwards, then make an incision into the vein using an incising cut."
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	"And make the length of the incision equal to two fingers' width or about that amount, then let as much blood flow out as desired."
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And afterwards apply powder and dress the wound until it heals."
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	"And as mentioned at the beginning of this book, these veins are also opened with cauterization."
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	"Among the two arterial veins on the temples, the benefit of phlebotomy is for ancient migraines, chronic bad humor, habitual inflammation of the eyes, and acute attacks of superfluous heat in the cheeks."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	"And the procedure for phlebotomy of those veins is as follows: Have the patient lean their head forward until both veins appear clearly. Then feel for the pulse of the veins with your index finger, and once you've found it, make the incision."
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"And elevate the elbow above the vein with your index finger. Insert the phlebotomy lancet into it, raise the vein up, and make an incision just as you did for the other two veins. Then let blood flow out according to your needs."
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And then untie the bandage from the patient's arm. Place your index finger on the vein for about an hour, then press a cotton cloth and powder onto the wound with strong pressure. Leave it like that until it heals."
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	"And as previously mentioned at the beginning of this book, these veins have been remembered and their incisions and attractions are described."
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	"And the benefit of phlebotomy from the frontal vein is similar to that of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face, migraines, nosebleeds, and fetid ulcers."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the procedure for phlebotomy of that vein is as follows: Have the patient lean their head forward with a bandage wrapped around it so that the vein appears. Then take the instrument called 'fossor' which has this shape:"
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Place the pointed tip of the 'fossor' onto that vein and strike it with a pen or other tool in this manner, then let blood flow out according to your desired amount. Then unwind the perforation from the patient and apply pressure until it heals."
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	"Sometimes it is useful to perform phlebotomy laterally. However, the phlebotomy should not have an acute tip like others, but rather a blunt one on one side. Perform the phlebotomy transversely because if it's sharp and fine, it might break the bone in that area during phlebotomy."
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	"The benefit of the two veins that are on the temples is for the itching of the eyebrows due to redness and heat in the eyes, and for diseases of the face."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	"And the procedure for phlebotomy is as follows: Have the patient lean their head forward with a bandage. Then perform phlebotomy on those veins while you are standing above the patient's head."
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	"And perform the phlebotomy transversely with a blunt lancet that's not too sharp, because there isn't much flesh in that area. If the lancet is too fine and sharp, it might break."
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	"And then let blood flow out as much as you need. Press cotton onto the wounds and apply pressure overnight. Then untie it in the morning."
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	"The phlebotomy of the vein in the nose is beneficial for acute fever and violent inflammation, and for diseases of the face, migraines, nosebleeds, especially if they are chronic."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	"And the procedure for phlebotomy of that vein is as follows: Have the patient lean their head back and place your left hand on their nose. Then take a sharp lancet and insert it into the middle of the tip of the nose vertically, because the vein does not appear here to the touch, and blood will begin to flow immediately."
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	"It is important that you gradually withdraw your hand with the lancet and let blood flow out according to your needs. Then leave it for the night because this wound heals easily."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	"The benefit of phlebotomy from the two veins at the wrists is for constriction of the uvula, the beginning of leprosy, and many other diseases such as impetigo and destructive corrosive ulcers like herpes zoster."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	"And the procedure for phlebotomy of those veins is as follows: Have each patient lean their head forward with their arm outstretched. Then stand above the patient's head and have them sit on a stool."
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	"And then perform phlebotomy on the vein along the arm with a blunt lancet little by little. Then extract blood according to a moderate quantity or as much as is necessary at that time, and do the same for the other vein."
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	"And then untie the bandage and compress the two veins with a midrib binder for a while to ensure that the patient is not faint. Then leave it overnight because the wound will be healed by morning."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	"For the benefit of bloodletting from the large veins, it relieves small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that are found in the nose and around it."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	"And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that you first hold the patient's head steady with one hand, and then wrap a cloth around their neck to protect it. Then carefully pull back the lips and observe where both veins are located, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left. The demonstration of each vein is indicated by its darkness compared to the other, and there are more small dark veins in that area. Then cut each one with a single cut."
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	"But if there is doubt about which vein it is, and you are unsure of its location, then make the incision on the larger one, and follow the course of that vein."
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	"And imitate the appearance of both veins that are in the lips above."
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	"But it is customary to cut both veins that are on the left lip more often."
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	"But of the two veins that are on the left side of the tongue, it is particularly appropriate for bloodletting from the cephalic vein to precede those found in the cheek, for diseases of the uvula and mouth."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	"And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that you follow the disease along your side and toward the sun, raise the tongue gently, and look for both veins on either side of it. The color of each vein will incline towards darkness."
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	"And then bloodlet from each one; but be careful not to cut too deep in bloodletting those veins, because arteries are nearby."
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the veins that are bloodlet in the neck are those which usually run through all people. Bloodletting from them is done in two ways: either with a mirtillat or olive oil lancet for subtler cuts; or with a cutellar lancet and catgut thread, and this is how it is done:"
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	"And this catgut thread is used for sewing the incision closed. It must be special, thin and fine according to the width of the veins and the narrowness of those veins."
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	"How to perform bloodletting with a mirtillat lancet:"
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	"Be sure to sharpen the edge of it like this, and use it to open concave veins that appear full and contain dark, turbid blood."
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	"And this is how you perform bloodletting with an olive oil lancet:"
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	"And this bloodletting is of lesser width and has a more subtle point. It should be used for bloodletting from thin veins containing clear, citrus-colored blood."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	"But the main purpose of bloodletting from the basilica vein is that it removes blood from diseases on the left cheek and neck, and also from those that affect the chest and abdomen."
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	"And the phlebotomist should be careful when bloodletting from that vein and proceed with caution, because there is an artery nearby. If they err in their puncture, they may lacerate the artery and cause excessive bleeding. Therefore, it is not recommended to use a pointed lancet for this procedure, but rather one that is blunter and can be used with catgut thread."
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the basilica vein is not apparent by its usual signs, then you should leave it and move to another vein, either searching for one of its branches or bloodletting instead at the end of the arm where it is more visible. In this case, you should use a catgut thread lancet as previously mentioned."
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	"But if you wish to perform bloodletting from the median vein, then it should be done near the elbow crease of the arm where you can feel the pulse. Hold your arm down with one hand and use a catgut thread lancet to make an incision into the concave vein, as previously mentioned. Be sure not to hit the artery located nearby."
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	"And when you twist with the thread, if there is swelling where you have placed your finger, then that swelling is an indication of the artery, so avoid that area."
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	"If blood flows like a fountain during the bloodletting procedure and it is clear red in color, then you know that it is arterial blood. In this case, you should stop twisting your finger over that area for a long time. Then remove your finger, and if the bleeding stops, you should squeeze the arm gently to help close the wound."
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	"And beware of infection from the wound, and be especially careful not to aggravate it by touching it for a few days until it has healed."
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	"But if the bleeding does not stop and continues to flow freely, then you have probably severed the artery. If this is the case, do not try to treat it yourself. Instead, use a compress of fistic [fresh figs] to stop the bleeding, and then apply a poultice made from mallow leaves over the area where the vein was cut the next day."
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	"If the bleeding stops, that is good. But if not, then treat it with the remedy mentioned earlier for stopping bleeding at the site of powders."
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	"And bloodletting from this area is difficult in many cases due to the small size of the vein and the possibility of damaging the nerves of the arm."
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	"But bloodletting from the dark vein is beneficial in removing blood from the upper right side of the head and the left side of the body. This is because it is composed of branches from the basilica and cephalic veins, as previously mentioned."
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	"And the phlebotomist should be cautious when bloodletting from this vein because there is a nerve nearby. If they mistakenly cut it with the lancet, they may cause paralysis, which can be difficult to heal and may never fully recover. This nerve is often palpable but can sometimes be hidden beneath the skin in some people. In such cases where it cannot be felt, one should use a blunt-tipped lancet for bloodletting and avoid damaging the nerve with excessive pressure."
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	"And if the vein is located between two nerves, then you should cut across its length to avoid damaging either of them."
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	"The benefit of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is that it draws off blood from the head and helps alleviate headaches."
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	"In this case specifically, if you wish to bloodlet using an olive-shaped or myrtle-shaped lancet, then do so because these shapes are safest for all veins as there is no artery or nerve nearby."
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	"But remember that you should not bloodlet too deeply with the lancet alone, but rather search for a lighter location and do not try to hit it if it is not easily palpable upon the first percussion."
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	"But in some cases, an aposteme [hematoma] may occur if one attempts to bloodlet at the first percussion without success. However, they should not try again on that aposteme."
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	"However, the quality of bloodletting from this vein and its potential complications are many, which you should carefully consider for their correction."
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	"The first thing you should know about bloodletting is that it should only be performed for the conservation of health and with the expectation of benefit and caution against potential illness. It should be done on one of the three main veins: cephalic, basilic, or median cubital vein. Bloodletting should preferably be done in springtime, after fasting in spring and autumn, and before meals in winter, when signs of plethora appear."
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	"Perform a bloodletting on the third day after it has been three hours since sunrise."
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	"And when bloodletting is administered, whether it brings convenience and necessity at that time or another, either by day or night, at any hour."
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	"And it is not appropriate to perform bloodletting on a child who has not yet reached fourteen years of age, nor should a pregnant woman be bled unless she is in her fourth month, and old people who have surpassed sixty years should not be bled."
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	"And when someone wishes to be bled for any reason whatsoever, it is necessary to cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's claw enema, especially if they have much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw impurities into the bloodletting of the bowels, which are purified, and thus harm the principal members."
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	"And those suffering from sacred disease and gluttony should not be bled until they have recovered from their illness or drunkenness; nor should those suffering from dropsy be bled. Bloodletting should rather be avoided during colic pain and vomiting, as well as during abdominal inflammation and multiplication of coitus, hard labor, and excessive exercise following long fasts or vigils, or any other cause that dissolves bodily strength or fluids."
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	"And consider also the refinement of humors before performing bloodletting: if the blood is thick, use foods and drinks to thin it out, and medications if necessary."
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	"And also perform a bath if nothing prohibits it, or exercise somewhat for the blood to become refined."
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And pause bloodletting on that day at sunset, except during the hour of Terce, as we have said."
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	"And ensure that the sunset of that day is guarded from all sudden accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and also from all bodily accidents like excessive work, fatigue, coitus, and similar things."
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	"And at his seat let there be present the causes according to their use, with aromatics and fragrances and balms and similar things, as much as possible."
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	"And let the bloodletter lie on a couch that is higher than the couch of him who is to be bled."
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	"And also, before extracting the vein, rub his arm with his hand two or three times; and also, strengthen the limb with a bandage and wrap it twice."
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	"And let the ligature be moderate, for if it is too tight, it prevents blood flow; or if it is too loose, it causes superfluous bleeding. In either case, it prohibits proper bloodletting. But if it is moderately applied, it allows the blood to flow evenly."
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	"And also, before applying the ligature, let him who is to be bled rub his hands together for a moment until the veins are inflated and clearly felt."
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	"And also, let the bloodletter anoint his lancet with a little ancient oil properly; and also, let him place his index finger of his left hand on that vein where he wishes to perform bloodletting, so that the vein may swell slightly and the percussion be seated correctly. For it is said that among the veins there are some that resemble strings or cords, and those that are full of windiness contract under the lancet, causing the bloodletter to slip and lose his grip; and if he does not find the vein at first, then it becomes narrow."
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	"And therefore, it is necessary that the bloodletter be firm and attentive to all these causes."
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	"And also, after inserting the lancet, if the vein is not filled at once, it is good; but if not, withdraw it slightly and try again in another place nearby, or else on the surface of the skin if there is no swelling."
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	"And if the location is inflamed or the illness worsens, then let it rest for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage too much, lest it draw out an abscess, nor enter into baths."
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	"And also, repeat the bloodletting if necessary."
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	"And if the opening is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will flow out as desired, then insert the lancet again in the same vein according to its rectitude and adjust the opening slightly; but do this with haste before the location becomes inflamed, for many men become inflamed from a small opening."
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	"But if the location is already inflamed, then do not insert the lancet again there, for it will serve no purpose; instead, apply some olive oil to that part of the skin, for it alleviates blood flow."
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	"And it is better in this location than other oils."
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	"And similarly, apply olive oil in all bloodlettings where veins are opened with the prohibition of blood flow, and they do this by applying tyriaaca almonds and saggina when pausing from one of those over the location, for blood becomes thinner and is better circulated when it is thick."
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	"If a large abscess is formed at the location of bloodletting, as often happens, especially if one has not been bled for some time or if the opening of the vein was too small, then let him apply a poultice and place over the location a sponge infused in water and salt, lightly scorched; let this remain for an hour, for it will dissolve."
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	"And let him do this also at the conclusion of bleeding from that vein with completion of it or of another vein."
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	"If there remains in the location for some days any blackness or greenness, do not heed this; and if you wish, apply over that location a plaster of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or of mint juice or calendula or the like."
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	"Many times apostemes and swellings occur due to bloodletting from the basilica (vein)."
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	"And therefore place your hand over that (vein), and if you feel softness due to your compression over it, then that swelling is bad and harmful; and therefore be sure to apply over it some cause of what we have said, for blood will flow strongly from the artery."
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And make a plaster with that which has astringent properties so that the location may be endured; and also treat it with other appropriate remedies until it is healed."
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	"And it is necessary to draw blood from each person according to the quantity of his strength and according to the prevailing color over the blood as it appears."
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	"For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and similarly if it appears thick, let it flow out until it becomes thinned; and likewise if it is bitter, let it flow out until its bitterness is removed."
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	"And it is necessary for that person who is full and strong and has need of bloodletting in one session to amplify the bloodletting of the vein and make the lancet wide."
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	"And for that person who is frail, let the opposite be done, and it is necessary to bleed him in many sessions, and let the vein be narrow."
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	"It is better to perform a transverse section in bloodletting of veins than puncture."
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	"This manner of bloodletting saves from flow of blood and from incision of nerves; it is more laudable and safer than bloodletting according to width and length."
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	"And in that person to whom syncope is accustomed to occur during bloodletting, you should care for him before bloodletting with a little powder of millet seeds infused in wormwood wine or simple oil macerated; and draw from him blood in three or four sessions."
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If it is a cold complexion, then perform phlebotomy to infuse an eyewash of myrrh or an aromatic eyewash scented with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy, and it is due to loss of much blood, then one must drink beef water and a subtle fragrant eyewash. Use aromatics with algae and rub them on the patient's body.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And here to raise the arm and dissolve the blood according to what is seen, if phlebotomy has been done for much evacuation, and its virtue is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, then it is according to the quantity of the virtue on consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But if one wants to raise the arm again and evacuate the blood once more, and his body is robust, then do it appropriately 7 or 9 hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But if one wants to draw blood from his body contrary to the direction it inclines towards, then do it on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But in the body where much blood has already been drawn and it is hot and causes fever to occur, then draw out some blood once more and draw off a large quantity of it, amplifying the aperture so that syncope occurs. For you have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand over the pulse of the body to prevent death from occurring instead of syncope, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood again, after the opening of the vein has already been closed and it is difficult to draw out the blood, press beneath it violently and curved, for that is very wrong.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Leave it until it is phlebotomized again; or remove that with the heat of the phlebotomy which has coagulated the blood in the opening of the vein; or place upon it some triaca ointment, or sage, and compress it with light compression until the blood is completely evacuated.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that one alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if you are provoked to evacuate blood again and there is no excuse, then do it on that same spot or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "the rope of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the furca or basilica, when they are not visible or hidden, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of phlebotomy of that one is that the patient immerses his hand in cold water until the flesh reddens and the vein appears manifestly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And make sure to tie it tightly with a ligature made of twisted thread with moderate tension; and phlebotomize according to the transverse direction, not latitudinally nor according to length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the aperture be wide and your phlebotomy be such that you phlebotomize that one at the junction of the hand a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse your hand in cold water again and let the blood run into the water until your need is satisfied.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from the immersion of your hand in cold water; and in autumn the course of blood is stopped by immersing it in cold water at that time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And phlebotomy from this vein is safer than from all other veins because it does not have a pulsating vein nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And phlebotomy of the little finger of the right hand corresponds to diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of phlebotomy from that one is this: you tighten the hand with a ligature or your hand, because you have placed it in cold water until the vein becomes inflamed and well demonstrated at sight; and make sure to phlebotomize it transversely; and if you miss it entirely, do not worry about it.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to end the phlebotomy on your hand, because those ones have nerves denuded of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And make sure to immerse the hand in cold water again and let the blood run into that one because if you do not immerse it again in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood has been extracted according to the amount needed, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close suddenly; and do likewise in all strict vein.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But be aware that phlebotomy of the little finger of the left hand corresponds to diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do likewise in the phlebotomy of that one as you have done with the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the advantage of phlebotomy from that vein is for diseases that are in the parts of the body, such as diseases of the mother, and retention of menstruation, etc. and also for ulcers of skin and old wounds, and their similar diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of phlebotomy from that one is this: the patient immerses his foot in cold water and makes friction until the veins appear well; and he places it on the junction of the foot with a belt; and the place of the vein appears clearly below the said foot, and from there are many branches distributed on the face of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then phlebotomize the largest branch or the one that is below the heel on the side of the aggregation of it because it is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you phlebotomize that one on the face of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below that one on the face of the foot, and pause your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize transversely, as if you wanted to miss it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And make sure that the phlebotomy is sufficient
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the emission of blood is prohibited, then immerse the foot again in cold water and let the blood run into that one until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then repeat with the phlebotomy somewhat higher up because the place is safe; and do not fear its malignancy, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do likewise with the saphenous vein of the other foot
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And concerning the sciatic vein, its place is thus: below the heel on the side of the ankle of the left leg
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the advantage of phlebotomy from that one is for pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of phlebotomy from that one is this: the patient enters into a bath and makes haste and tightens the skin of that one on the side of the hip above the heel above four fingers with a long thin bandage because it does not appear except by that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And then when it appears, then phlebotomize that one according to each vein that is within your ability and according to the transverse, and it is better; or miss that one by incision or cut that one by section because its place is safe.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is found more in men than women. And if you find that one, and it does not appear to the touch, then phlebotomize some branch of it, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot near the said ear and little finger bones.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Guard yourself against the nerves, and make the blood flow as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then carefully untie the ligation and place your hand over the site of the phlebotomy wound, pressing gently to stop the bleeding. It heals easily this way.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and the quality of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilation is done with horns, or earms (earmuffs), or wicks
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventilation is done in two ways: one with scarification and bloodletting, the other without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation that is done without scarification is performed in two ways: either with fire or without fire
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the twelve locations of the body where ventilation is administered with scarification and bloodletting are: behind the ears; at the crown of the head; in the middle of both halves of the neck; below the jawbone on either side of the mouth; on the two shoulder blades; over the buttocks; on the inner thighs, each about a hand's breadth above the knee.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Ventilation does not draw blood from veins but from the small capillaries scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore does not drain the virtue through them, just as blood is drawn by phlebotomy. Neither does it matter whether ventilation is done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by excess within that needs to be evacuated completely from the body
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if there is a need for ventilation due to illness or continence, administer it every hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle of it as well, whenever necessary.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	This is why men who have an abundance of blood that needs to be removed by ventilation experience heaviness and headache; those with congestion and heat in their face, head, and neck; those with dizziness and darkness before the eyes, and blurry vision; those who spit blood during coughing fits; those whose laughter is excessive; those who have a metallic taste in their mouth or a coated tongue that bleeds when they spit; those who sleep excessively, and those who see visions of blood, redness, ants, plagues, and other such causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, whenever any of those causes occur, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, we command that ventilation be performed after two or three hours have passed since daybreak.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	It is helpful to ventilate the nape of the neck when there is heaviness in the head and sinking at the temples, but it is important that this be done as part of a general evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This ventilation is performed on the same spot where phlebotomy is done on the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not permitted to perform this procedure on anyone who is of robust constitution or has a cold, as it can cause great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Therefore, this technique should not be used on the elderly or those with hot-headed illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But if one continues to perform this technique repeatedly on the same person, it can lead to forgetfulness. Therefore, you should command the operator performing ventilation to pause slightly with his hand and the cup at each of the intervals mentioned earlier, in order to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Ventilation of the armpit is done on the spot where phlebotomy is performed on the dark vein and the basilica vein: for this reason it relieves asthma, tightness in the chest, and splitting pain in the lungs, as well as coughing and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	It is important that armpit ventilation be done with care, because if it is done too vigorously it can cause weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	Ventilation of the forehead relieves accidental headaches and inflammation of the eyes, migraines, and congestion, as well as pain in the roots of the teeth. It is performed on the spot where phlebotomy is done on the basilica vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	You should command the operator performing ventilation not to press his hand at the site of incision, lest he injure the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Ventilation of the chin relieves halitosis in the mouth, gingivitis, and symptoms of oral diseases. It is performed on the spot where phlebotomy is done on the veins found on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	However, ventilation performed on the two spatulas (the sides of the neck) causes headache, which is caused by congestion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	Ventilation of the two divisions at the corners of the eyes relieves symptoms associated with phlebotomy of three veins: the basilica, dark, and cephalic veins. This is because it attracts blood from all the smaller veins in the flesh, as well as the smaller branches of the other larger veins that lead to those three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	Command the operator not to proceed with scarification at this location, as it is lacking in flesh and has nerves and arteries close beneath the surface.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	This ventilation technique involves applying the cup over the buttocks and relieves hemorrhoids of the anus, as well as ulcers in that area.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	You should command the operator to perform strong, broad ventilation at this location using a brass cup, as the area requires a strong section. Weak or subtle traction vents may not be sufficient and scarification may be necessary.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	However, ventilation of the calves reduces pain manifestly by degrees, as it attracts blood from the entire body and relieves chronic pain in the loins and back, as well as the bladder. It also stimulates menstruation and relieves dropsy and edema. It is performed on the spot where phlebotomy is done on two saphenous veins, the external saphenous vein, and two cavel veins.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they greatly weaken the body and can cause fainting in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	The benefit of ventilation on the external saphenous vein is similar to that of ventilation on both calves.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position for performing vents is to place the cup at the beginning and follow with moderate suction, not prolonging the position but pausing it lightly and removing it gently, allowing the humors to come to the location by equal attraction.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	Do not cease repeating this until you see the location become reddened and swollen, and you can perceive the color of the blood appearing within the cup.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then scarify and repeat suction little by little, carefully considering the condition of the patient's body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For a person with delicate skin and few pores, you should scarify once only and not more, so that the location is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	Command the operator to widen the scarification and probe slightly, and apply suction gently with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the blood is thick, you should then scarify twice, because in the first instance the pathway for suction of the blood and its humidity is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second instance, the extraction of thick blood becomes more visible during examination.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the blood is very fetid, then perform a third scarification to ensure its complete removal.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when you wish to remove blood little by little or just a small amount, one scarification is sufficient.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If you wish to remove a large amount of blood, perform many scarifications. If you know that the blood is thick, then you should scarify with a deep cut.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the incision made by a lancet.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	"For one whose chain is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it's necessary that the places for cups be anointed with lenitive, aperient, resolvent oils. If it's summertime, use oil of aloes or violet oil, or bitter almond oil, or oil from cooked hemp; but if it's wintertime, then use poppy oil, lilac oil, chamomile oil, or blood."
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	"If there is abundant sweat that's thick and frothy, then use oil of amaranth, balsam oil, aloe oil, or aneth oil."
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	"But if the bleeder has large pores with tender skin, then it is forbidden to use oil. Instead, wash the places for cupping near the area being treated with warm or hot water mixed with salt, hemp, or borax, and similar substances."
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	"And for one whose blood is very moist, wash his cupping places with sour wine or water from myrtle and sumac."
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	"And for one whose sweat is thick, wash his cupping places with old wine or water from hyssop (majoram), or decoction of aneth or chamomile."
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	"And it is necessary that cupping be performed before bathing. It should be administered near the bath for an hour or two hours, and one should sleep near where the cupping is taking place."
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	"It is necessary to regulate the air before performing cupping on a person who has undergone bloodletting."
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	"At the beginning, if the one performing cupping or phlebotomy is choleric with sharp and inflammatory blood, then it is necessary to use cooling causes, such as sour apples, endive cooked in sour wine and lettuce, and secanabin, julep, and similar substances."
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	"And pause from foods such as polecat meat, cooked birds' flesh, and foods seasoned with sour flavors."
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	"And for one whose complexion is cold, it is necessary that he drink barley syrup or alkanet syrup with seeds, sumac, and wine with a moderate odor between old and new. And it should be recommended to him that he use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods such as polecat meat, cannabis, fish, small birds, and pigeons."
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	"And on the day of cupping and bloodletting, it is necessary that drinking be greater than eating."
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	"And it is necessary to give some people, especially those who are weak, triaca alhacen or muscat oil, or musk powder, or aloes denbent cupping or phlebotomy, so that the main members may be comforted and the blood subtilized; and these things should not be taken by those with a scaly condition."
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	"Ventoses that are without scarification are cupping vessels paused on the liver, spleen, and gouty parts, and on the navel, in the locations of the joints, and on the armpits of the ankles, because these members do not suffer scarification upon them."
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	"And it is not desired for these except the attraction of blood from a member, such as pausing a cupping vessel on the breast in a condition of blood flux from the nose. It is used to dissolve cold and viscous cupping vessels from the member, such as pausing on the belly and navel, because it rarifies the member, clears it, and relieves pain by resolving cupping vessels."
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	"And it is paused on the ears when there occurs an obstruction or deafness in them, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out obstruction and removes deafness from its place."
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	"And similarly it does when paused on the liver and spleen to draw out coldness enclosed within them."
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	"These cupping vessels are administered wet with suction alone, but sometimes they are administered with fire."
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	"And sometimes they are administered full of warm water for illnesses of the spleen."
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	"This is because when the cupping vessel is filled and becomes larger, it can be done with cold water alone or with water in which herbs are boiled according to what is appropriate."
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	"Form of cupping vessel administered with fire: let the opening of the mouth be two fingers wide; let the amount of pitch be as much as half a palm; and place it on the side where it is in the circuit, as much as possible; let the attraction be small according to the amount that enters into it through one needle."
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	"Let it be made of copper or bronze, with thick edges, lion-shaped, egg-shaped, and flat-bottomed, so that the member is not harmed by its position on it."
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	"And let there be in the middle of it a transverse groove of copper or iron where the candle with fire is paused."
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	"And this cupping vessel should be much larger than that which we have recommended, and smaller according to the illness and condition of the person who uses it."
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	"The cupping vessels for infants and weak individuals are different from those for young people and those with strong constitutions."
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	"The quality of pausing this cupping vessel with fire on the member is that one should extend the wick with fire from dry wood decently before a small candle of wax, and pause it on the middle of the transverse groove in the middle of the cupping vessel, so that the fire is kindled around the opening so that the body of the sick person is not burned."
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	"And immediately after it is paused on the member of the sick person, let him be on the attraction that we have said, until when we have the cupping vessels and do not want to draw out the wick so that vapor does not rise upon that attraction, at that time the cupping vessel will be dissolved quickly."
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	"And immediately extinguish the wick according to its manner, and repeat this if necessary."
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	"But in a cupping vessel that is administered in the illness of pleurisy with water, in which there is no transverse groove nor attraction, and it is not administered except that it is filled with water, and it is paused on the member alone."
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	"And this is its form: And this cupping vessel, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water."
Capitol .xcvii.	"Chapter XCVI."
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	"Bloodletting is not administered on most members except on those in which the position of cupping vessels is not possible because of their smallness, such as the hand and gingiva and similar ones; or on a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and nose and their similars."
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	"And the quality of using those bloodletting vessels that are found is if there are bloodsuckers in the stagnant waters of muddy pools."
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	"And immediately they are placed during the day and night in stagnant water until they become hungry, and there remains no cause in the belly of those; and immediately let the body be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping vessels; and immediately rub the member of the sick person until it becomes reddened; and immediately pause them on it."
E cum son umplidas e caso.	"And when they are full, throw them away."
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	"If suction from the place with a cupping vessel is possible, it is better in judgment."
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	"But if not, then wash the place with sour wine and immediately with much water; and let it be rubbed and pressed."
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	"And if the body of blood is prolonged through the skin of the bloodsuckers, and this is sufficient, then you take a cloth dipped in hot water and pause it on it until the oozing stops."
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If blood has multiplied, then sprinkle powdered vitriol or gallstones and similar substances with styptic properties onto the wound until the bleeding stops; or place handfuls of cooked fava beans on the area, allowing them to adhere before the bleeding ceases.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, apply leeches for bloodletting, but only when it is possible to remove them later.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If it is not possible to remove the leeches by suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the flesh until some blood flows out. Afterwards, apply pressure to stop any further bleeding immediately.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you want them to detach, sprinkle a little powdered garlic or salt or ashes on them and they will fall off immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the prologue of the third part: On restoration
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very often necessary in the art of medicine, as it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and laymen who at no time have regarded the books of the Ancients nor read even one letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, the science of this manner in our land is rare. And I have not forgotten it at any time. And I do not propose what follows except due to the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, in order to extract the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And therefore I direct you to experiment and study throughout the duration of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and about which my experiment has passed. For here I have summarized it for you other wise men and delivered it from the occupation of lengthening; and I have abbreviated it in abbreviation; and I have shown it in declaration; and I have formed many forms of the instruments that are administered therein, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections of the causes of bone fractures, from which it is necessary to make a premise before we begin remembering the members that have been broken and diverse.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	I therefore wish to declare in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of my speech, and the chapters for understanding which at the beginning it is necessary for craftsmen to stand still and reflect on their truth. So you are and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art besides you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when some fracture or dislocation or torsion or collapse occurs, at the beginning it is necessary for you to prepare with a phlebotomy or bleed that one, or several together, if no prohibition exists due to debility of virtue or because he was an infant, or elderly in decrepitude, or during intense heat or cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And therefore you should be content with your diet of fresh herbs and meats of birds and crabs. And prohibit thick meats and foods that fill the veins with blood, lest you are secure about an abscess forming and fear effusion of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And at this point return the sick to his first regimen with which he is accustomed to live.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, at this point the sick should be nourished with foods rich in nutrients that are thick and heavy, containing viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, chickpeas, eggs, beef, cheese, fresh fish, thick wine, and similar things. And with this regimen coagulation of the fracture is done more easily and quickly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that when bones are broken in men who are in the first flourishing of life or are elderly, it is not possible for them to be joined together and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of the members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are joined together and consolidated according to their nature at all times due to the drying out of those members. And those that are broken in them at the end of youth are joined together and consolidated, just as the bones of young infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nevertheless nature adjusts and binds the broken bone together with glue-like substance that adheres to it, so that they are joined together at the same time. And it brings about the end of firmness and strength, just as fire does at its beginning. As long as no cause prohibits this from occurring in its workings.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to pause the feeding of the sick with foods that are heavy, viscous, and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Many varieties of fracture according to the variety of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members. For a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm, and similarly all other members have different fractures among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I come with a reminder of every type of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinguished from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many varieties of fracture even within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is an arch-like fracture that occurs sometimes in stars. And some fractures occur according to the length of the bone: such as those of the satire and astragalus bones which are additional or not, just like when a pen is prepared to write. And there is also a fracture with splintering and disruption at the head, and a fracture with a small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each type there is a specific pain or torment in its restoration, which will be remembered later on distinguished by their locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Many signs of bone fracture
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And a fracture of the bone is known by its crookedness, and by the prominence and depression that can be felt on it, and also when you squeeze it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no apparent crookedness in the place nor any deformity felt when touched with agitation and the sick person does not experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It may happen that there is slight crookedness or fissure present, so you should not squeeze it with your hand or compress it too much. Rather pause at this point and use the medicines of which a reminder will be given at this moment suitable for the location; and also apply a bandage to provide subtle support.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the location is arched and not split into two or otherwise injured in its satire, if all separation from its companion is removed, then you should begin at this point to correct it, provided that an abscess does not occur there.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs there, then leave it alone for several days until the abscess stops. And then treat it according to each manner that you know of lifting and binding.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that restoration and healing of this is easier than for the bone in which satire occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it as will be remembered later on.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if there are satiruses in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And let your position be such that you place the affected member in its natural figure while the parted parts of the broken member are extended; then you should proceed to return those additions with binding and according to each manner that you can apply them in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	"Guard thou thyself, according to thy strength, that thou fall not upon the patient through thine own carelessness or injury. And proceed thou with all thy might, applying one bone with another their companionship in their best forms."
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	"And it is necessary that thou dost touch him at that opportune moment with thy hand, and if sometimes some different cause occurs, correct and equalize it according to the quantity of thy virtue."
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	"And excessive extension and compression are avoided, as many foolish doctors do who often cause an abscess to be cut by their operation, or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen happen from their operations."
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	"And immediately annex the parts, apply equanimity and gentle operation and bandaging of that limb, and give rest and tranquility. Warn the patient about this and cause him to avoid moving that limb during his waking hours or sleep, and observe his revolutions and agitations, and direct his evacuations, and direct all his movements with all thy virtue; and wait until the position of the limb is one in which pain is ensured, which is the cause when he feels discomfort in the disposition of the limb through his injury. Then it is necessary to change that into another position where he does not feel pain; and guard this so that the position of him is correct and equal, lest the limb become deformed upon recovery."
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	"And this is the quality of bandaging that I recommend for tranquil limbs, because you should know that broken limbs are diverse in their smallness and greatness and form."
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	"And for those that are small, such as the arm, hand, and foot, and similar to them, then the wrapping should be of very fine linen."
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	"But for those that are large, such as the thigh or calf, then in these there should be wrapping of thick and strong linen, because the tight binding connects the limb and strengthens it on all sides with equal bandaging, so that nothing enters between them."
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	"And when you begin, first direct your evacuation of air, then bind it conveniently with three or four wrappings according to the size of that limb, and tighten thy hand with the linen."
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	"And then take him to the highest part of that limb from the location of the fracture, and tighten more so that thy bandage is not too loose at the place of the fracture."
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	"And then extend yourself with wrapping from the location of the fracture a little bit, and gradually loosen the bandage, until you take up a large part of it."
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	"And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the location of the broken limb with wrapping, and then go with those wrappings to the highest part of that limb away from the fracture; and let your operation be in the tightening of the wrapping and loosening of that according to what we have said about the first wrapping above."
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	"And then insert between the wrappings of linen or cloth with which you should equalize any curvature of the fracture, if there is curvature in it; and if not, do not pause therein for any cause."
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	"And then place another bandage over it, and then equalize upon those wrappings with well-arranged stitches immediately, if there is no inflammation or abscess in that location, and then place over that which sits on the abscess and covers the inflammation; and leave that for a few days; and then tighten over it the stitches."
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	"And let the stitches be of strong linen thread, well-formed; or of juniper wood; or of date palm branches; and let the width of each stitch be according to this shape and figure:"
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	"But the stitch that is placed upon that fracture should be thicker and stronger than the other stitches, and the length of the stitch according to what is measured on the limb in size and smallness; and then tighten over the stitches with another bandage according to thy first tightening; and then tie it above with thread neatly according to what we have said about tightening, and let thy tightening be according to the location of the fracture more, and as it is further away from the fracture, so less should be the tightening."
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	"And let the threads be soft in thickness and fineness, and of wool; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some fools doing who place their threads of twisted cords, it is a great error, for they will not have an even tightening."
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	"And very fine threads are not convenient, for with them you will not be able to tighten as much as you want, and it is necessary that there should be less than one digit between stitch and stitch."
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	"And if the pain is felt at the ends of the stitches near the tightening in those locations, then place them aside with linen or wool pads until that does not cause harm."
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	"Sometimes fracture is with splinters, and there occurs displacement in the bone, and I have spoken about that previously in this chapter concerning singularities."
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	"And know that not every broken limb should be stitched with stitches on the first day; which is because when a limb is large, it is necessary to wait upon it with stitches for about five or seven or more days, according to your security concerning the advent of an abscess."
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	"And this is the manner of splints with which the Ancients used to restore fractures, displacements, and luxations."
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	"Mode of splinting commonly used for the restoration of fracture, convenient for many complexities and especially for women and children, because it does not admit heat nor friction: And let there be taken powdered gypsum, which is the marrow of flour that you must remove from the movement of the millstone in the walls of the mill."
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	"And grind it thus as it is, except that you sieve it with white of egg, and make the mixture neither too thick nor too thin, and then use it."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	"Another manner of splinting for restoring fracture and dislocation and luxation: Take of asafetida one drachm, laudanum two drachms, acacia three drachms, enula four drachms, and migrace five drachms, which is root of wild radish; myrrh and aloe two drachms each; all of them are ground and sieved and mixed with aloes water or with white of egg if the condition of the illness is scaled. And then use this splint, for it is of good composition and restores lightly broken bones, conferring benefit to many men."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	"Another manner of splinting which benefits fracture and luxation: Take of migrace five drachms, white lead two drachms; myrrh and aloe one drachm each; acacia six drachms; pitch twenty-four drachms."
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	"All are ground in a mortar with much crushing, and sieved, and mixed with water or white of egg, and it is administered."
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	"Mode of splinting for joints and bones separated from their locations, and causes pain in those places and for fissures and fractures: Take clean wool and immerse it in sour wine and boiling oil, and place it on the location."
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	"But this plaster has no virtue of restoration, nor does it cause abscesses or expel pains properly."
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	"Another manner of plaster that restores broken bone: Take leaves of wild fig and leaves of opium poppy, count them all together and make plaster of them."
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	"A brief manner of plaster administered for the restoration of fracture of bone and when you wish solution of the remnant of abscess: Take roots of althea, camomile flowers, violet flowers, barley flour, all in equal parts; all are ground and mixed with wine if the member is not scaled."
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scraped, then comfort it with water containing humid coriander or simply with water.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method for a plaster that is more powerful in resolution than the first one, when an apostema occurs during the restoration of a limb: take some roots of althea and its seeds, and of balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, and all this finely chopped and sifted; then grind them together with water from sauces or sweet water or wine, all according to the quality of the limb and the pause of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be paused on the limb for forty days during its restoration, but rather recommends making a cerote of wax and oil, and nothing else; he also advises that it should be ground between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But it is seen that in Galen's view, they should be paused on the broken limb during its restoration and the causes for which there is drying with little heat are such as myrrh, resins, and similar ones of those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A way to make a plaster that relieves injury and pain: take some myrrh, saffron, human hair cuttings or chicken feathers, althea, and salt, all finely chopped; grind them together until they form a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	However, the amount to be left in place according to how tightly it should remain and when it is appropriate to remove it depends on whether there is no pain or swelling nor any bone fracture, in which case you can leave it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation in the place where it has been applied, then you should immediately remove it and replace the plaster.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Then take some lint and marine sponge moistened with hot water, and submerge it in warm water; use this to wash the affected area until the swelling subsides and the pain is relieved. Then allow the limb to rest for an hour. After that, place lanolin soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil on the limb and leave it overnight, ensuring that there is no signs of cauterization, and that the swelling and pain have been removed from the limb.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that subtle strapping and small plaster again, not too tightly as in your first application, until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if sometimes the abscess and redness and pain and inflammation and all accidents are completely removed, and you need a plaster and strapping, then repeat that which you have done at the beginning of treatment.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause of those mentioned occurs in the limb, then you should not remove it but leave it on for three or four or five or seven days. And sometimes all this is left until twenty days according to what appears to you when removing the plaster, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh upon it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then tighten the strapping more than your first strapping all around, and adjust it according to the thickness of the limb of the sick person, according to how much it has healed.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if the place of the fracture becomes dry and emaciated more than it should, then you should know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching that place. Therefore, moisten it with warm water every time you remove the plaster; do this for all three days. And loosen the strapping a little, and through this operation, bring nourishment to the limb, and it will be healed easily.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what foolish bone-setters do when a fracture of the limb is not restored at the beginning, as it should be, and is restored crookedly, that is an error according to their operation. And there is great fear, and if it were correctly done, the Ancients increased in their books and writings with this practice.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	"I have never seen them do this, so it seems more reasonable that they should not."
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	"Chapter Two: On fracture when it occurs in the head."
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	Broken bones are many, and their shapes are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are caused by impact of force which crushes all of the bone within its cavity, leaving the bone like that seen in a tree trunk, and hence this type is called "axial"; or the force cuts into some part of the bone, cutting through the flesh but not penetrating to the marrow; and this kind of fracture is called "closed".
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The disease of these two fractures is great or small, and it varies from fracture to fracture. The cause of this is impact with force or pressure on bone, accompanied by swelling or bruising.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture is penetrating and approaches the perimysium which covers the bone, or it occurs on the surface of the bone. The severity of these two fractures varies greatly.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And there is fracture which is concentrated within the bone itself, in the finest detail of hair's breadth, and hence this type of fracture is called "capillary".
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And there is fracture which occurs by pressure or impact of bone, with similar symptoms, causing some laminae of the bone to enter into its cavities, and this happens especially in concave areas, as seen in the heads of hammers when they suffer impact and their entrance is fractured.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This phenomenon occurs most often in the bodies of moist bones, such as the heads of nails.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And so for all these types of fractures, they appear like stars separated from one another.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	"I will bring all of this back to its proper place."
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	"I know all these types of fracture by detection on those and by inquiry of their marrow and examination of putrid flesh that is upon them."
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	"A capillary fracture is recognized by the fact that it is visible on the bone and is cleaned and lined with tincture of iodine because the fracture appears black."
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	"However, in the treatment of fractures, one must first consider any accidents of the illness, and then whether the accidents are significant by manifest sign, such as vomiting from cholera or extension and loss of consciousness, fainting spells, acute fever, dilation of pupils and redness of eyes, and similar occurrences in major conditions; it is not healed if not treated."
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	"And if there are no current accidents you wait for health, then you begin the treatment of it."
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	"The reason for this is that if it happens to you at the beginning as it was happening and especially in the days of winter, then it is necessary for you to observe the marrow of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all conditions."
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	"And if it is in the days of summer, then you must expose the bone before the seventh day, having ensured that what remains of the bone has become corrupted by the soft tissue, and that the accidents which we have mentioned have occurred."
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	"And if the fracture has already reached the soft tissue covering the brain and is accompanied by small pieces and attrition, then you must insert the comminuted and attrition fragments, according to what I will recommend to you."
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	"And having shaved the head of the patient, you must uncover the bone according to your custom and manner as much as possible following the figure of the fracture, ensuring that it is light on the patient."
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	"And if it happens to you that you must make the detection of the bone, fluxes of blood or hard abscess, then you should pause for it with what is necessary, and this is that you apply compresses of cloth infused in wine and rose oil to the place, and let the fracture rest until the abscess is sedated, and ensure there are no fluxes of blood; and then begin the circumcision of the bone and its ablation."
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	"And this is according to one or two methods of operation."
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And one method is that you insert the bone with a narrow incision, and this is its shape: And then administer another incision tool a little wider than the first one; this is its shape:"
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	"And then apply an even wider incision tool."
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	"And you should have a variety of different incision tools, some of which are wider than others; some shorter than others and sharp at their tips, made of iron or steel."
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	"And use them with ease in percussion on the incision tool so that you do not strike the head and harm it."
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	"And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate around it before you administer the incision tools with their handles, which are called non-penetrating awls."
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	"And they are not called thus but rather those which do not reach the end of the bone at that point where it is approaching it, so that the awl has a round tip or edge on that side which is left of its sharp tip similar to an edge or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone."
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	"And it is convenient that you take many of these awls, each suitable for the thickness of each bone, so that you have present in all tests of the brain the tip of which is sharp, and its quantity in length and width according to the quantity of thickness of this test."
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	"And this is the shape of three types of awls: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the awl on the bone and twist it with your fingers until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; and then move the awl to another location, and pause where it is between all threads equal to the thickness of the ray or approximately."
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	"And then incise with incision tools between each thread of the bone and make it as subtle as possible in the end of levitation, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause by some instruments which will be prepared for that, such as tweezers and subtle forceps."
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	"And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the incision tool does not touch any part of the cerebrum."
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	"And then when you have completely perforated the bone and separated it from the cerebrum if it is continuous with it, you will extract it, and rasp and smooth it on its roughness where it is on the bone with another tool similar to an incision tool but which must be more thin and subtle than the others."
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	"And if some fragments of the small bones remain scattered and scattered, then you should take them with ease with what is necessary among the tools; and then cure the wound with stitches and bandages which we have mentioned."
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And the other method of operation is light and distant from fear, which Gaulish and Greek praise greatly; this is its speech: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin discovering the fracture of the bone in that place where it is most violent and evident, until when you have discovered that fracture and placed on one side of it the tip of this long and gentle incision tool whose shape is as follows:"
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	"And it is that the lenticular fracture is lion-shaped and does not incise any part, and the acute fracture is of it on both sides in length, as often happens; so that the lenticular fracture fits well with the cerebrum with its face facing the sharp edge of the bone."
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	"And then strike the incision tool of one fracture with a small hammer until you incise all the bone easily as it revolves and you are sure that the panic does not happen in any manner whatsoever, even if the patient were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep."
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	"Then if some part of the paniculus attached to the bone in certain places of bone breaks off, incise it with the tip of this lenticular incision tool and detach it easily because it is detached from it without harm or fear."
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	"And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the paniculus and that which is cut off or detached from the bone is its face, and remains rough and scattered with subtle fragments then it is necessary to rasp this roughness and remove these fragments with subtle razors which you have prepared in different quantities so that you can administer them in all places as conveniently and correctly as possible according to how you proceed in your operation of that broken bone and the shape of it."
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	"And it is necessary that you use in your operation with which you rasp the bone at the beginning the widest of those razors and then use progressively the most subtle ones, and do not cease doing so continuously until you arrive at administering the thinnest and most subtle of all."
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	"But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, administer cure according to what you have found for their correction."
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	"And it is a cause that it is not mentioned among all those who have studied in this art."
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	"And what we have written about this applies especially to large fractures."
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	"And if the paniculus is torn when you remove the bone, then it is necessary to take a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it on the wound; and also take another doubled or tripled cloth and immerse it in wine and rose oil and place it on the first cloth gently so that you do not press too hard, and then apply this bandage and do not stretch it except according to the quantity that the wound has alone."
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	"Let that one remain under this care for one or two days until you are sure of the formation of pus; then remove it and administer medicines with which superfluous dryness is removed, such as linseed oil and barley flour, powder of incense and aloes, and similar things."
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	"Also make powders from these medicines which are finely powdered on the wound, like they are dry; generally, administer to him all medicine of a property that cleanses and does not bite."
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	"And guard yourself, according to your skill, that the wound in your treatment is clean and not sullied by dirt or other things; do not allow it to become inflamed, because when it adheres to the panniculus of the brain it corrupts it and causes severe illness."
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	"When it occurs in the head, if the bone is exposed and especially if the treatment of it is neglected, then blackness appears on its surface; therefore consider the hours so that you know if it happens to the patient those accidents which we have said are fatal without any remedy."
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"But if blackness does not appear except from the medicine applied to it and that blackness is due to the power of that medicine, then take some honey and three parts rose oil, mix them with a cloth, and apply it directly on the wound; also treat it with the appropriate remedies until it is healed."
Capitol .iii.	"Chapter III."
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	"On the restoration of the nose when it is cut."
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	"You should know that the nose is not broken except into two parts at once raised up, or one of those sometimes seen, because there are two bones in it, and the cartilage part is not broken but only roughened and twisted."
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	"But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should introduce the little finger into its place and push that fracture inward with your thumb and index finger from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape."
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	"And let this be done by you easily, and guard yourself so that you do not cause pain to the patient during your operation."
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is at the top of the nose where it meets the forehead, and the patient cannot reach that area, then a splint should be applied with its end placed on the bone in which some thickness has been carved.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in two parts, then make it appear as if it were one piece.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And try to begin the restoration of it on the first day after the fracture if possible; otherwise, around the seventh or tenth day you should repeat the wound cleansing process.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And if the fracture is in one piece, insert a cloth wick into the end of the nose, or use two cotton pads if it's in two pieces, ensuring that the padding is thick enough to fill the gap in the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Some ancient restorers say that the cotton pads should be edged with border and changed every day, but this is not seen by me. It is necessary that the wick be wrapped in albumen of egg yolk mixed with powdered mastic; and also let the pad remain inside until the bone has been set and the cartilage strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Sometimes, instead of cotton pads, pieces of linen wool can be inserted into the nose, provided that there is not much pus present and that the patient's breathing is not impeded.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this method is not necessary for you to use; if you wish, do as I have said, or if you prefer, use cotton pads.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another wound cleansing process is needed in the future, plaster the nose with cerote or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if there is no wound cleansing process needed, then you should plaster the outside of the nose with sesame flour and powdered mastic mixed with egg white. And also cover it with linen wool, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or slightly comminuted, then you should bind them up and extract those fragments using appropriate instruments. Then close the wound with stitches and treat it with something that heals and consolidates the bone, along with suitable plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If plague occurs within the nostrils, then it is necessary to cure them with hot compresses and administer lead cannulae until completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Capítulo IV
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	De la restauración de la mandíbula cuando está trabada
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is broken and the fracture is not infected, look to see if it is fractured only on one side, and not in two pieces. If it is curved inward at the ends, its treatment will be easier
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth and similarly if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert the said index finger of the right hand. Then gently push the swelling of the fracture inward with that finger while supporting the outside of the bone with your other hand until it becomes even.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two pieces, then you must apply traction to both parts according to their straightness until it is possible for them to be brought together.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is commotion of teeth with disruption, then strengthen those which you expect to break with gold or silver wire or thread. Then place cotton on the broken jawbone and apply gauze over it, and place a large sterile cloth folded lengthwise on top of everything. Then bind it all together according to how you are accustomed to do so and according to what is convenient for its application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest quietly, and have them avoid eating dry foods that are difficult to swallow.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in some way, then on the third day remove the splint and realign it. Then refine what needs to be refined on the splint and apply plaster with powdered chalk or egg albumin or wheat flour, after first removing the cotton from the patient's mouth. Then place a linen cloth over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, when the splint is attached and well-adjusted on the patient, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it in place until the fracture has healed and become strong. For many times this fracture heals in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if an abscess forms later on, then apply what we have said many times for its treatment until it heals and the abscess is removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is accompanied by pus, then consider whether it is a piece of bone that has separated or an abscess. If it is an abscess, then be careful to remove those abscesses using whatever is convenient for removing them with your instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"If the orifice of the wound is narrow, then you should widen it using a dilator according to your need."
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	"And when you have finished those procedures and nothing remains, then if the wound's orifice is wide; otherwise, apply one of the dressings that are convenient for this purpose and pack it until it heals."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter Five."
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	"On the restoration of the collarbone when broken."
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	"Frequently, the collarbone is broken at its midpoint near the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways."
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	"It is broken, separated, or separated into two pieces without any displacement; this is easy to restore; or it occurs with displacements, which makes restoration difficult; or it is accompanied by a wound."
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	"And the operation in this case, when there is no wound, is that you have two assistants present: one to hold the forceps and follow the broken collarbone, and the other to extend the neck at its midpoint."
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	"And once you have grasped the fracture with your hands as described earlier, make sure it has the appropriate shape according to what is needed, and that there is neither prominence nor concavity at its apex."
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	"And if you need more extension, then place a folded cloth or wool pad behind the sick person's shoulder according to how much is necessary for your needs. Then extend and elevate the collarbone and compress the pad with your hand while grasping the fracture as needed."
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	"And if you cannot reduce the end of the collarbone to its normal position from outside, then have the patient sit up on their neck and place a large cushion or bolster under their shoulder on that side."
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	"And the assistant presses down on the muscle at the fracture site while you elevate the collarbone until it is reduced to its normal position. Then you can correct the fracture and grasp it with your hands as described earlier."
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	"But if there are displacements of the collarbone that cause pain and discomfort, then you should press down on them and remove those displacements with ease."
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if it is retained within the bone, then you should make an incision through it using one of the incissors that you have prepared for this purpose. You had previously placed the collarbone under the instrument called a 'cyphac,' which can be made of wood or iron and has this shape:"
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	"And it resembles a spoon with a concave surface, whose width should be according to your needs based on the size of the bone or the depth of the incision."
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	"But its length should be according to what is feasible for the operation: it should have two ends like this, one wide and the other narrow."
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	"And if the disruption of the skin that you incised when removing the bone displacement is wide and you are certain there will be an abscess, then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with sutures."
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	"And if the disruption is small or you fear an abscess, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the size of the skin incision."
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	"If an abscess forms, then soak a cloth in sour wine and rose oil mixed with wine, and place it on that area."
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	"But the method of treating the bone when it is not covered by skin or flesh involves applying a poultice made of flour from a millstone mixed with egg albumen and placing it on the wound. Then place a lion's tooth compress over that, and if necessary also compress the shoulder joint using a folded pad made of cloth or wool. Then take a long piece of bandage, about as wide as your palm or slightly more so; fold it double and place it over the poultice. Take a thin wooden splint about three digits wide and the same length, wrap it in cloth, and apply it to the fracture site. Then take another long piece of bandage like the first one, twist it around itself, and place it around the patient's neck, behind the shoulder joint on that side and behind their back. Twist it several times until the splint is reduced over all parts of the fracture, ensuring that the reduction of the fracture remains stable; this is what you should do."
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	"And all this should be done without causing pain to the patient over the fractured bone. And you should check on the patient every day to see if the bandage becomes loose or slips out of place; if so, then correct it and tighten the ligature."
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	"And also place the patient on their back and elevate their head with pillows, placing one pillow on either side of them at night. This way, the assistant's arm is elevated from that side and consequently the fractured collarbone is elevated due to the elevation of the muscle; or else the patient's arm is tied around their neck."
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	"And do not remove the bandage until the twelfth day unless there is proper healing or an abscess occurs."
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	"And also renew the poultice if you see it become dry at any time, adjusting it to fit the reduction and replacing it until the fracture is completely restored and consolidated."
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	"And it is strengthened and comfortable after one month and twenty-eight days. Sometimes in some men it happens more quickly than this."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter VI."
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	"On the restoration of fractures of the shoulder."
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	"The blade of the scapula is broken at its lateral edge and not the whole bone, but only its margins."
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	"And therefore when the fracture is at its lateral edge and not known except by touch, then prepare it according to its shape and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way that you are able."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	"And also apply a poultice of fine powdered millstone with egg albumen and a lion's tooth compress. Then place a folded cloth bandage over it; then apply a thin wooden splint according to the size of the entire blade or slightly larger."
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	"But if there is a concavity on one side of the blade where the splint lies, then fill in that concavity with a lion's tooth compress and place the splint evenly."
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	"And also secure it above with a long twisted bandage with sufficient tension and firmness of the splint so that it does not slip out of its place."
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	"And check the bandage every day. And whenever it becomes loose, replace it and tighten it again, adjusting the splint if it has slipped out of its place."
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	"And make the patient lie on their side."
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	"The blade is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five days."
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	"And therefore when this number is complete, then dissolve the bandage, ensuring that you know that it is among those bones where healing has begun and its removal will not cause harm."
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	"And if you proceed with the operation at the location of the shoulder blade and put the arm in place, then cut it open there, drain it, and follow what we have said concerning the treatment of an abscess if one occurs here."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter VII."
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	"On the restoration of fractures of the thighbone."
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	"The thighbone sometimes breaks in its middle but most often it is broken at both ends and becomes shortened and comminuted."
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	"And when the middle of it is broken, its accidents are that it declines towards the thighs and occurs with great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, shortness of breath, and vomiting blood. It is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden to sensation."
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	"And the restoration of him is that the patient should be propped up on their back, and a cushion placed between their shoulders; then press upon their muscles, adjust their ribs with both hands, and proceed gently in the operation and equitation according to whatever manner is possible for this purpose."
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	"And then place the plaster and cotton wool on top of a subtle table made of wood or marble, and its semblance in levitation, since you wrap it in cloth. And be careful to apply that gently onto the broken bone without hurting him; and bind around the back several times according to the roundness of the spine, tightening it appropriately. Observe the binding at all times, and when softened, tighten it again."
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is necessary to provoke the removal of that binding due to infection or pain, or an aposteme occurring in that location, then you gently remove and untie that binding, eradicate the plaster, and rectify whatever has happened there through appropriate care. And then reduce the plaster, sometimes applying it to the face; and adjust the tightness until it is healed."
Capitol .viii.	"Chapter VIII."
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	"On the restoration of crushed ribs."
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	"You should know that rib fractures only occur in large, thick bones of the back; and at their extremities near the junction, such damage does not happen except due to a fall."
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	"And its diagnosis is not hidden from sensation during the examination of it with these tools."
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	"And the restoration should be done as follows: align the fracture with these tools according to the most possible manner, until it is completely aligned according to need, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if necessary."
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	"And if the rib fracture is displaced towards its ends inward, then it occurs with sudden pain and stabbing, like that which occurs in someone who has coughed up blood, because the bone pierces the pleura; and difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting of much blood occur, and this is difficult to treat."
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	"And even the Ancients knew about this with many words."
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	"And they said this: that one should pause feeding the patient who generates inflation and flatulence, so that the abdomen may become inflated and extended, and thus the fracture may be pushed back towards its ends outward."
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	"But we would avoid this because it might cause a boil to form easily if it does not happen, and if it has happened, then it will already help with that."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	"And some of them said that wind should be paused and sucked out with force; this is similar reasoning, but nevertheless it is feared that the wind might draw the superfuities to the location due to weakness."
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	"And some of them said: that the location should be covered with wool which has already been immersed in hot oil, and powdered resin should be paused between the ribs until it is full, so that the wrapping may fit well according to its roundness; and then the patient should be treated with food and medicine for pleurisy."
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	"And if the patient is experiencing strong pain which they cannot bear, and the bone pierces the pleura with sharp puncture, then we fear for the patient, so it is necessary to perform a operation on that location, uncovering the broken rib, and then place upon it the instrument that preserves the cicatrix, of which the memory has been preceded, and gently insert the bone and remove it."
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	"And then we should join together the edges of the wound, if it is large, with suturing, and treat it with plasters until it has healed."
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	"And if an abscess forms inside it, then take and grind up frankincense in rose oil and pause it upon the location, and treat the patient with what is necessary for that internal abscess."
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	"And let him be propped up on pillows on the side on which he lies, until he has healed."
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and it tends to adhere to them, and similarly for the spines of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	"And when this happens to someone and you want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider: if the muscles around it are already softened, stunned, dead, and cannot move them nor extend nor strengthen them, and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in that location, then you will know that it has not healed, and such cases are mortal."
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	"But if they can move them and feel pressure with the fingers or pricking, then you will know that the neck of the bone is saved, and the patient will recover with treatment."
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	"But if it appears like this on the spines of the neck, then consider its weight to know whether it will heal or not."
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	"Then if you find that the muscles around it are already softened, as happened with the others mentioned earlier, and furthermore when he lies on his back, there is windiness and emptying without his will, and sometimes he is propped up on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you will know that it is mortal, and therefore do not bother with treating him."
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	"But if none of these causes occur, then the case is better and easier."
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	"And the treatment for it is that you should pierce and evacuate the abscess which has formed on the broken spine with hot rose oil or with hot wax, pausing upon it a few times each day until the hard abscess has been softened."
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	"And then pause one of the comforting and exciting plasters on it, and strengthen it with bandages; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and not to lie down on the part where they feel pain until they have healed."
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	"And if it happens that the bone is sticking out or some cause has already separated from it, then it is necessary to secure a splint on the neck and fix that bone in place; and also join together the edges of the wound with suturing if it is large; and also treat it with some encrusting of the ointments until it has healed."
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	"But if the end of the bone has broken off, and it is the end of the spine, then you must insert your left-hand thumb into the anus, and grasp the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible by equilateral pulling; and also pause upon it plaster and bandage, if necessary for those, and also strengthen it."
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	"And if you feel broken bone fragments in it, then remove those and fix that bone in place, treating the wound with the treatment that has been described until it has healed."
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	"On restoring health."
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	"The bones of the thighs are broken here, and if they break, the fracture is merely union at the ends of those bones which are inserted in length and incline toward the inside; and it happens that the patient suffers pain in this place and puncture, and the limb becomes paralyzed when there is a fracture."
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	"And the restoration of him consists in your extending your hand over that part which is above the fracture as figured."
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	"And if the fracture is only in the extremity of it then you shall reduce that according to what appears equal to you by proportion; and engage that part which is joined together with its natural figure."
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	"But if the fracture is in the long bone or already inclines toward the inside of the leg then let the patient lie on his back with that limb prepared for you to restore that fracture."
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	"And then when you have reduced it, apply plaster, and also apply a splint of wood or stick, and bind it firmly with bandages so that there is no fear of puncture or displacement of the bone."
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	"And then fill in the concavity with something that will occupy that space which has been filled by the bandages according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	"But if an aposteme occurs, cease from the extension and restoration of it until the aposteme is sedated, and apply what sedates that according to what has been said before; and then return to the restoration of it, and bind it as usual."
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	"And if any splinters or small fragments occur in the bone, then remove them."
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the jawbone.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The jawbone is that which is between the cheek and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	"If it is broken, then its restoration is by one of two methods, the first being that you should take a splint of moderate thickness in this manner:"
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	"And if there are two extremities to it, two bands should be suspended from an elevated place nearby."
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	"Then have the patient sit on a chair, and carefully place their broken arm on the splint so that it reaches the elbow joint at the midpoint where the curvature of the splint is attached."
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	"Then suspend some heavy weight from that (the splint), or have the servant extend it towards the left side; and then the physician should gently pull the broken ends together with his hands, ensuring that the fracture is realigned properly."
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	"The other method is for the patient to be propped up on their chest, with their arm suspended by a sling from the neck. Then command two ministers: one should hold what is above the fracture with both hands, and the other should hold what is below it. And each of them should extend towards his side."
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	"And if you wish for greater extension, then place one strap above the fracture and another below it, and each of the two ministers should pull towards their respective sides."
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	"And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then you should place half of the strap on the elbow joint and the other half below the fracture at the bone."
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	"And likewise, if the fracture is close to the elbow, then you should place the strap on that location and also over the elbow."
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	"Then apply it with ease and without difficulty, and as soon as it is applied correctly and according to what is necessary, then tie it firmly so that it does not happen that a blister forms."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	"But if a blister forms, then loosen the bandage for 7 days, and apply over it a poultice made of linseed and oil, until the blister disappears. Then tie on again."
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	"And the method of tying that is: apply a plaster over the fracture, then wrap it with a layer of clean cloth over the plaster. Then adjust the arm over that support and place the hand covered in a sling on top of its muscle."
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	"And wrap and tie the cloth over the support for the arm so that the arm remains in place if there is no prohibition due to any cause of the broken bone."
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	"And then apply splints."
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	"And it is necessary to place over the fracture that splint which is wider and stronger than the others. And place the width of a finger between each splint, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers on either side."
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	"And then tie over the splints with the bandage which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	"And it is necessary that your bandage over the fracture site be as tight as possible."
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	"And when the fracture is extended, the bandage should be looser."
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	"And therefore, if you adjust the splints and bandage as we have said in the time when you restore the member to its proper position, then do it."
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if you fear blistering, then loosen the bandage and splints for 7 days as we have said."
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	"And then consider the bandage in all cases for 3 days so that no bruising or inflammation occurs at the location due to excess tightness. Or if the member is prohibited from being nourished due to excess tightness, then correct everything as we have said."
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	"But if you are doubtful about this and fear that nothing might happen due to it, then do not loosen the bandage, but rather wait for 3 days or more."
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	"And let his sleeping place be elevated on two pillows, and let his hands be on his stomach."
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	"And place over the elbow joint a full cushion of wool padding, and watch at all times of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not dislocated nor dissolved, or if the bandage becomes softened, then correct everything with your skill."
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	"And feed the patient according to the order which we have mentioned earlier, so that in the beginning the food is soft until he begins to heal. And then it becomes necessary to increase his food."
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	"Regarding the custom of the splint and the sling, they should remain tied for 40 days. And then it becomes necessary to loosen them and give a bath and apply ointments that correct them."
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	"And if the fracture is completely consolidated, then you do not loosen the bandage and splints for 1 day or up to two months."
Capitol .xii.	"Chapter XII."
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	"Of the restoration of fractures of the arm."
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	"The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two elbow bones. Of these, one is small and it secures the thumb; and the other is large and it is placed beside the little finger from its outer side."
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	"And sometimes only the larger elbow bone is fractured, or sometimes both are broken together."
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	"When the little elbow bone above is fractured, then its restoration will be easier and healing will also be quicker."
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	"But when it is fractured below, its fracture is bad and healing is difficult."
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	"And the worst of all is when both bones are broken together."
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	"Therefore, if the bone that is fractured is the little elbow bone above, then it is convenient for the physician to do its restoration by applying a small extension with ease until it becomes well aligned."
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	"But if the large elbow bone is broken, then it is necessary to apply stronger traction."
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	"And if both bones are fractured together, then you must apply traction very strongly."
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	"And it is necessary that you place the figure of the hand in its restoration and traction extended on a pillow. And let the wrist be placed above all the fingers, with the thumb higher than all the other fingers, and let the patient lie on a cushioned bed."
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	"And place a pillow before him at his height or behind him, so that the patient does not move."
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	"And then let one assistant extend the arm from its outer side with his hand or bandage, and another assistant extend it similarly above."
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	"Then the physician aligns the bone until he reduces it to its best figure possible."
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	"And if in the fracture of the bone you are unsuccessful, then proceed to reduce all pressure into its proper place with your skill."
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	"And if it appears that the elbow is dislocated and does not return to its proper place during restoration, then do as we have said above."
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	"But if the fracture is accompanied by contusion, which has already been discussed in Chapter X, and therefore take care of it accordingly."
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	"And if blistering appears at the beginning of your restoration, then take a cloth with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be moderate between thickness and thinness. Then apply the cloth over it with gentle pressure until the blister is absorbed. Then remove the cerate and apply an emplaster prepared from powder of barilla with clay of eggs. And then apply bandages; and let the bandage which is applied over that fracture be wide and strong."
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	"And know that in the case of fractures of the arm, the number of bandages used is usually greater than those used for other parts of the body, whether it be a fracture of one bone or both bones together."
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	"And then apply your bandage over the location of the fracture with great force and vehemence. And if the traction pulls too much on the parts above or below the fracture, then apply the bandage more gently according to what is remembered from the beginning of this chapter."
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"Wet bandages should be wrapped around the fracture, not hard or rough ones. The thread with which it is sewn should be neither too thin nor too thick."
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	"The limb and its ligaments should be considered several days later."
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	"And if some cause occurs that necessitates correction, such as swelling of the limb, then you should immerse the limb in cold water until the swelling subsides."
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	"Allow the limb to rest without constraint and then gradually return it to its original position."
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	"And if the dislocation has already been softened and the bone has returned to its usual appearance, then correct everything with your own strength."
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	"Also consider whether the supply of nutrients to the limb is being restricted by excessive tightness. If so, you should loosen it slightly and allow it to rest for a few days until blood flow improves, and then bind it again."
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	"But if the injury does not involve any of the causes mentioned above, then it should not be unbound for at least 20 days or thereabouts."
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	"And then have the injured person use their own strength to move their arm actively, and make them sleep on their back."
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	"And know that this fracture takes about 30 to 32 days to heal, or sometimes even fewer, such as 28 days, depending on the disposition of the complexion and the strength of the person."
Capitol .xiii.	"Chapter 13"
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	"On the restoration of fractures of the hand and fingers."
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that at the tip of the hand and the knuckles of those fingers fracture occurs frequently, yet it rarely happens without first experiencing many dislocations.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand suffers fracture or dislocation, it is necessary that the patient lie on their back with the injured arm extended out in front of them and supported by a pillow.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister should extend the broken bones and the physician should bind them together with good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, unless there is a risk of pus formation. Then apply a splint according to the severity of the injury, which you should already have wrapped in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the middle of the palm, then fashion a splint like a hand towel and instruct the patient to grasp it with their injured hand. Then bind it with a long strip of cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the splint should be made of leather covered in cloth that is folded over itself to provide padding, so that the splint can be applied directly to the palm. Then bind it according to what is necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is on the outside of the hand, then you should apply splints both above and below the injury on the palm side of the hand, so that the hand is in a position of flexion. Then bind it as follows:
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture of one of the bones in the fingers, then if it is the thumb, splint it as necessary and bind it to the palm. Additionally, you may apply a small splint on the outside of the finger to elevate the fracture and prevent displacement.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in one of the other fingers, such as the middle finger, index finger, ring finger, or little finger, then splint it by extending and binding it with the finger next to it that is not injured. Alternatively, you may bind them all together in continuity, which is preferable. Or apply a small splint on top of the injured finger, as previously described for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And note that in your treatment and splinting, you should consider the position of any blisters or wounds formed during the procedure, as well as what is necessary when such causes arise according to what is described in this book.
Capitol .xiv.	Capítulo XIV
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Chapter XIV
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	"The bone of the hip joint is often broken, and this is felt according to its transformation into the anterior part and upper part."
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	"And its restoration is done in such a way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament on the other side of the fracture, and the patient should lie prone on their stomach."
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	"And therefore the minister should extend all the ligaments to their respective parts according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone."
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	"But if it is displaced towards the hip joint, then the ligament attached to the bone should be stretched at the point of the penitent, so that the extension takes place there, and the other ligament on the other side of the fracture."
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	"And similarly if the fracture is displaced towards the bone end, then it should be done by stretching the ligament attached to the bone end, and the extension should take place on the other side of the parts."
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	"And therefore the doctor should press both sides of the bone inward so that it reduces according to its natural shape and the bone is joined together by good union. Then plaster and splinting should be applied if no inflammation occurs in the limb."
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	"But if inflammation occurs, then allow that to rest for a few days until the inflammatory swelling subsides, and then return to your treatment."
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	"The splinting should be done as follows: wrap a hard bandage over the fracture and fold it two or three times, removing the excess; then wrap the limb so that it reaches to the heel and hip joint."
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	"And insert a long splint between the hip and the limb near its lower end; bring both ends of the splint above the upper part of the two parts, then wrap it around the limb and hip, removing any excess bandage."
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	"And then place a splint over the hip in the location of that fracture, and place another splint on the limb bone."
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	"And then fill the spaces between the limb and hip with soft cloths, so that the union is consolidated."
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	"And then begin with a strong splint on the middle of the limb over the location of the fracture with three or four layers. And as you go along with the ligament at the site of the fracture, make your splinting lighter and more flexible."
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	"And extend both ends of the splint to both sides of the fracture until it reaches the ankle bone, and strengthen both ends of the other splints on either side for fear that the ligament is dislodged from its place."
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	"And then leave the splint on for about three weeks until no inflammation occurs nor any heat or swelling appears. And if any cause of those occurs, then take care to remove it immediately and correct whatever has happened according to what we have said many times."
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone is broken at its tip, then you should reset it according to what is possible for you. And if not, then wait until it heals and then remove it, treating with whatever precedes the memory of it until it is healed."
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	"And sometimes this fracture of the hip joint is strengthened with those splints which are adjusted to it, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm."
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	"But however in the restoration of it in this manner it does not happen that the patient becomes lame. And if it is restored alone, without applying the other limb, then it is necessary that he limp on it at all times."
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	"And know that the hip joint is strengthened in forty days or a little more or less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions."
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter 15."
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	"On the restoration of fractures of the patella."
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	"Know that a fracture of the patella is rare, but it often happens with a blow or fall."
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	"But if a fracture occurs to it, then it is only a crack or break in its parts, and this is with much pain or little pain. And over all this the diagnosis is made by sensation."
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	"And its restoration should be done by resetting whatever is broken in its parts with the said splints until it is united and joined according to what is possible for equitation, ease of construction."
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	"And then apply an emplaster and place a round splint if needed. And strengthen it above with a splint that is appropriate."
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	"And also consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, such as inflammation and swelling, so that it opposes all accidents with whatever is appropriate for it until it is healed."
Capitol .xvi.	"Chapter 16."
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	"Of the restoration of a broken leg."
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	"Do you know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick and is called the shinbone; and the other is slender and is called the fibula?"
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	"And what happens to each of the types of fracture that happens to both bones of the arm also happens to it [the leg], and thus its restoration is like the restoration of the arm, and the operation for it is one."
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	"And if two bones are broken at once, the leg becomes completely useless."
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	"And if only the thinner bone is broken, the leg is paralyzed in front."
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	"And if only the thicker bone is broken, afterwards that one remains, and it is of those causes which are not lame."
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	"Therefore, extension, traction, and fixation of the splints should be applied according to that same manner."
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	"But nevertheless, if the fracture of the leg is such that it has many attempts, then extension should be less and lighter, and eased with your virtue."
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	"And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and this is when you align the splints and complete all your operation; then you will take pieces of wood from pine which is placed behind the causes which are placed below, and they should be made equally of branches of palm; lighten those which have less thickness, and do not use large ones, and let their length be according to the length of the leg, and from the knee up to the thigh."
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	"And therefore wrap each splint with two wrappings according to its length, and place one on the fracture of the leg from one side and the other from the other side, and they should be from the knee up to the ankle."
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	"And therefore fasten the two splints in three places of both extremities and in the middle place, because with this traction the leg is prohibited from bending at the right or left joint, and it remains in good position."
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	"And then apply a splint of wood according to the length of the leg; and let the leg be placed upon it so that it retains its movement."
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	"And especially when you do this in a fracture, and particularly when with that there is swelling properly."
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"And therefore consider the leg each day and study it with that for final study, and keep it from suppuration and inflammation or other similar causes. And when any of those causes occurs, then pause there with what is necessary until it is healed."
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter xvii
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle bone and the bones of the foot.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle bone does not usually break completely, but the bones of the foot do sometimes fracture occasionally. And those of the foot rarely break, and they are only sprained in cases of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	"And if any of the bones of the foot becomes fractured and those bones sometimes rise above each other, then the sick person places his foot on the ground prepared thus as when walking."
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	"And therefore pause the other foot upon what is raised from those bones, and press them down, squeeze them together, and keep them in their places until they return."
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	"And therefore apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place a small board at the bottom of the foot with two projecting heads."
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	"And therefore strengthen that with the leg by traction downwards since you have wrapped it with bandages and other means which are necessary."
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	"And when three or four days have passed, then undo the bandages, for you will find that the bones are united, either by being fixed together or reduced. And the operation on them is like those previously known."
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	"But if some of these are not fixed, then reduce them and fix them thus as you have seen in the reduction of the bones of the hand."
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	"And therefore place a splint on the fractured finger according to its length, and let it be placed a little to the side of it. And then place that board which has been recommended under the foot, and strengthen it with traction downwards."
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	"But if two or three or more of the bones are broken, then place on each finger a splint according to its length wrapped in lion's skin cloth, and strengthen the board at the bottom of the foot, and let it stand upon one of the heads of the board with the sole of the foot for better retention."
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	"And it is necessary for you to remember that you do not neglect all the causes which have been mentioned to you concerning the other fractures which we have spoken of, and be prepared for every accident with what is necessary."
Capitol .xviii.	De la fractura del colze e dels osses de la man.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	"Regarding fracture of the bone of the woman's pelvis, the bone of the penis, and the rod of man."
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	"When the bone of the woman is broken, then immediately cease that pressure in that area, and gently incline her to the side of the hip, keeping it held behind."
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	"And moreover the midwife will press the bone from outside, and it should be placed in the bone as if it were hoped; and moreover the woman should be moved gently, lifting her hips little by little, because all this is forgotten until it is before the opening of the bone as desired, and the broken bone returns."
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	"And moreover, powder should be placed on the hips, and when she wants to urinate, gently move the hip away with ease, and then she can urinate, and reduce it again according to how it was positioned at first, and then return to her initial powder."
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	"And do this for seven days or thereabouts, because that is when it will be restored."
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	"And if you wish, take an ovine bladder and stretch it over the bone of the hip using a reed cannula; then insert the entire bladder into the bone of the hip, and blow into the cannula with force until the bladder is inflated within the bone, because this will cause the fracture to return."
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	"And then fill it again with cotton and keep it there for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed."
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	"And when the bone of the penis in a man or woman is broken, then you should apply the same treatment and stitching as we have recommended for the hipbone."
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	"And that which is right is not concealed in these fractures, nor is it difficult to find, especially for those who study and use this my book; because this fracture indicates to you the major dispositions of a straight line in restoring and repairing it, and therefore understand well."
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	"But in the case of a broken penis in a man, take a gourd of cucumber and place the penis inside it; then apply a bandage made of cloth over it and wrap it up, and leave it for three days or thereabouts, until it is healed."
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter XIX."
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	"Of the restoration of fractures of the bones when they are with plague."
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate for one who has experienced a fracture with contusion, especially if the bone is large like that of the thigh or arm, or similar, you should perform bloodletting immediately if conditions for phlebotomy are favorable as mentioned above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the contusion flows with blood, it is necessary that you cauterize the wound immediately, powdering it with the above-mentioned mixture, unless there is another cause present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And therefore begin restoring the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this process if there are no signs of gangrene.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if gangrene is present, delay restoring the fracture for up to nine days until the gangrene has subsided. Do not approach it on the third and fourth day altogether, for you will cause further harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin, it is necessary that you perform reduction and alignment of it with your hands with ease and minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared and the bone cannot be aligned with your hands alone, then use this tool: it is made of iron, seven or eight fingers long, and its width varies depending on the size of the wound. Therefore, it is necessary for the physician to have three or four of these tools ready, according to what is needed in the treatment of all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And once it is reduced, apply slight pressure to prevent it from being displaced during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And if there is an acute angle at its ends, cut it with the scissors near its extremities; and make sure that the upper part of the bone is thicker and the inner part is wider.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is how it looks:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And in Greek, it is called "labre volentz atelarem," which means "slight spatula."
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the acute end may be elevated above the prominence of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press it into place within a splint until the bone returns to its alignment with some reduction.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Then strive to align the ends of the fracture with one another. If the end of the broken bone is thin and does not fit well with the tool, then insert the tool between them so that it can have some leverage.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone with all that has been recommended, then cut it with scissors in the manner that is described above. Or saw it with one of the saws, whichever way is easiest for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And remove any sharp edges or small rough spots from the remaining bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone has been reduced and the patient feels intense pain upon movement, you should know that the bone has not returned to its proper place. Therefore, be careful so that you do not cause further harm to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed the reduction of the bone, then cover it with a bandage soaked in black stiptic wine. And especially if it is summer, do not apply any ointment containing oil or other grease, so that it does not cause inflammation and corruption afterwards.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And apply bandages in the final stages of the reduction of the bone. Leave the dressing uncovered so that you can insert splints and use wrapping according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful not to strain the dressing at the fracture site, as many foolish doctors have done this and caused harm to their patients, resulting in death or gangrene.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your patient's fracture is light, soft, different from other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or infected and you fear that one of the bad accidents mentioned earlier may occur, causing pain in the area, then do not apply bandages. Instead, use a dressing made of thick cloth and tie it on firmly to keep the wound clean.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And after one or two days have passed since the wound began to suppurate, then remove the bandage that you had placed over it with wine. And apply poultices, as is customary in our practice for treating wounds, such as teriapharmacon and similar remedies.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is your duty to remove the splints and examine the wound every morning and evening until it has healed and is firm. And the limb should be positioned in such a way that pus can flow easily from it towards its lower parts.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If many days have passed and the wound is not consolidated nor has it begun to heal, then you should know that here are signs of pus formation. Therefore, explore the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those signs that are separated and removed or drawn out, if they are not separated from one another and put the limb in danger and cause pain, then persevere in incising them according to what you find possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if pus or gangrene occurs in the wound, which is called stomatitis, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary that you treat it with one of those remedies that are described in their chapter under the heading of treatment.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And regarding that in which my speech should be brief and you perform your task: when the thick bone is crushed, do not attempt traction or extraction of it, as many times this has caused death. Leave it there until it grows together, for it will usually unite by itself in about 20 to 30 days. And then treat the wound if you see fit, or leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the treatment of union that occurs in the place of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times this condition occurs during the healing process of a fracture, especially near joints, and it is characterized by a deformity of the limb. It is strictly forbidden to move the limb from its natural position.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the deformity is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, resins, and myrrh. Take some of them and mix with stiptic wine, albumen of egg white, or vinegar, then apply it on the deformity wrapped in linen cloth and secure it with good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the bandage remain undisturbed for several days until the swelling subsides. Then remove it and repeat the application until the deformity is removed; or place over that a lead plate descended from above, as lead has the property of reducing any swelling in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the deformity has already hardened and tightened, it may be necessary to remove it carefully. To do this, first make an incision along the superior edge of the limb and then incise the superfluous skin and fat until the hardened tissue is exposed. Then carefully remove that tissue using some probes or hooks until it is completely removed; afterwards, dress the wound until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	"The chapter twenty-one."
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	"When a fracture has healed, but the limb remains thin and does not follow its natural course."
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	"When a bone fracture has healed, but the limb remains thin and does not follow its natural course, this happens for several reasons: one of which is the abundance of solution in the ligaments and bonds, not according to what is appropriate; or due to excess tightening of the ligaments preventing nutrients from reaching the limb; or due to excessive use of ointments; or due to unnecessary movement; or due to lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness."
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	"And its treatment is to feed the patient and make their heart strong so that blood may be increased in them; and administer baths; and apply warmth, joy, and comfort upon them."
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	"And also to apply plaster around the limb, so that the plaster draws nutrient to it, or continuous application of hot water, so that the nutrient flows and returns to its natural form."
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter XXII."
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	"On the treatment of broken bones that have healed crookedly and why surgery is not appropriate in this case."
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	"When it happens that a limb which has already healed becomes crooked and prominent at the site of the break, and this causes the limb to appear misshapen, although the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, you should not listen to those who claim that the limb has been recently broken."
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	"But many foolish doctors and bone-setters have done this in our land, and this operation is most reprehensible and brings great fear upon those who bear its mark, which is death."
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	"But if the limpness and nodosity are recent, then they should be treated with hot water containing herbs that soften them, such as marshmallow and rosewater, and mallow, and similar ones; and a plaster made from white lead should be applied with a moistening plaster like litharge well-made; or gum tragacanth of rosewater mixed with wool grease or camphor oil, and this should be plastered upon it; or ripe figs crushed with dove's feathers, and similar to those medicines called softeners."
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	"And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction with the most humid ones, and the member should be moved in all parts at all hours."
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	"But if the crookedness has already become hard and converted into bone and surgery is necessary, then it is appropriate to cut away what is superfluous from the prominence of that bone with subtle chisels, and to administer ease in that place with care and diligence."
Capitol .xxiii.	"Chapter XXIII."
De sermo en dislocacio.	"On discourse concerning dislocation."
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	"Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints from their place so that they are hindered in movement and cause deformity of the limb and bring about great pain and harm."
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	"Therefore when it happens that there is dislocation somewhere, then it should be promptly reduced and not delayed in reducing, because if it is delayed the joint becomes inflamed and firm, making reduction of dislocation difficult."
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	"And therefore one should not be moved or stretched at the time of inflammation, because many times it brings about spasm and severe pain."
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	"But when it happens, then you should apply the cautery to the affected part and let it rest until the inflammation subsides; and then embrocate the limb with hot water and oil, and reduce it gently."
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	"And every limb should be treated with that remedy which brings back the memory of its place."
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	"I have already set the bones of dislocation according to what is known about fractures; I placed the upper part of the body into the lower part."
Capitol .xxiiii.	"Chapter Twenty-four."
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of dislocation treatment of the jaw on the left side
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If both mandibles are dislocated but do not reduce on their own, there are two methods to treat the dislocation of both jaws:
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	"However, if the dislocation of the limb is minor, it often returns to its proper position on its own accord."
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	"If the dislocation is entire and complete, then it must be reduced gently, without delay."
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"And the assistant should hold the patient's head, while the doctor inserts one finger of his right hand into the dislocation of the jaw within the patient's mouth if it is on one side; or inserts both fingers together if the dislocation is on two sides. The others present should hold the rest of the body firmly in place and command the patient to keep their jaws still and relax those muscles that cause each part to move separately. Then the doctor gently moves the jaw back into its proper position."
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	"And if the reduction of the dislocation is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then steam should be administered with hot water and oil to facilitate gentle and easy reduction without delay."
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	"After the dislocation has been reduced and the jaws are in place, the patient's mouth should be closed gently and not forced open. Then powdered cloth with cerate should be applied to facilitate easier reduction, using melted wax and rose oil."
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	"And the patient should sleep on their back with their head supported between two pillows to prevent turning it to either side. They should not be forced to chew anything, but have liquid food until the pain has subsided and the jaws are healed, after which they may eat what they wish."
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	"And this should be administered with care to avoid any strain on the opening of the mouth during eating and drinking until the jaw is healed."
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	"And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated and cannot be returned to their proper places, then frequent vomiting, fever, and constant thirst often occur, with severe abdominal pain and sometimes bloody diarrhea."
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	"And when this happens, you should know that it is a serious condition; many times the patient dies within ten days."
Capitol .xxv.	Capítulo XXV
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	**Of the reduction of dislocation of the clavicle and the extreme end of the muscle.**
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The shoulder blade is not displaced from its position due to its connection with the chest; sometimes it can be displaced outward, and this is apparent by touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	To restore it, the patient should lie on their back and extend their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then press tightly with your palm for a moment, as it will return to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then apply plaster and powder there and bind it firmly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	However, if the extremity that is attached to it is not displaced on any day, then it should be reduced and bandaged according to what has been said and according to your judgement.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then apply plaster, powder, and dressing there, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	With this same treatment, the detached end of the muscle is also reduced.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of dislocation of the muscle
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways: one is that it is dislocated at the attachment of the tendon to the upper arm bone, another is at the attachment of the tendon to the elbow.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second way is that it is dislocated at the attachment above the muscle, and this is rare; and it is not dislocated at the attachments behind by the shoulder blade or in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and exits at the attachments below the elbow near the tendon of the biceps, especially in those individuals whose flesh is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those with much flesh, it exits out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And sometimes it happens to some men that through a blow or fall the muscle becomes swollen with blood and clotted, and is then dislocated by that swelling.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore you should remove this [swelling] before it becomes completely hardened, and then proceed with its treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is recognized when it occurs at the attachments below the elbow near the tendon of the biceps; so that you may distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, since there is a manifest difference between them. And you find on the head of the muscle a concavity towards the elbow and the tendon of the biceps feels like an egg, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear nor move it in any way.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated at the lower end or above, then you can immediately find a palpable swelling which is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation undergoes easy reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the practitioner elevates the patient's hand towards above; and approaching from behind he places his thumbs below the tendon of the biceps of that arm, and elevates the joint with force up to its place, and then the practitioner raises the patient's hand, extends it upwards; and while doing so he should pause it below when it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return by what has been said, and especially at the beginning when the dislocation occurred many days ago, then the patient should be immersed in hot water and given a poultice that softens and lubricates like a common liniment made from althea root, fenugreek, and marshmallow leaves in water.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be propped up on his back and placed below the elbow with his arm suspended between elevation and tension, and the physician places his heel upon the sphere [of the joint], elevates the head of the muscle with force, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not hidden at its lower attachments; and another practitioner should hold the patient's head so that it is not moved from its place, for then it quickly returns to its proper position.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, you can also reduce it in this way: have present someone who is taller than the patient and stands on that side; let him insert his muscle behind the tendon of the dislocated arm and elevate the tendon upwards while the patient is suspended in the air; then another practitioner pulls the patient's hand from its lower attachments towards his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light in weight, then it is necessary that some other cause be suspended from him in order to weigh him down, for the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is also reduced in another way: this is by placing on the ground a long stake whose head is round like that of a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin. Then place the patient on top of the head of the stake with cloths beneath him; then let the patient stand along the length of the stake and extend his arm at its lower attachments towards the other side, while extending his body on the other side with force so that the joint quickly returns to its proper position.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	"If reduction proves difficult for all the reasons mentioned, then use this treatment: Take a stick whose length is that of two arms, and whose width is four fingers, and its thickness should be eased in the middle according to this form:"
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	"And similarly, a lion's skin should be laid over the patient's head so that the stick does not slip."
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	"And then the stick should be placed on top of the patient's titillic, and their hand or arm should be extended over the stick to either side, and the stick should be bound over the assistant's hands and the arm and the tip of the hand."
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	"And then place your arm on a ladder rung according to its width, and extend your hand to either side, and the other end should be suspended from the other side, for the joint will be ready soon."
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	"And when the treatment is completed according to each possible manner, then you should place a compress made of wool of equal quantity on top of the titillic; and then apply an emplaster prepared from powder of ground almonds and egg whites over the entire muscle, just as it is rolled up, and then tighten beneath the titillic with moderate tension; and the bandage should be wrapped around the emplaster, and his hand should be attached to his collar, and he should rest it for seven days without moving his hand."
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	"And the patient's food should be limited during this time while the member is recovering, for it is easier for healing to occur."
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	"And then food should be gradually increased after seven or eight days and some movement exercised; and thus if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed."
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	"But if the joint is often dislocated due to humidity that occurs there or for some other cause, then cautery should be administered in that place with three burns, as is mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery."
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	"And even if all of this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed but the joint remains loose, and the emplaster and tension are applied to it several times without effect, and he cannot raise that arm above his head, then know that the nerves of that muscle, which are at its head, have been injured or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be put back in its proper place."
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	"For the dislocation of that which has occurred, you should press the patella and the kneecap or the parts behind, and the reduction is made with pressure and extension using both hands until it returns."
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And then apply the other bandage to that place and cure it until it is healed."
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	"And if there is heaviness in the member that occurs during healing and slowness of its movement, then the patient should use hot baths several times until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its original nature."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII."
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	"On the treatment of dislocation of the coccyx."
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	"You should know that the joint of the coccyx is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, but more so towards the front than the back. The dislocation of it is not hidden from you for you can see it clearly by looking or touching according to whatever figure it has been dislocated, and when you reduce the displaced coccyx with your hand, that is made clear to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch its own muscle."
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	"And you should know that it is necessary to reduce the dislocation immediately before an abscess appears, for if an abscess appears, reducing it is difficult and the healing will not be complete; and especially when it is in the back parts, for there is no worse species of dislocation nor greater pain, and several times death results from it."
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	"And the reduction of it, when that which is possible to reduce occurs, is that his hand should be extended with two hands and his arm spread out, and the physician's hands should be placed on the coccyx from below, and he pushes the joint back with the force of both hands together or with the heel of his palm until it returns to its place."
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	"But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns thus by bending his hand with his own hand until he strikes the coccyx with the heel of his palm."
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	"And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then apply powerful extension and great force."
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	"And let two assistants extend the arm and hold it firmly with both hands so that it is not moved during the extension."
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	"And then turn the arm in every direction, because it is wrapped up with a doubled cloth or bandage around his hand."
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	"And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil for this purpose that this may be one of those causes which help in lubricity of the joint with facility. And then push the joint back with powerful pressure until it returns."
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	"And then the reduction of it should be supported with that plaster in which there is astringency and suction with white of egg, and it should be extended with descending bandage, and his arm should be suspended from his neck, and he should rest for some days."
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	"And then let it be untied. And if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you should untie the bandage from it and leave it alone."
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	"But if you see that the joint is not strong, then repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it for some days until it is extended. And then untie it."
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	"But if heaviness occurs during the reduction of the joint and its position is in movement, then apply moistening in baths and gentle friction and compression until it is relieved. Or let him rest upon the joint elevated, for this is a matter of fatty motion. And then let him be bound, and leave it on overnight."
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	"And then remove that and put him in a bath. And when he rises, then friction the joint with gentle friction. And then repeat over it elevated, for this is routine of fatty motion, once, twice, three times."
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	"Within the bath until it is softened."
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	"And if you wish, apply over it the hollow of a moist cow's horn scarified on its edges and press upon that. Do this several times for it is moist and reduces to its position."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII."
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	"On the treatment of dislocation of maltreatment, that is of the joint which is between the arm and the hand."
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	"Dislocation of the hand sometimes occurs and its reduction is easy, unlike other joints. But nevertheless it is necessary that there should be swiftness in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated before a tumor appears or something happens with an abscess."
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"And the reduction of the dislocation of it is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and an assistant extends his hand. And the physician places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its proper place."
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	"But nevertheless it is necessary to consider if the palm has already been removed from the surface of the hand. Then the patient places the back of his hand on a table for extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is anterior, then the position of the patient's hand should be internally rotated upon the table so that the hand of the physician may lie over that prominence."
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	If it does not return quickly, then press it with an embrocation that draws out the abscess and leave it. And do not repeat this unless necessary, for otherwise it will suffer and you cannot reduce the inflammation that passes through the days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But first soften the joint according to its tortuosity; and do not notify the patient of any cause, but say that your hand is softened and cannot press any cause. Then you will know that the nerves are crushed or cut, and therefore it is necessary to cauterize them near their outlet, and afterwards tell him some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when it is returned badly, then pause on the embrocation which we have recommended, and let it be laid and pressed for 5 days. And near about it should be untied and left alone, and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of the hand is difficult and it occurs to him some heaviness, then you should apply that with cold water and friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the said (joints).
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes these are dislocated entirely out of their place.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when some finger is dislocated from those on the side of the palm or on the back of the hand, then stretch the finger and push back the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the tip of the finger, and suspend that above the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it can be covered with its bandage on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	"And when it is night, lie down according to that narration, and do not cease loosening him during the day and exercising with movement, and lie down with him at night. And do this for several days until it becomes tight."
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	"And do likewise if it is dislocated in the stomach or hand. Lie down according to that partition and perform your first operation until it is healed."
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	"And similarly do this when it is dislocated at other joints."
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	"Of the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the spine."
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	"When complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the spine or neck, removing the displaced vertebra from its place is not a cure, for death overtakes the sick person."
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	"And this is indicated by the fact that the evacuation of the sick person's excrement is without control and he cannot retain it. Many times some members become relaxed on one side or both sides, or both arms, or one of them; or one vertebra is removed from its place, for many times removal occurs and many times the displacement to all four parts is made."
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	"Therefore that which has already been removed to the posterior parts is called sciatica (gelbozitat)."
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	"But the treatment of it is this: first consider whether sciatica occurs in childhood, for if it does, there is no cure nor healing for that."
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	"But those that occur from falling or striking or similarly to these have already been discussed by the Ancients with lengthy words, of which the majority returns with profit; but this is now abbreviated because it is too long for me and excuses itself from it due to my proximity to the intention of my exposition, with which I have explained and formed diverse instruments with which I will show this and explain that."
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	"And I say that there is neither remedy nor healing for sciatica that occurs from the front part of the foot, and similarly for those that are made on both sides."
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	"And of these only those that occur properly in the back can be cured by what I will recount."
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	"And it is that the sick person should be laid on his back with his head close to a wall, and extended outwards from him by means of soft padding so that the foot of him does not get hurt."
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	"And properly a straight stick should be placed and set on the ground at the end of the foot around his head, and another stick on the other side of his feet at the other end of the foot."
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	"And the minister should hold the stick, and not be fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other according to that form."
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And properly he should cover the head of the sick person and tie him there tightly with linen bandages and fasten them; and extend the end of the bandage to the stick that is above his head, and tie it there; and properly stretch another bandage over his hips on both sides of him, and above his knees; and properly adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick that is above his feet."
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	"And properly each minister should extend the bandage at the beginning of the stick and not remove the two sticks and the bandages from their places where they are set, but nevertheless not fixed as we have said."
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	"And the doctor should place his palms on the sick person's back with force so that he returns, or rather if he places one table on it and properly adjusts his feet on the table so that he returns."
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	"But if he does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is around three braccia and hollow out in the wall that we have said is near the sick person a place in which to fit the end of the table."
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	"And properly place the middle of the table on his back and the doctor places his feet on the other end and strongly presses so that the back is shortened and returns to its proper place."
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	"And if you wish, open it with a turn made by hand. And it is that you place yourself on the ground near the head of the sick person at the end of his foot between two sticks whose length is one braccio and at the end of his head similarly two sticks; and let the distance between each stick be one palm and already made in each stick a hole through which it turns, and let each one be firmly fixed on the ground so that they are not moved."
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	"And let there also be placed a round stick on which is the hole and it should be turned in the two holes of the two sticks."
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	"And at its end there should be a hole through which the stick is passed whose length is one palm with that which turns. And in the other two sticks there should be similar ones."
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And properly tighten the bandages that you have tightened on his foot at the hole that is above his head and the bandages that you have tightened on his thighs at the hole that is below his feet."
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	"And properly above each hole there should be a minister who turns the hole with his hand and the doctor presses on the back as we have said."
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	"And this is the method of turning:"
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	"And properly when the back has returned and the place is pressed, then it is necessary to place an absorbent plaster with alum of hawk and properly cotton; and properly place on the plaster a table whose width is around three digits or about that, and its length should be equal to the extent of the swelling, and on the beginning of the back."
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	"And properly tie it with the bandage we mentioned and feed the sick person a subtle diet until he is healed."
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	"And if there remains some inflammation in the place at the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and cleanse with administration by table for a long time which we have recommended. And already administered in that place lead plate."
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	"And sometimes inflammation occurs at the end of the two spine bones and it is squeezed by that dislocation. And that bone already threatens such that it should not be operated on with this medicine, for strong rubbing will cause you to die."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Chapter LXXXI"
De curacio de anca dislocada.	"On the treatment of a dislocated hip."
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	"You should know that the dislocation of the hip and the dislocation of the muscle is not only a displacement, but also an injury which does not occur in other joints with small movement and concavity."
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	"The hip joint can be dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated inward or outward, forward or backward."
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	"Most commonly, the hip joint is dislocated inwardly, and less commonly forward or backward."
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	"The sign of hip dislocation inward is that when you press the healthy thigh against the affected one, it feels longer and the kneecap seems more prominent than on the healthy side. The patient cannot bend their leg backwards and must have an incision to drain the hematoma."
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	"The sign of hip dislocation outward is that the injuries occurring in it are opposite to this one."
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	"The sign of anterior hip dislocation is that the thigh expands according to its nature but does not bend due to pain in the knee area. If forced to do so, it cannot extend forward. The urine is retained and there is a hematoma in the groin area. Treatment should be directed towards the heel."
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	"The sign of posterior hip dislocation is that the knee does not expand and cannot be bent forward. The thigh appears shorter than the other one, the groin area is softened, and treatment should be directed towards that area."
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	"However, reduction of these types of hip dislocations should be considered with caution if the dislocation is old and chronic. In such cases, one should administer traction according to the patient's condition, but this is not the only treatment option. In these cases, there is no need for forced manipulation."
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	"However, in cases of recent dislocation that fall into one of the four types, it is necessary to reduce the joint and extend the leg inward and outward. Then move the leg to the right and left until it returns to its normal position, as this alone will suffice."
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	"But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong rope and extend the thigh as far back as possible. Alternatively, you can attach ropes to the upper part of the leg or use a sling placed over the thigh above the knee. Another assistant should extend their hand above the patient's foot so that their fingers point towards the toes. Then, grasp one end of the rope tightly with your left hand while another assistant holds the other end."
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	"And extend it either from the inside to the angle of the pubis or from behind to the buttock area."
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	"And let all of this happen in one glance, while the patient is lifted up on their own body from the earth and remains hanging."
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	"This type of extension is common to all four (limbs)."
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	"And therefore if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; but otherwise, now it is necessary to speak of its proper cure."
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	"In the reduction of its own (joint), when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is inwards at the hip joint, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their side with the affected leg; and then pause the limbs above the root of the thigh at that point where the head of the thigh bone enters the socket; and then extend the limb upwards from the angle of the socket to the furthest possible part of the clavicle."
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	"And then another person should take hold of the limb firmly and press the thick part of the dislocated joint and extend it forcefully outward, because that will return it to its proper place."
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	"And this type is of easier reduction with which this limb is reduced than the other types."
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	"But if it is excused on you and does not obey the entrance with this type of reduction, then both feet of the patient should be lifted together with firm, light pressure, on both heels and both toes."
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	"And let the length of each (foot) be by the amount of four digits, and let the affected limb be extended more than the other by the amount of two fingers."
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	"And then the patient should be suspended over the head of the bed, with their back up, and let the length from the ground be by the amount of two cubits."
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And then command a strong youth to pull down the head of the joint, and let another youth suspend it, and the other youth pull down the joint with forceful impetus, because the articulation returns to its proper place with speed."
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	"But in the proper reduction, when there is dislocation outward at the joint, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back according to what we have recommended in the event of stiffness; and let the limb be straightened over the affected joint properly and over its foot."
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	"And then two sticks should be placed, one at the foot of it, and the other at its head; and let two sticks be placed that are adjusted in the middle of the elbow, over which damp cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not injured because the stick is between their joints, for the extension to the joints should not be forced."
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	"And then each assistant should extend on his own side, and the physician with his hand guide the reduction according to the art."
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	"So if it does not succeed in reverse, then pause over that diligently and thus as we have said in stiffness for that guidance."
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	"But the patient should lie on their left side quietly."
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	"When dislocation is at the front parts, then it is necessary that the bed be extended lightly, and this is according to this method; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the sick person's flank, and then grips that with the other hand, and with that grip extends the legs away from the leg of the pain."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	"If the dislocation is at the back parts, then it is not necessary that the sick person be extended with the legs away from them, and they are raised off the ground; it is necessary that they be placed on a hard surface, like this: if the hip joint is dislocated externally, according to what we have said about placing it on two widths; and they lie on their face and the limbs are extended, as we have said."
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	"It is necessary that compression be administered with a board over the location where the joint is dislocated."
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	"So when the reduction is completed as it should be - and the sign of the reduction of the hip is not hidden from you, which is that you extend the sick person's two thighs, and when you feel those joints and the sick person extends their thigh and expands that without excuse, then you know that the member has been returned to its proper place; then you apply two splints and bind it tightly with a bandage so that the joint is not moved in any of the parts; and let the sick person rest for three days or four."
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	"And after removing the ligature and splint, compare one thigh with the other."
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	"Then if you feel those joints firmly, then you know that the dislocation is already healed, and therefore let the sick person go."
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	"And if you see any sign of weakness, then return and splint that again, and extend it according to your first method, and let it rest for three days."
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	"And after removing the splint, let them walk with support on crutches for a few days until they are strengthened."
Capitol .xxxii.	"Chapter XXXII."
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	"On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder blade."
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	"The shoulder blade is dislocated in three ways: for it is dislocated at the outer parts, and at the inner parts, and more often at the upper and rear parts; but it is not dislocated at the front."
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	"And the sign of dislocation of the shoulder blade is that when you tell the sick person to apply their thigh to the hip, they are unable to do so."
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	"And the reduction of all kinds of dislocation is as follows: make the sick person lie on their right side, so that they can extend their thigh if possible; press their knee against the outer face of the shoulder blade, and place their foot between your feet; then apply both palms to the shoulder blade of the sick person, and press firmly with your elbows over the shoulder blade of the sick person while another assistant extends their foot until the shoulder blade returns to its proper place."
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	"And the sign of reduction is that the thigh adheres to the hip with ease and effortlessly."
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	"And then splint it and make the thigh adhere to the hip, then bind them together with a bandage for three days or four, then remove the splints."
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	"Then let the sick person not walk until they are healed and strengthened."
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	"But if you cannot reduce it, then apply strong traction with ligatures as described in the treatment of hip dislocation."
Capitol .xxxiii.	"Chapter XXXIII."
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	"Treatment of an ankle dislocation."
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	"The talus bone may sometimes be displaced by minor trauma, and sometimes it becomes completely dislocated, with dislocation occurring either internally or externally."
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	"And the sign of talus bone dislocation is that sometimes the talus becomes swollen at the joint where it has dislocated."
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	"The treatment for removing it is easy reduction; it should be extended gently with hands and gradually returned."
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	"Furthermore, in the treatment of it when it is displaced according to completion, you should make the patient lie on their right side, and have a strong and able servant hold them firmly by the hips from behind."
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	"And appropriately, place your right hand on the upper part of their thigh and your left hand lower down towards their knee."
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	"And properly pull the leg towards you with your right hand, and appropriately grasp it twice with your left hand, and then extend it with your left hand; and press firmly on the joint of the leg with your right hand without force."
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	"And perform this procedure twice as we have discussed."
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	"And then press firmly on the joint of the leg with your hand for the third time; you are now at the knee."
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	"So if it returns in one or two attempts with this method, and the leg feels right again, that is good. But if not, then repeat the procedure until it returns."
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	"But if you are prohibited from performing the reduction with this method that we have recommended, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a sturdy stick firmly on the ground at the foot of their bed. Cover them with a blanket so that they do not move."
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	"And then the minister of the church should hold their things, and another minister should extend the leg with both hands or with some cloth placed on the sole of the foot; and each minister should extend themselves against extension of the hip, so that the stick is extended between the patient's thighs retaining them, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the sides during extension."
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	"And then the doctor should reduce the dislocation with their hands, and another minister should hold the healthy joint on both sides, for the dislocation returns easily."
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	"And then once the dislocation has returned and you have declared that the reduction is successful, then apply plaster and bind it firmly with cloth, and tie the leg with cloth at the joint."
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	"And be careful or guard yourself from the nerves which are behind on the heel, so that the cloth does not press too tightly and hurt them."
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	"And then leave him for two days or three; and if the cloth becomes moistened, replace it."
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	"Then on the third or fourth day, untie it and forbid the patient from vomiting for 40 days."
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	"If it is necessary to go ahead with this space, it's not certain that the dislocation isn't already dissolved and corrupted, precisely because of this."
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	"If an abscess forms after cautery, you must administer to it what was mentioned earlier in this story regarding cure and embrocation, until it is removed."
Capitol .xxxiiii.	"Chapter XXXIV."
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	"On the treatment of dislocation of the said hips."
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	"It is necessary that he who has been dislocated be stretched out with slight extension without moving him; and if it is difficult, let him be lifted up easily."
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	"But if the dislocation is in some of the bones of the foot of the leg, then place the patient's leg over a low stool or table, and let him be standing thus as if walking."
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	"And then stand on the foot and pause his leg over what you have prepared from the joints, and then press that with your foot with force until it returns, and see if it is now aligned and does not appear in the prominence of the joint."
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	"And then place the lower leg of the thigh on a table that takes in all the leg, with two heads, and then stretch it with appropriate and firm traction for three days; and then untie him and have him rest from walking for more days until he is strengthened and recovery is assured."
Capitol .xxxv.	"Chapter XXXV."
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	"On the types of dislocation that are made with pain or fracture or with each one separately."
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When some cause occurs from that, and you strive in its cure and restoration, many times death succeeds.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	However, it is not necessary to presume over its cure, but rather that one who is knowledgeable in the art, experienced, merciful and compassionate, cautious, not hasty or presumptuous; and who uses medications at the beginning that only cause apostemas cauterizations, leaving the patient's fate to divine judgment, unless there is hope for salvation from destruction, relief from illness, and some sign of improvement appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Then make haste to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes an apostema caut.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns as desired, afterwards administer regimen which causes cauterization of apostema and heals the plague with what is convenient for it of the remedies for drying humidity.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation with fracture occurs in the limbs and bones separated, then you perform the reduction of them, and do in this what we have said in the simple maladies of that which is preceded in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your ability that which enters through the paths of fear according to what is preceded by my instruction; for this is better for you to owe to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more healthful to your true body in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-Bukaysis perfectly, of which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
