Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	"Thus begins the speech of Albucasim."
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	"Oh, my children, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, due to its completion it has come to an end. And because of its explanations and clarifications, it seems to me that I fulfill what I promised to you with this treatise, which deals with surgery by hand."
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	"Since the operation by hand is almost entirely lost in our region and time, to such an extent that the science of it is completely forgotten, and only a few descriptions remain in the books of the Ancients, which are now changed hands and have become obsolete due to their errors and mistakes. Therefore, its intentions are closed and its power weakened."
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	"And it seems to me that I should revive this with an ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments of the work, both for addition to the clarification and preparation of it, which is necessary."
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	"However, the reason why there is no good craftsman with his own hand in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and its practitioner must be well-trained beforehand in the science of anatomy, which includes knowing the joints of the limbs, their shapes, connections, separations, knowledge of bones, nerves, and muscles, their numbers, arrangements, and locations of pulsating veins and quiet ones."
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	"And therefore Hippocrates says that 'in the name but not in deed', meaning that he excelled more in writing than in surgery."
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	"But we have already said at the beginning of this book that anyone who does not know what we have said about anatomy will surely fall into error and cause many deaths. For I have seen too many such cases, where some are formed in this science but depart from it without knowledge or experience."
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	"For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who operated on an abscess in a woman's neck, cutting some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed out and the woman died immediately."
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	"And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from a man's bladder that had become very enlarged. He came and removed that stone along with a piece of the bladder wall, causing the man to die three days later."
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	"And I had already predicted that this would happen, for I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the illness, he would certainly die."
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	"And I saw another doctor who was paid by one of our dukes to perform surgery. This doctor approached a blacksmith with a dislocated hip fracture. However, due to his ignorance, he reduced the dislocation improperly using pillows and wedges with great force, not allowing the hip joint any room to breathe."
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	"And he then relocated the limb according to his desires, but when he reduced it, he immediately released it and left it alone for some days. Then he commanded that the bandages be removed, and thus he caused the hip joint and thigh to become inflamed, leading to ruin."
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	"And I was called to him, and I prepared to release the bandages. Then he became calm and free from his pains."
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	"But nevertheless, corruption had already established itself in the limb, so that I could not prevent it. And corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient died."
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	"And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess. The wound became ulcerated after some days, and the malignancy of it was greatly magnified in the patient."
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	"This is because cancerous tumors are caused by black bile. Therefore, it is not necessary to cauterize them completely with hot iron, but rather to operate on the limb that suffers from it so that it may be hosted."
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	"And therefore, my sons, it is necessary for you to divide surgery into two parts: one part concerns operations associated with health, and the other involves works in which there is great danger in most dispositions."
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	"And I have already stated this in every place throughout this book where there is mention of operations involving error and danger. Therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it alone, so that foolish people may not find an opportunity to speak and bring dishonor upon you."
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	"Therefore, take up your arms with diligence and protection from God, and treat your patients with skillfulness and steadfastness."
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	"And follow the best path through the grace of God, losing your way to health and success. Leave behind difficult diseases that are hard to cure, and put aside your fears, so that you may remain steadfast in your faith and name: for it is more glorious for you, both here on earth and afterwards, with regard to your sanctity."
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	"Just as I have stated in some previous discourses:"
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat an illness badly, lest you be named a bad doctor."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	"And I have already divided this book into three sections according to its contents."
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	"Begin the division of the book, starting with the first part."
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	"The first chapter is concerned with the following topics within the first section: the shape of instruments and the forms of cauterizing irons, and what is necessary for surgery."
La divisio de la segonda partida.	"Division of the second part"
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The second chapter is about cautery and perforation, cupping glasses, ligatures, extraction of arrows and similar objects, all ordered according to the forms of instruments."
Divisio de la tersa partida.	"Division of the third part"
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The third chapter is about reduction and relocation, and treatment of torsion and similar conditions. This chapter is organized according to the shape of instruments."
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	"On cauterization with fire and medicine, acute remedies, and memorandum on surgery."
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	"With that, begin the discussion of this entire book."
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	"It is necessary for me to speak about the qualities of those things that are useful and harmful in cauterization, and in what condition cautery is prohibited."
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	"Therefore, I say that the discussion about the qualities of what is useful and harmful in cautery is long and detailed, subtle through science, and secretively concealed. Many wise men have spoken at length about this topic, and they disagree with each other on it. It suffices me to mention a little of their discussions, for fear of prolonging."
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	"And therefore I say that cautery generally benefits all conditions universally, whether they are material or immaterial, except for two conditions which are without matter."
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	"In the case of a dry and hot complexion with matter that is out of order; for some say that cautery is beneficial for this, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for an illness that is due to heat and dryness, since fire has qualities of heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate for an illness of a hot and dry nature with matter that is cauterized and dry to be healed in this way."
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	"And he who says the opposite of that, namely that cautery is beneficial in all hot and dry illnesses that occur in human bodies, argues that when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man very similar."
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	"I say according to the speech of him, that I have experienced this many times myself."
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	"However, it is not necessary for me to speak further about this, since the matter has already been thoroughly examined and discussed in the chapter on cautery. And having known the diversity of complexions among men, the disposition of illnesses within them, their causes, accidents, and duration of time, [I have covered] everything."
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	"But in other complexions, there is no doubt, and especially in hot and humid illnesses, for all physicians agree about them, and they are not in disagreement about the benefit of cautery in those cases."
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	"And know, my son, that the secret of curing with cautery by fire and its effectiveness lies in cautery with burning medicine. For fire is simple, whose action does not extend beyond the member that is cauterized, and it does not harm any other member adjacent to it except with a slight injury."
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"But the action of burning medicine extends to those members that are burned by it, and sometimes it causes illness in them that is difficult to cure, and sometimes it even causes death."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	"But fire, because of its subtlety and its good substance, does not do anything except superfluous. And we know this through experience and the length of service in study with the art concerning the truth of causes; therefore I am excused from lengthy speech. And if it were not that my book is not yet read in this place, I would conceal from you in this pause a secret about fire, namely the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsive power by which it expels illnesses, demonstrated with philosophical proof, which would clarify your thoughts."
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	"And know, my son, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cautery, and they consider the best time to be in spring."
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	"And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm that may occur by chance is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted by the cautery. And especially if the cautery is performed for pains or necessary operations, such as fistulas, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that greater malice will come, which is worse than a slight injury entering through time."
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	"And do not think about this, my son, for only the common people and foolish physicians estimate that. For those illnesses that are cured by cautery have a remedy at all times, but they postpone it."
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	"And the reason is not as they imagine it to be because cautery is only a substitute for medicine that alters complexion and dries out humidity, which are the cause of pain."
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	"But nevertheless, cautery is superfluous over medicine because of its volatility and virtue of its operation and the greatness of its heat."
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	"But it is possible that the illness returns at some time in the future, depending on the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness, and the virtue of cautery, and what is prepared in the body from the aggregation of its superfluities, and what is received by it in its acquisition through foods and similar causes. But the illness in which cautery is administered should be a subtle one in a member with few superfluities and humidity; thus, cautery for toothache and similar ones does not usually return, but this occurs rarely."
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	"And also the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is truer than they understand it to be because they believe that nothing else profits besides cautery."
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	"But the reason is contrary to this; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine only applies when other methods of cure are tried for certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and therefore cautery is administered at the end of the cause, and it profits there."
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	"And from now on understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention understood by the common people and many foolish physicians."
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	"And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this because of anything other than the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance."
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	"And they said that the place of cautery does not matter, which is not absolutely true because I have seen and proven that this is only the case in some bodies without others, and cautery with it is good and better than with iron, as they said. But when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not declared to you because it depends on the quantity of heat that you want from the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive friction; and if you adjust the ignition, the gold will melt in the fire, and some laminae may fall into the fire due to the occupation of the artisan."
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	"And for that reason, cautery with iron should be performed more gently and more moderately according to the virtue of its operation."
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	"And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the chapters so that later you can find what you want from them."
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	"On cautery for headache caused by coldness and humidity."
Le capitol primier.	"The first chapter."
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	"This cautery helps against humidity and coldness in the serous accident caused by these two causes, such as soda and multitude of fluxes called coriza from the head to the parts of the eyebrows and ears flowing, and multitude of sleep, and toothache and jaw pain, and generally all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, sodomitisal diseases, and apoplexy, and similar ones in these illnesses."
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	"The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to be purged with laxative medicine clarifying the head for three or four nights, according to what the virtue of the illness and the age of the patient and his habit require."
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	"And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then perform the cautery between your hands over a carpeted bench and have him place his hands on his knees."
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	"And then place the edge of your palm just above the bridge of the nose between his eyebrows."
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But however, when your little finger reaches the middle location, mark that spot with a tent and then ignite the olive oil cautery of which this is the form:"
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	"And then place that over the spot marked with a tent in such a way that it descends while your hand is gradually constrained and you turn it."
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	"And then lift your hand gently and observe the spot. If you see any amount of bone already exposed on the head, as much as the amount of a grain of barley, then raise your hand again, and if not, turn your hand with that iron, but another one if it has cooled, until you see what I have said to you."
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	"Then take some salt and dissolve it on that spot; let it sit for three days."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	"And pause over the burn wound at its edges, letting it sit until the fire's skin is destroyed."
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the spot with tetrafarmacon cream until it heals."
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	"And they said that when the plague is opened, the arm should be bandaged more tightly, for it is better and more beneficial in this way."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	"And some of them said that the vein should be cauterized near to the bone, and the cautery should be held until some part of the bone's head is adhered."
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	"And then scrape off what has adhered to the bone, and then it shall be healed."
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	"And others said that when the cautery reaches the end, it should be pressed onto the bone with great force until the bone cracks, and this is the small form of alphecati."
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	"And they believe that from that spot the vapors of the head expire."
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	"And let the opened plague be held for a long time, and then it shall be healed until it is consolidated."
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	"But I have not seen these two kinds of cauteries in any man, except some because of fear; and leave that, it seems to me, better is with health when it is; for the head is softened by solution of continuity from this same as we have testified in the other members, and more so when the head of the disease is very strong."
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	"And the first kind of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and that way with that work is healthier."
Capitol segon.	"Chapter Seven:"
Del cauteri del cap.	"Of the cautery for the head."
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	"When severe and prolonged headache occurs in a patient who uses various remedies such as ointments, poultices, bandages, emplasters, powders, cataplasms, liniments, etc., especially if cautery has been applied without improvement, consider whether the patient's head is constitutionally strong. If it is not hot and dry but rather moist and cold, then cauterize again with another cautery."
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	"He cauterized that over the horn of his head with a cautery until the flesh was parted."
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	"Cut the flesh until you see the amount of bone we mentioned and cauterize him with a cautery at the last part of the head where it is called 'the vessel,' which is also where cupping is performed."
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	"And be gentle in this, and do not expose the bone, for this disease causes less pain than all other cauteries of the head."
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	"And this cautery should be applied in its proper place, for it is necessary to use a more subtle cautery on the horns of the head and the occupit than that used on the middle part of the head. This is its form."
Capitol ters.	"Chapter Three."
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	"Of the cauterization of non-ancient migraine."
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	"When severe pain occurs suddenly in the part of the head, or there is persistent pain extending to the ear, evacuate with medicines that cleanse the head and administer the other treatment mentioned earlier for this disease. But if it does not help, cauterization is then performed in two ways: either cauterization with a medicine that causes burning, or with iron."
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	"The cautery with a burning medicine is made as follows: Take a dollop of aloe and scrape it clean, then remove both its ends."
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	"And then carefully cut the location of the pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until you see the bone beneath the flesh, but do not expose it."
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	"Then press over it with a hot compress for a moderate constriction and leave it there for the space of three hours. Then remove it and take away the aloe and let the wound lie open for two or three days, then apply a poultice of bread dough around it until the area becomes dry."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with an ointment until it is healed."
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	"If you wish, do this with some burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines."
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"The cauterization with iron according to this method is as follows:"
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	"And it is called 'closed nails', for its head is shaped like a nail with some curvature, and there is a small prominence in the middle of it."
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	"And apply pressure onto the painful spot, hold your hand steady — so that the heat of the iron is not wasted — and slowly move it back and forth with speed."
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	"And if the amount of heat absorbed by the skin is as much as its magnitude, lift your hand up so that the artery that is left is not burned, so that blood does not flow."
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And apply cotton soaked in saltwater onto the spot and leave it there for three days; and then apply warm compress with its edge and cure it with ointment until it heals."
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	"And if you wish, cauterize the extremity of the catheter according to cautery and beware of cutting into an artery in this migraine that is not ancient."
Capitol quart.	"Chapter Four."
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	"On the Cautery Treatment of Ancient Migraine."
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	"When you treat migraine with what we have said about the previous cure and what we have said in the divisions of illnesses, but the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the catheter within until it becomes white. Because it signifies onto the spot of the pain with a line of length equal to its magnitude or longer; and pause your hand for a moment and strengthen that until you incise the artery and bring about inflammation up to the bone."
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	"However, it is necessary that you guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is moved by mastication; and that the nerve is not burned nor the nerves that move it; and that spasms do not occur."
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	"And if it is about the caution and care of blood flow from the artery that is opened, because in the opening of it there is fear, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not studied nor practiced; leave the operation at the beginning."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	"And I come with remembrance of the regulation of accidental blood flow from the artery according to its manner, in its place in this book."
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	"And if you see this illness that does not abate with this cautery and you see the patient's condition tolerable, then cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have recounted before, and cure the ulcer until it is healed."
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	"And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the stricture of artery with cautery having two catheters, and this is better cautery and more confirmative."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter Five."
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	"On the Cauterization of Earaches."
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	"When in the ear there is pain due to friction and it is cured with laxative causes and other cures that have been mentioned in the division, but the pain is not removed, then heat the cautery, which is called puncta, of which this is its shape:"
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	"And when it has been heated, apply it around the entire ear as if a wheel is turned, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each one."
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	"And go along with the cautery to the root of the ear little by little until you feel the spot with your tent."
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	"And if you cauterize with ten punctures around the entire ear, and it is sufficient, then cure those spots until they are healed."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter Six."
De cauterizacio de turtura.	"On Cauterization of Dizziness."
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	"Dizziness that is cured with cautery is only of those species which come from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses."
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	"Avoid cauterization for the species that occurs due to dryness or spasms of nerves."
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	"When treating that type of tumor with herbs and caper spurge and garlic, if your treatment does not help, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below their temple, and the third at the junction of two lips."
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	"Then pause your cautery in the contrary direction to where the wound is, for softening only occurs on the part that appears sound."
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	"And the manner of cauterization is such that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the tip of the ear, then slightly above the horn of the head, and on the temple, whose length should be equal to the length of your finger, and pause your hand with the cautery until it has consumed about half the thickness of a rope."
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	"And this is the form of the cautery, which is specific to barbers, and its shape is described before us."
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	"But it is still more subtle than what you see here; and it would be better to cut away excess roughness in place of unnecessary delicacy."
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	"And apply the cure with that which is described in its proper place until it is healed."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter VII."
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	"On cauterizing ancient stroke (apoplexy)."
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and the cure for it is what we have said, and the patient does not confirm your medicine but has no fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries: on all the horns of his head; and one cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and another cautery on the cheek.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of cauterizing is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	Now cauterize over the mouth of the stomach, and it should be more recent; then it shall be cured with what you will prescribe.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterizing for oblivion caused by a tumor.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	"Give the patient at the beginning large jars and purifying pills."
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	"And then cover the entire head of the sick person, pausing on its crown, place the plaster described in the treatise on plasters."
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	"And pause for some time, because this is a manner of cautery."
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	"And do this according to that methodical order which I have already mentioned."
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	"If this does not heal well, then perform three cauteries on the last part of his head, which should be descending from the most superior part of the head toward the most inferior part of the neck."
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	"And pause between each cautery for the thickness of a finger, and then immediately dress the cautery with what has been produced."
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	"But if you see that the patient tolerates this badly, then perform the cautery in the middle of the head; but if you want greater cautery, then cauterize him on both temples."
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	"And dress it immediately until it is healed; and let the cauteries be round according to the shape mentioned before."
Capitol .ix.	"Chapter IX."
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	"Burning of parasites and softening of the entire body."
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	"After preparing the head with erasures and water as we have said; then remove the patient's hat, and burn that area with a cautery in the middle of the head, and apply cauteries to all the corners of the head, and apply cauteries to the back part of it, and apply three cauteries to the cervical vertebrae."
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	"And if it is necessary to soften the body too much in illnesses that are poorly tolerated and the illness is severe, then apply four cauteries on the lumbar vertebrae, and also apply a cautery on the sacrum between the buttocks, lifting up the thigh."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	"And also cure that area with olive oil, after it has healed, using a cautery."
Capitol .x.	Chapter .x.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	"On cauterization for epilepsy."
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	"No one is cauterized except in the case of epilepsy caused by phlegm."
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	"And therefore at the beginning of the illness, prepare the brain with erasures and the other treatment which we have said in the division when the illness is great and poorly tolerated except for medications."
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	"And if the child cannot tolerate medications, then administer gargarisms and mastigators to soften the brain, for several days before, with beneficial diet."
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	"And also shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the manner previously mentioned, and another cautery on the occiput of it, and cauterize each corner of the head."
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	"And if the illness is severe and poorly tolerated, then cauterize it with cauteries as mentioned earlier, having paralysis and softening of the body on the cervical vertebrae and lumbar vertebrae."
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	"And let it be cauterized with olive oil according to what has been said previously."
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	"But if the illness is in a child, then pause and use subtle cauteries in this manner:"
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	"On cauterization for melancholy."
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	"When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with cauteries as mentioned earlier, having paralysis."
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	"And if the cause of melancholy is declining towards it due to excess, and the body of the patient is humid, then let him drink that which cleanses the brain according to what has been mentioned earlier in this division."
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	"And also shave the head of the patient, and then make a small poultice well-made of it on the circle, and then place it in the middle of the head."
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	"And let the patient be seated comfortably, and let him be held by someone from every part."
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	"And also apply a liniment, and then it is worthy of being rubbed with lamb's fat."
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	"And heat it on the fire for gentle warmth by measure, which the patient should suffer when it is applied to him."
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	"And then place it in the middle of the head of the patient within the circle, and leave it until it has cooled down."
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	"And do this with the patient once a week until he is healed, with the other regimen of him being well; or if you wish, cauterize it making small punctures according to his strength, but keep your hand with such an arranged cautery: this is a special cautery which moistens the brain with equality."
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	"And then apply that poultice wrapped in a bandage or a piece of wool."
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	"On cauterization for descending water in the eye."
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	"When it has been declared to you that the beginning of water in the eye has appeared through the signs which I have mentioned earlier in this division, then begin and give the patient to drink what cleanses his head, and protect him from all humidity."
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	"And make him take a bath with hot water for several days."
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	"And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of descent of water in both eyes, or on one temple if it is the beginning of water in one eye."
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	"Incise with a cautery all the veins and arteries which are close to the neck; and let the cauteries be in that length on the level of the temples."
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	"And guard yourself from fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see any fluxes of blood, stop them with some medicine, which is at your disposal."
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	"And I will come with wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the ablation of those and caution concerning fluxes of blood."
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	"And sometimes it is cauterized on the back of the neck near two bones with two cauteries producing smoke."
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter .xiii
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	"On cauterization for old tears."
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	"When tears of the eyes are old and abundant, and it is found that this is due to thick phlegmatic excess in the veins and arteries which are manifested on the surface of the head, then cauterize it with a cautery as mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water rising in the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on the back of the neck near the temples, and with two cauteries on the back of the neck near two bones."
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	"And if you need addition, then cauterize it also on all sides of the cheekbone above the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery."
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter .xiiii.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	"Regarding cautery for bad breath."
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	"When you treat that person with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not help, then prepare this ointment and give it to the patient to drink for three nights; afterwards, shave their head, and cauterize the area with a hot iron, using olive oil."
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	"And then cauterize that spot with a clove-hot iron, placing two cauteries above the eyebrows on each side of the hairline."
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	"And be careful not to burn yourself with the hot cautery."
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	"This is how you apply the clove-hot cautery:"
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter XV."
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	"Regarding cauterization for drooping eyelids."
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"If the eyelid is drooping due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with an iron using this lunar cautery; and this is how it should be done:"
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	"And if you wish to do so, cauterize that spot above both eyebrows a little with two cauteries in each part, and they should be elongated from the temples."
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	"And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of eyebrow."
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	"Don't press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to how much the third part of the eyelid should be burned."
Capitol .xvi.	"Chapter XVI"
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	"Regarding cauterization of the eyelid when the hairs are turned inward and piercing the eye:"
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	"When the hairs of the eyelid are turned inward so as to pierce the eye, cauterize them either with fire or with medicine that burns."
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	"If you cauterize with fire, first tell the patient to pull out his hairs like those who pluck them for depilation, until they are elongated and hardened; and if it pierces there, then stretch the eyelids with a bandage so that it is not harmed while the hairs are growing."
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	"Therefore, when they are grown and hardened, then have the patient hold his head steady in the air, and press the eyelid of the eye with a probe, shaped like a mortar leaf, and let the beginning of the probe be close to the hairs."
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	"And then pause on that spot by immersing it in powdered alum or mucilage of pimpernel on the eye."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	"And then ignite the cautery, whose shape is like this:"
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	"And then cauterize along the figure which is marked here, bit by bit, with several glances, until its surface burns completely, just like a myrtle leaf."
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	"The sign of the good deed is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and its hairs raised above the puncture of the eye."
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	"Then raise your hand and leave him for three days, and then pause on that spot with a bandage until the scar is healed."
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with ointment until it heals."
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	"But if the hairs return again for some cause and the eyelid becomes softened, then do the cautery once more on that spot just as you had done initially."
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	"But if the hairs are still on the eyelid, then cauterize them until they are raised to their natural place and hardened, so that they do not pierce the eye."
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	"But if you use a cautery with burning medicine, then order the patient to pull out his hairs until they are elongated and hardened, and then make a paper from cloth in the shape of a myrtle leaf."
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	"And then take known soap and live coal ashes an ounce each, or whatever you have, and then mix those ashes well, and do this with haste so that it does not get cold; and then spread this on the paper made like a myrtle leaf shape, and place this over one eye or both eyes; and place some of that on the spot of the eye immersed in powdered alum, and let the patient's head be held upright."
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	"And then place your finger on the medicine and press it gently without harming him until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for biting is like that of fire."
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	"And then when he perceives that it feels like biting, then remove the medicine and wipe it with your finger; and then when the biting stops, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid is already raised just like it was washed from constriction with fire or incision, for then it is good; and if not, then return to that medicine on the spot where it has not been applied before and do not relent until your operation is hardened and the eye is contracted."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	"And then place a bandage on that spot until the scar of adhesion is healed, and then treat it with ointment or some other thing until it heals."
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	"And it is necessary that you, during your operation, guard with vigilant diligence that no dirt from the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes softened after several days and some hairs again pierce the eye for some cause, then repeat your medication on that spot where the eyelid has become softened, and exactly as you did at the beginning, and then heal it."
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	"And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf:"
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	"And know that human eyes are diverse according to their magnitude and smallness, and therefore your contraction should be made accordingly."
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	"And do not close the path of rectitude towards anyone who studies in this art."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	"On the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye."
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment is ineffective, then you should cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place their head on their own seat, and hold their head steady with some assistant's hands so that it is neither moved nor agitated by their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then pause a piece of gauze or cotton wool soaked in hot wax or pitch on the wound, covering it completely.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now ignite the cautery which is in this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is cone-shaped, like the shape of a reed or vulture's feather, at one extremity where the cautery is made
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it may be penetrating into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, it can come out like this:
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But that which is cone-shaped is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	"Then press on the abscess if it is open, and draw out its liquid and dry it."
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	"And if it's not open, then lance that area and extract the pus from it."
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	"And then apply the cauterizer that has been well ignited, and press it on that area with a little force at the beginning of the nose, so that you do not burn your hand or disturb the patient, and then pause the cauterizer in the wrinkles of the skin and char it."
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	"If at the beginning of your cauterization it enters into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice if necessary; and leave that area thus for three days, and then apply to that wound with a border and surroundings with a drying ointment until it heals."
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	"But if eleven days have passed and it is not healed, then apply to it a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what is suitable in its chapter."
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	"And another method of cauterizing a fistula is that which was first described as follows: enter into the location of the fistula and burn it with this thin camphor wax of the shape of the fistula. And then put in there the amount of one grain of melted lead; and hold your hand on it with the camphor wax with good retention, so that the patient is not harmed because the melted lead does not reach the skin of that area; and cover that burned wound with albumen of egg white or water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by wonderful healing."
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	"And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a suppository of the nose and reduce the fistula into the course of the nose according to what will come in its proper place."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter XVIII."
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	"Of the cauterization of the anal fissure."
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	"Fissures often occur in the lips, and most frequently in the lips of infants."
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	"Therefore when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and it does not help your treatment, then perform a small cautery incision according to this form that is shown here:"
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	"And let its concavity be according to the thinness of the scalpel."
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	"Then place that little incision carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissure."
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	"Then also heal it using wax, once it has been healed."
Capitol .xix.	Here's sentence 19 to translate from Occitan:
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Cauterization of a fistula in the mouth
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an apostema forms on the uvula or palate or tonsils and it bursts and becomes infected, and then breaks open and a fistula is formed, you should clean it out and not neglect its treatment. Otherwise, if necessary, you must cauterize according to the amount of pus received in the fistula, and put the heated iron into the opening of the fistula, and place your hand so that the hot iron reaches the front of it, and repeat this once or twice; then cure it with what we have said about treatment until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the bone is resected and healed, then it is good. But if not, it is necessary to expose the site and remove the decayed bone according to what is described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cauterization of teeth and softening of gum abscesses.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the abscesses are softened by moisture and teeth are affected, if you attempt to treat them with medicines but do not succeed, then place the patient's head on the pillow, immediately ignite the cautery whose shape is depicted here. Thus, you should place the pincers on the tooth and insert the ignited cautery swiftly, while keeping your hand slightly away so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then quickly withdraw your hand, and repeat the cauterization several times according to what you desire.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then have the patient rinse their mouth with saltwater and hold it there for an hour, then spit it out. For the affected tooth will be solidified, the softened gum strengthened, and the corrupted moisture dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by coldness or worms in the tooth, or if medical treatment does not succeed, then cauterize it in this way:
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	"You should take a border of cowhide and stretch it tightly over the iron head of the cautery; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the cautery. Then quickly plunge the cautery bordered with cowhide into boiling water, and immediately apply it to the painful tooth before it cools."
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	"And repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the teeth."
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	"If you wish, dip wool or cotton in the cowhide border mentioned above and place it on the painful tooth, then place the red-hot iron on top of it until the iron reaches the surface of the concavity of the tooth."
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	"But be careful with fire cautery: wait until the iron or coal is red-hot and glowing brightly in its center, without scorching the mouth of the patient."
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	"And then ignite the cautery according to its shape, and place it on the tooth with your hand until it cools down; do this several times until the pain disappears completely, either that day or the next."
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	"And it is necessary that after this cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good border and holds it for one hour, then spits it out. This is the form of the cautery."
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	"And cauterize according to what you wish or can, using extreme care."
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	"And this is the form of the cannula:"
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter XXII."
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	"On the cautery of external prolapses."
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	"When prolapses are made of mucus and humors, rubbed on but not digested by medications, and you wish to promote digestion of them slightly, then ignite the cautery with this shape: it has two hollow extremities through which the smoke should rise from one end of the cautery to the other. Place the hot cautery on the prolapse once or twice until it reaches its surface."
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	"And if the prolapse is small, then place the cautery according to its size. Then let it rest for three days and apply it again on the edge of the wound until what was burned by the fire disappears."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	"And afterwards dress it with ointments, bandages, and cloths until it is healed."
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	"The shape of the cannula or cautery for such an operation is as follows:"
Capitol .xxiii.	"Chapter XXIII."
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	"On the cautery of sorethroat and constriction of windpipe."
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	"When humidity comes upon the channel of the lung, especially when it is due to coldness of temperament, then the patient should first be evacuated with laxative medicines. Then cauterize him on the back of his throat in the depressed place."
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	"But take care not to reach the gag reflex with the cautery nor burn much of the wall of the esophagus."
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	"And cauterize him also on the junction of his neck with the last cervical vertebra using another cautery."
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	"The cautery should be applied thus for two or three times, following the manner described above."
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	"And then dress him as stated previously until he is healed."
Capitol .xxiiii.	"Chapter XXIV."
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	"On the cautery of lung disease and coughing."
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	"When coughing and lung disease are due to rubbed-on humidity, the patient has no fever or spitting of blood, and it is an old illness, then cauterize him with two cauteries on the furcula in the depressed places at both sides and below; and with another cautery in the middle of his chest between his two nipples. Apply the cauteries thus for two or three times following the manner described above."
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	"And if you wish, your cautery should be performed puncturing with the cautery called 'punctum,' the shape of which is given in the puncture for earache."
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	"Make punctures at those points; and then dress him with what has been stated previously until he is healed."
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	"And since the cautery has three branches for this operation, you can perform three cauteries following this shape in one session:"
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter XXV."
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	"On the cautery of tittillio (i.e., twitching or spasms) which is called 'the head of the helper'."
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	"When the 'head of the helper' (i.e., the atlas vertebra) is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not return to its proper position at the usual time, but rather moves slightly causing it to dislocate as we have witnessed, then first reduce the dislocation. Then place the patient on his back or side. Then elevate the neck which is located within the citillo (i.e., the atlas vertebra) using your left hand so that the junction is reduced."
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then apply the cautery, which has two heads. This is its shape:"
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	"And then cauterize the neck so that it penetrates from one side to the other. Now follows the figure for cautery with four cauteries."
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And perform this subtly according to the quantity of bandages. This is its shape:"
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	"Some times it may be appropriate thus, and there are eight cauteries in all."
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	"And then pause on the cautery for a short while with salt and water. Then have the patient lie quietly until he is comforted. Do not move him for any time."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	"And if the dislocation is above and it happens thus, then cauterize on the muscle with a cautery applied thus or with multiple puncturing cauteries, for the junction is strengthened and the humidity is broken up and the patient is healed."
Capitol .xxvi.	"Chapter XXVI."
De cauterizacio del stomac.	"On the cautery of the stomach."
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	"When there is heat and much humidity in the stomach that it extracts from its temperament and produces many flatulent rumbles, if you continue with these remedies and do not help him, then place the patient on his back with his arms and legs extended. Then cauterize him thus: apply one cautery to his left side of his chest for the length of a finger using a cautery applied thus; and apply two cauteries below both sides of this cautery so that it forms a triangular figure. Lengthen those which are not well-adjusted lest they cause blisters."
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	"And the depth of the cauteries should be the thickness of two thumbs of the width of the neck."
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	"And this is the shape of the cautery according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach thus: and this will be one cautery shaped like a circle thus:"
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	"And the stomach should be punctured thus for those who are frightened by this cautery. And if you see on the stomach a puncture as large as you wish with a bandage, then cauterize it with a cautery at that point. Then dress him with the dressing stated previously until he is healed."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII."
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	"On the cautery of a hot liver."
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	"When pain is felt in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness so that it deviates from its normal temperament by superfluous exit, and if the patient is not helped by what has been said here, then place him on his back with his head supported. Then apply three cauteries of this form and size thus over the liver on its left side near the hypochondria where a man lies on his right side."
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	"And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger; and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right side of the chest."
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	"Do not press too much with the cautery."
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	"And if the amount of water that adheres is equal to half a finger's width in thickness, do not adjust it further. And if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then let him lie down, having already extended his arms and legs. Then raise his elbows."
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	"And this is the form of the cautery:"
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	"It is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a surgical cautery, if you possess subtlety and prudence in the art."
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	"And beware that you do not proceed in the cauterization, and ensure that the specific heat of the entire chain is maintained so that everything within it becomes heated, because here the chain is thin; and know this."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII"
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	"Of the perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery."
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	"When an abscess or tumor forms in the liver and you wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the illness becomes serious and painful, without sharpness."
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	"And if it is in the membrane of the liver, then the pain is sharp and great, and often the physicians become tired of treating it."
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	"Therefore it is necessary that the illness be turned towards its back; and approach the location of the abscess with a finger; and then heat the cautery like wool, the shape of which has been previously described in another page."
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	"And cauterize with that cautery until the entire chain is consumed, until it reaches the cyphack, until in ashes it becomes clean."
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it by the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed."
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	"And it is necessary that this form of cautery be used only by one who has prolonged his studies in the art of medicine and knows many illnesses; but even he should not attempt this operation without experience several times, but rather let those others do it, which is better."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter Twenty-Nine."
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	"On cauterizing pleasure."
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	"According to ancient methods of cautery for pleasure caused by the hilum of the testicle, follow this manner: Take a long, dry stick from the Aristolochia plant, pointed at one end, as thick as your finger."
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	"And then immerse that stick in oil and heat it in the fire, and cauterize with it at the spot which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries guide them, one a little inclined towards the side where the beard is, and with two cauteries inclining slightly between the fifth rib and the armpit, inclined somewhat toward the back parts; and with another cautery in the middle of the thigh; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back parts; and with one cautery between the two buttocks, and with two cauteries on both sides of the thigh."
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	"And you do not need to hold your hand with the cautery, but it should be done quickly and surely."
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	"And it was said by some ancients that men use cauteries made of iron like a ray, and heat them in the place between the ribs until they reach the aposteme and cleanly burn it, as we have said concerning the aposteme on the liver."
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	"But in this case of cautery there is no fear of death, for such an occurrence happens rarely at the location called 'fistula', which does not heal."
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter Thirty"
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	"On cauterizing the melons (testicles)"
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	"When you treat the disease of the testicles with what we have said about cure in division and your treatment does not improve, then cauterize it in this manner: According to three methods, all of which are correct. One method is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the testicle according to the figure of the liver cauteries, the shape of which has been previously described."
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	"And let each cautery be as thick as a finger or a little more, and the manner of cautery should be done in the same way we have described for liver cauteries."
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	"And do not hold your hand with the cautery; let the disease be evident on its own two sides."
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	"And another method of cauterizing is: heat the cautery having two vents, the cause of which we have described in the chapter on dislocation of muscles, and elevate the cord which is towards the left testicle where the disease lies."
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	"And let your elevation be such that you raise the cord according to the length of the body, so that cauteries can be made along the width of the body."
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	"And bring the two vents close together, lighted with a hot flame, until they penetrate the cord on the other side."
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	"Then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made."
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	"And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vents."
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	"Then treat the cautery as soon as it has ceased to discharge blood for several days, because it is more effective than the other causes mentioned in treatment."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Chapter Thirty-One"
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	"On cauterizing hydrocele."
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	"Not to burn in hydrocele but rather on its wall properly."
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	"When you treat hydrocele with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in this section and do not succeed, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one on the stomach, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen, and two cauteries between the spinal vertebrae, and one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach."
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	"And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the scrotum."
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	"Afterwards, leave the cautery buried in order that it may burn for a long time."
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	"And do not remove the cautery until it has done its work properly so that two intentions are aggregated to it, and then it will be quickly removed with help of healing."
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	"The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a clavis, following its previous form, and that with which the back is cauterized should be like an olive, as it has been previously described in its form."
Capitol .xxxii.	"Chapter XXXII."
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	"Of cauterization of leprosy and of sores."
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with serous water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot near the area between the little toe and the ring toe, raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist that; and then raise your hand and do not return that completely, for the serous water will subside.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is how you should apply the cautery: First, make two cauteries on both sides of the thighs, and on each thigh make a cautery with the cutting edge of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And make the cautery along the length of the thigh, leaving one on the outer side and another on the inner side near the middle of the thigh, making two cauteries on each thigh.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the wound remain uncovered for some time so that no water may accumulate there.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	About the cautery of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly suffers from wind and moisture inside that weakens the vital powers, such as the digestive and retentive powers which are in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with these methods of treatment without conferring, and sometimes the illness requires cautery to exhibit its virtue, at that time cauterize it on the same stomach according to what has been said before about the cauterization of the stomach, with a large cautery circle and four small cauteries around it, with a small nail-like cautery; and with one cautery on the spleen near the great kidney, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the moisture is excessive and the illness tolerates it, then cauterize on the penis and on the intestines, and closely apply two cauteries on the stomach near the groin, for this treatment is perfecting healing of which you should not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	De cauterizacion de costelas e de bracs.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	"Regarding the cautery of ancient hemorrhoids."
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	"When there are recent hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured with what we have said in the division [of medicine], then cauterize them with three cauteries on each side of the small triangle below the navel, and one cautery above the navel."
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	"If the stomach appears cold and the food undigested, and the face is pale and yellowish, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as described previously; and apply one cautery to the liver, and another cautery to the spleen using a pointed cautery, and leave it there for some time until the wound heals."
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	"On cauterization near the incision of hemorrhoids."
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When thou cuttest away the vein, then thou ignitest the cautery that is assembled like a rod.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert this heated cauterizing instrument into the vein you have cut off, and finish closing its mouth so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, because if the veins are too large, then cauterize each one separately according to what has been said above, and afterward cure those with care using what is recommended for healing.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over some area, it is more likely to cause injury.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature of wounds in the parts of the flesh.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work recommended for it in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, then let it be healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when there is some vein fistula in the nature of a wound, and it is old, corrupted by corruption and moisture, then what is more fitting than to probe that with a subtle probe, and also know the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery which resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert this heated cautery into that fistula, according to how deep the probe enters.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"Burn the corrupt flesh with the cautery thrice, twice or once, according to your need."
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	"Be careful not to burn nerves or veins. If the fistula is in the bladder or the intestine, be especially careful with all those areas and do not perform this procedure unless the fistula is in a fatty location and you think it is not penetrating."
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the area once it has healed."
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	"If the area is sealed and the matter is cut off from it, and it remains like that for some time, then you know that it has healed completely."
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	"If the matter is not removed from it, then you know that it is penetrating or that the bone is corrupted nearby, or that this is due to one of those causes which will be mentioned later in its place."
Capitol .xxxvii.	"Chapter xxxvii."
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	"Regarding cauterization of warts."
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	"When the warts cause pain due to friction or large size, and consequently the patient's skin becomes irritated, it is necessary to cauterize each one with a hot iron, applying it to every wart with a pointed tip, taking care not to forget any."
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	"And then cauterize them again with the second iron, leaving a small space between each one, so that three lines of cauterizations are formed, and then continue with more cauterizations afterwards as needed."
Capitol .xxxviii.	"Chapter XXXVI."
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	"Regarding cauterization of the bladder."
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	"When the bladder suffers debilitation and softening due to friction and humidity, such that the patient cannot retain urine, it is necessary to cauterize there on both sides of the pubic region, where the hairs of the pubis begin, applying one iron on the right side and another on the left."
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	"And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of hair in the pubic region; and cauterize there with one iron on the lower part of the buttocks, or with two if necessary."
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	"And let the cautery have a pointed tip depending on what is needed."
Capitol .xxxix.	"Chapter XXXIX."
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	"Regarding cauterization of the navel."
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	"When the navel suffers friction and humidity, making it difficult for conception to occur, corrupting menstrual flow, delaying its onset, and causing pain during menstruation, it is necessary to cauterize there with three cauterizations around the navel region, as we have described in the cautery of the bladder; and also apply a cautery on the lower part of the back, or two if necessary, using a pointed tip."
Capitol .xl.	"Chapter XL."
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	"Regarding cauterization for dislocation of the anus."
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	"When moist discharges are abundantly emitted from the anal region, causing prolapse of its tissues, and a sign of this is that one side appears prolonged over the other when compared together."
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	"And the location of the prolapse is found within the buttocks."
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	"Therefore you should cauterize the patient on the spot where the ankle bone is located using a circular cautery similar to this, since once you have felt with your hand in the area around it as it revolves, and thus that the ankle bone falls in the middle of the circle."
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	"And here is the cautery described earlier for use in cauterizing the stomach."
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	"If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize with three olive-sized cauteries."
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of heat throughout the whole cord; and afterward take care that the wound may heal."
Capitol .xli.	"Chapter XL."
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	"Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein."
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	"When pain arises in the ankle joint due to friction and dampness, the patient is cured with what has been said [above] if it is not confirmed or outdated. Then you should purge the patient of thick humors using fetid pills or artificial pills, and afterward cauterize that area."
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	"And the method of cautery in this case is done in two ways: either by cauterizing with burning medicines or by cautering with fire."
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	"First of all, according to two known methods, one of which is that you should cauterize the area around the ankle joint with three triangular cauteries arranged in this manner; and make them of good depth."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	"And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of a finger, if the cauteries are olive-sized or larger."
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	"But sometimes you should place the cauteries directly on the middle point above the ankle joint, so that there are four cauteries."
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	"And if you wish, cauterize with the circle described in the cautery for dislocation of the ankle joint, so that it may contain and burn all the heat along the whole cord."
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	"And this is the method of cautery for sciatica when pain is adherent to the ankle and not extended into the joint."
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	"But if it extends into the joint, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the joint above the point where the pain is felt; and one cautery on the shinbone a little below that point on the left side."
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	"And if cauterizing with a knife (cautery), let the depth of the cautery be according to the amount of heat in the cord."
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	"And if the pain extends to the point near the toes where you should cauterize that area with cauteries for three points or four or more as needed."
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	"And if the pain extends to the side below the joint, then cauterize that area with one knife cautery."
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	"And be sure in all cauteries not to finish with the cautery so as to burn any nerve or large artery, lest you cause harm or contraction."
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	"And I have seen some of those who cauterized on the shinbone and finished with the cautery, and the leg became swollen within so that the tumor reached the foot, and the foot was perforated and corrupted."
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	"And indeed such a careless procedure is often followed by a sudden loosening of the belly, and often death results."
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	"And if pain is in two places at once, cauterize each according to this manner."
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	"And the wise ones said concerning cauterization of the ankle joint that this is the manner: make it like a ring of iron, whose circumference should be the size of a large palm; and let its opening be on the outside according to the thickness of a date bone or slightly more."
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And let that circle be followed by another third; and let the space between them be equal to the width of a finger joint; and let those circles be opened on both sides; and let their length be one or two finger widths, and make their edges of iron decently sharpened in the circles; this is its form:"
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	"And let it be heated in the fire until it becomes red-hot and throwing sparks; and let it be placed on the party of the ankle where the pain is located on the inside."
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	"And then cauterize that area with three reddened cauteries at one time."
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then leave it for three days; or plaster that with mud and leave the wound open too many days; and cure it with honey until it is healed."
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: "O son, concerning this kind of cautery we have used it little because of the fear of its appearance and because few people regard it."
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	"But of all cauteries there is none like that one which suffers itself to be found in its place."
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	"But cauteries with adherent medicines are those which you should make two circles having holes pierced in them, into which let the end of an iron rod be inserted; let their length and thickness be such that they are two or three finger widths apart."
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	"And if the space between each is equal to the thickness of a finger; and let them be open on both sides and above, and let them contain something between them according to this form:"
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	"And let it be placed on the party of the ankle where the pain is located on the inside; and press your hand on the party of the ankle, and take boiled water and pour it between the two circles, whose heat should be increased gradually, and keep that for about an hour, until the pain has ceased from its biting and adhering — for that burns like fire — until the biting ceases."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	"And then lift your hand with the instrument and wash off the boiled water from all the ankle with fresh water."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	"And then leave it for three days and press on that area until the blackness of the adhering cautery disappears, and let it be so for some days, and afterwards wash it with honey; this is the last in treatment."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then cure it with honey until it is healed."
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	"And if the pain extends into the thigh or leg, make to it as was done for the ankle joint."
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	"This is the manner of boiled water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines."
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	"Recipe: of alkali and of soda not quenched from both an equal party, grind them up and place in a new bowl whose lower part is pierced with a small hole according to the quantity that goes into it."
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	"And place underneath the bowl another vessel inverted, and pour onto that alkali and quicklime with fresh water until it covers them by one finger's breadth; then compress them with your hand with good compression, and leave the vessel which is going to fall from it boiling water to the inverted vessel."
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	"And then tighten all that water, and pour it onto more quicklime and fresh alkali, because at this time it will have very great strength, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterization of other members, because it acts like fire."
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	"And so of some medicines with which the ankle is cauterized, such as treacle and honey and quicklime with soap, so that they are mixed."
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	"Galen recounts of a man among the ancients the operation and cure with which pain of the ankle and sciatic vein was cured, and he highly praised it, saying that no other cure is necessary, because it is healed at once as he recounted, for it entered into bath and eased immediately."
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	"And it is that it should be taken of green celery, and if it is not found green, fig leaves should be taken; let them be ground with a little salt and placed upon the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh or leg, and bound up."
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	"It should be left for three hours or as much time as the patient can bear without discomfort."
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	"Then immediately take him to bathe and feed him once his body is immersed in water, because the pain ceases and he becomes healed."
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	"And know that no one should use cautery with these medicines unless it's for the evacuation of the body."
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	"But as Aesculapius said, when a goat's vein is cut and the bleeding stops, he should apply a poultice to it. And this is how you cauterize: take some wool, dip it in old oil, and place it between the openings of the skin."
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	"And also take dry goat hair and heat it on fire until it becomes charcoal, then place it on the wool and let it cool."
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	"And repeat this process, and don't stop until the sensation of the bite has reached the water, and then the pain will cease."
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	"And this method of cautery is called 'cautery of goats'."
Capitol .xlii.	"Chapter XLII."
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	"Of the cauterization of toothache."
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	"Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to various causes, such as kidney stones or blows or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, due to an infusion of hot and humid matter."
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	"But cautery is not useful except in this single case, which occurs from the effusion of hot matter."
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	"Therefore, first perform an evacuation of the patient with pills made from the same material as the one causing pain, placed on both sides where the pain occurs in three lines according to its width. Then apply cauteries with tenths in each line, depending on the quantity that comes out and the power of the disease."
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	"Then cauterization should be performed using pointed cauteries."
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries in a cross shape using a small knife-shaped cautery:"
Capitol .xliii.	"Chapter XLIII."
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	"On cauterization at the beginning of gibbosity (hernia)."
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	"It often happens that this disease occurs in young children. The sign of its onset in children is when the hernia appears suddenly while they are playing and moving around."
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	"And you should notice that it occurs at the last lumbar vertebra of the spine, where the hernia begins to protrude over the others."
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	"And when you see this and want to prevent it, immediately cauterize around that area with a circular cautery like this:"
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	"so that the cautery covers all of the protuberance of the vertebra on both sides."
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	"And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two or three lines:"
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	"so that the points are close together."
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	"And then treat the area inside that has been healed as we have said."
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	"But be careful not to use a cautery in cases of hernia caused by spasms of nerves."
Capitol .xliv.	"Chapter XLIV."
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	"On cauterization for gout and pain in the joints."
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	"When pain in the joints is caused by friction of humors that accumulate in each part of the body, it is customary for physicians to call this condition gout specifically when pains occur in the feet."
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	"And therefore, when gout caused by friction is being treated with medication but the pain does not disappear, then cauterize to remove it."
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	"and you should cauterize around the evacuation area of the joint of the foot using several cauteries:"
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And these cauteries should be olive-shaped, with this being their form:"
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	"If it is necessary to make points on the fascia of the foot, then do so using a pointed cautery."
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	"And if the pain moves into the toes or other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize around each painful area with three or four olive-shaped cauteries like this:"
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	"If many cauteries are needed and these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize like this without pressing too hard with your hand before the cautery, being careful only around the skin of the joint."
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	"And if the pain moves into both toes, then administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter."
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	"And if the pain is only in the joints of the hands and it is called arthritis, then make punctures around the knuckles like this, making two lines of them."
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	"And if there remains some pain in the fingers, then make punctures around each knuckle and around the root of the thumb."
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	"And if the pain moves near to the joints of the bones or muscles, then cauterize each of them on all sides of the tendons."
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	"And do not evacuate the disease without good regimen and receipt of medicines, for if there is good regimen and the humor is evacuated with this cautery alone, God willing, it will be healed."
Capitol .xlv.	"Chapter XLIV."
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	"On cauterization of fractures."
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	"When a fracture occurs in the ankles or shins and the bowels begin to be obstructed before they reach the anus, you should order the patient to leave off food for that day and to use gentle laxatives so that the obstruction may pass from his belly."
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	"And then place the patient between your hands on his back, and order him to hold his breath until the anus is open or the bowels appear."
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	"And then return him with your hands and gently press the fracture onto the bone of the hip, making sure that the end of it is like the middle of a circle on both sides of the body."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then heat the cautery which has this shape:"
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	"until it becomes very red-hot and emits sparks."
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	"And then reduce the bowel or anus to its convexity, and quickly place your hand over it so that the bowel does not escape."
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	"And you have already placed yourself between the thighs of the patient and one thigh is paused with your hand, and another servant holds one of his limbs and another holds his foot, which should be held firmly."
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	"And then place the cautery on that sign with your hand and straightener, and apply it until you succeed in reaching the bone of the hip in the middle of the joint; repeat this procedure again if you do not succeed at first."
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	"And be careful to observe the sensation of the bowel during your cauterization, so that you do not burn it and thus bring about the death or another serious injury to the patient."
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	"Know that if with the cautery you do not reach the bone, your operation is ineffective."
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	"And the cautery for children should be fine according to their size and proportion."
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	"And afterwards, care for the place of the cautery with a soft cloth for three days until the scar of the burn is removed."
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then care for him with other remedies until he is healed."
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	"And the patient should lie on his back for forty days until the place and the wound are sealed."
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	"And you should pause the patient's nutrition according to the length of time for his cure, which loosens his belly, and so that the bowel does not protrude due to the effort of healing."
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	"And when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer suitable food to him and have him lie on his back for another forty days."
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	"And he should be careful about work and exercise, food and drink, and loud voices, for if he follows this regimen of healing perfectly, he will surely be healed."
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	"I have spoken of the treatment of fractures in other parts of the belly, and at the beginning you wish them not to remain. Therefore cauterize the fracture with a round cautery according to its size, and it should be that which is taken from the bone as far as the third division of it; then care for him with what we have said, but do not follow this rule."
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	"And some first authors say that fractures should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape, for it is marked with a point thus:"
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	"And a line is drawn along the length of the side where the fracture rises and another line above it. Then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but let the first cautery be lighter and better."
Capitol .xlvi.	"Chapter XLVI."
De cauterizacio de torcio.	"On cauterization for torsion."
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	"When pain occurs in some members due to overexertion or blow and persists for a long time without being relieved by treatment with medicines, then cauterize with a pointed cautery."
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	"And let the cautery be of suitable size according to the magnitude and smallness of the member, its strength and weakness, location of the torsion and intensity of the pain."
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	"If it is not healed by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery. For such pains are often pierced in a member near to the one affected, so you must reach those with your cautery until the patient is healed."
Capitol .xlvii.	"Chapter XLVII."
De cauterizacio de lepra.	"On cauterization for leprosy."
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	"Some lepers are viewed with caution due to great harm and little improvement, especially those whose condition is caused by decay of phlegm and melancholy."
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	"Therefore, when you wish to cauterize this one, consider if the leprosy is common or already cured according to what we have said in the division above. Do not give it, if there isn't any, and fear that the corruption might spread throughout their whole body and entire complexion. Therefore, cauterize this one on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another towards the end of the hairline, and two on both horns; and one behind, on the nape or servants."
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	"And lastly, burn the cauteries slightly within so that they leave a small impression on the bone, and remove the scabs from them, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved. Then cauterize on the chest according to what is necessary."
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	"And if the leprosy has already spread over the malady and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize this one with those cauteries which we have mentioned for the head; and cauterize on the extremity of the nose with two cauteries on each cheekbone, two on both shoulder blades, six on the spinal processes of the back, and one large on the spinal process near the coccyx, one on the coccyx itself, two on each ankle, one on each heel, two on each toe, two on the knees, and two on the muscles. Cauterize this one over all the joints of these members and feet, and on each sole of their feet, and on the cushions of their soles."
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	"And beware that you do not cauterize those nerves which are situated on the sole that you may not burn them."
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	"And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the breastbone and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver."
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	"And know that the more closely you apply cauteries, the greater is the benefit and advantage. And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as they do with their own sores, because the body of the sufferer is already anesthetized."
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	"And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints according to what is prescribed by the species of instruments."
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And afterwards, cure the wound with a poultice made of bran, honey, and the other remedies until it is healed."
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII
De cauterizacio de stupor.	**On cauterization for stupor**
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	"When a limb is paralyzed or numb and treated with medicines, oils, and plasters yet is not healed, then cauterize that paralyzed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness."
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	"And your cautery should enter just a little into the spine of the backbone."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"Then dress it with ointment until it is healed."
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	"And sometimes it happens that some paralysis which is close to the hip or foot, and near the spine of the back where the nerves that move that limb originate, is removed after cauterization."
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	"But one should not presume to do this unless he is knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the body that moves everything."
Capitol .xlix.	"Chapter XLIX"
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	"On cauterizing warts that have been disfigured."
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	"When warts are old and do not disappear with the usual remedies of medicine, then cauterize over that one with a hot cautery iron slightly according to the quantity of the thickness of the spine of thewart until it is removed the whiteness and color of it, and its color is changed."
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	"Then dress it with flour of earth and lentils mixed with rose oil, and leaves of sage, and dove's blood or hen's blood, giving each one part and mixing them all together, and then apply a cloth and place it on the spot until it is healed."
Capitol .l.	"Chapter L"
De cauterizacio de cranc.	"On cauterizing warts."
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	"If cancer begins and you wish to destroy it, then cauterize around its circumference with a circular cautery iron as it turns."
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	"And they say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery iron in the middle of it; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen it happen sometimes."
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	"And it is better that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circular cautery iron as we have said, or with many cauteries."
Capitol .li.	"Chapter LII."
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	"For cauterization of varicose veins."
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	"If some varicose veins are delayed in maturation, this is due to the superfluity they produce, or the condition of the patient, who is elderly and decrepit with little blood, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of varicose veins; then cauterize around them using small puncturing caustics."
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	"But if you wish to perform the cauterization with a hot iron, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and press it on the middle point of the varicose vein until it penetrates the cord."
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if the cautery in that place is put on too strongly, so that the course of the vein is alleviated; and then cure it until it is healed."
Capitol .lii.	"Chapter 52."
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	"On cauterization of corrosive substances."
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	"Corroding corruption wanders through the limbs, which corrodes them as fire consumes dry wood."
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	"If you wish to cauterize that corrosion with fire, then heat the iron instruments accordingly, both small and large ones according to what is appropriate for that area being corroded."
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	"And similarly cauterize it thoroughly within so that you may eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause of it remaining."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	"And leave that alone for three days, and then dress the cauterized areas solely with oil mixed with salt so that all scars may be eradicated and all corruption."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	"And afterward treat it with engendering flesh."
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	"But if after three days the flesh does not grow back healthy and uncorrupted, then you should repeat the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted areas."
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	"And sometimes corrosion is treated with acute medicine, for it serves as a means to cauterize instead of fire."
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	"But nonetheless cautery by fire is the most gentle remedy."
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	"And I have already spoken of the treatment with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you begin."
Capitol .liii.	**Chapter 53.**
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	**On Cautery for Wounds and Similar Conditions.**
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Often seen in the parts left by the sick foot that is called claw, and it is a thick, solid cause which presses on the foot; and cautery in these cases follows two manners: namely cautery with fire and cautery with cold water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Cautery with fire is done using a cautery device similar to the shape of a vulture's feather quill, which should be made of iron according to the size that contains the claw on each side, and it should have fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then pause the heat of the cautery device on the claw and then slowly move your hand with the cautery device around the circumference of the claw until it reaches the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave that for three days until it begins to scar over
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a poultice made of crushed wild mallows mixed with salt on that area and leave the poultice overnight, because it will draw out its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the location with an ointment made from fatty tissue until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not improve, and often happens on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you should administer cautery with cold water in those cases. Take a canula made of bronze or iron or vulture feather, and place it on the claw; then pour a little cold water into the canula, and hold your hand still, pressing the edge of the canula onto the root of the claw while allowing the cold water to flow through the opening at the front of the root of the claw. Wait for a moment until you feel the bite of the cold water for about an hour, then remove it, because the claw with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	Do likewise to the others until all of them are eradicated from your body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then cleanse those pustules where the roots of the claws have been eradicated with an ointment that causes the flesh to grow.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter LIV
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When someone has trembling due to inflammation of the nerves or fever caused by heat, or for another similar reason, then you should perform cautery on them with four cauteries or five, placed on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and also place a cautery on the sole of their foot and on their stomach, using an olive-sized cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And may his trembling cease, and may his health be restored quickly from the burning illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On cautery for accidental wounds of the body
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body is wounded with accidental wounds, and there are pustules or cracks that have been formed from corrupted and thick matter, then at the beginning of the appearance it should be cauterized on top of the fistula head with a subtle cautery made from myrtle wood, the extremity of which has been burned in fire; or with long roots of resinous herbs; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And thereafter, as often as it appears, it should be cauterized in the same manner at the beginning of its expulsion; and they should not be believed to be healed until the excess has been disrupted and expelled from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But nonetheless, it is necessary that this be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	"Treatment of accidental blood flux by incision using a cautery."
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	"In places where blood vessels are seen that are cut due to plague or wounds, or during the incision of abscesses or cautery of limbs, they seem similar and it is difficult to remain calm."
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	"Therefore, when something like this happens, at once put your hand on the wound and press firmly until that moment when you see that the blood flow has stopped."
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	"And appropriately pause in the fire the olive-sized cauteries, large and small, by number, and exhale over those until they are hot enough."
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	"And appropriately take one of them, small or large according to the place and wound where the artery has been torn open. Place it on that vein quickly once you have removed your hand, and keep the cautery pressed until the bleeding stops."
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	"And if the blood is still being expelled from the wound of the artery when you remove your hand and press the cautery, then immediately take another cautery carefully from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue to do this until the bleeding has stopped."
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	"And be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and let it come close but not too close to the wound or cause harm."
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	"And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding by compressing it alone, especially if the artery is large. There are four methods to achieve this:
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	"Yet he who administers restriction decently to him with lamentation and with stricture by means of cloth or positioning of causes burning and similar, does not cause harm but helps."
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	"If there is some need elsewhere, and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then perform with caution the said operation on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand that there will be great tension inside which will stop the blood from escaping its upper part; and over the artery do not remove it; and over the artery sprinkle cold water well rubbed to make the blood thicken and coagulate. And also consider whether cautery or medicine is necessary."
Comensa la segonda partida.	"Begin the second part."
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	"On incision, perforation, wounds, and of phlebotomy and bloodletting, and their like."
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	"These are words of Al-Bukhazis."
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	"We have said in the first chapter all diseases in which cautery with fire is suitable and medicine burns."
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	"And you will proceed in this chapter in the same way as before, so that it may be understood by whoever asks about it."
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	"And first of all, know this: in this chapter is included everything that was said in the first chapter on cautery."
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	"And therefore it is necessary to be very careful in the operation which is discussed in this chapter, since many lives are lost there due to evacuation with blood."
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	"And of all these, fear and trembling accompany them, and most often death follows."
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	"And I warn you not to fall into that which is uncertain, for sometimes it happens that one takes on the ways of men who have very harmful habits."
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	"And among them there are some who take on the disease of the other person, and it is easy for death to come from that."
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	"And among them there are some who give you their wealth and sayings, and you await health with them, but their disease is harmful."
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	"And therefore do not consent to that person who comes to you with this habit; let your caution be greater than greed and your rapacity; and do not presume anything about it unless you have certain scientific knowledge which proves it, and for which successful outcome is praised."
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	"And in the treatment of all your diseases use prognosis and indication of that which turns towards health, for in it you will find assistance in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory."
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	"Oh, my son, may God inspire his understanding within you and not take away from you direction and protection, for this is in His hand."
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	"And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished into chapters according to what has preceded in the chapter on cauterization and treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may ease for you what you ask about and what you need."
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	"Concerning the Treatment of Water Retention in the Head of Infants."
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	"You should know that this disease often occurs in infants at birth and when the midwife squeezes the head of the infant without its softness."
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	"And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes which are not known."
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	"But I have not seen this disease except in infants; and among all those whom I saw, death took them away, and for that reason it seems to me that there is no hope in such cases."
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	"And I have seen an infant whose head was full of water, and its head was so swollen that it could not cease on account of the greatness of its head, and more than the humidity increased until death occurred."
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	"And this humidity either accumulates between the skull and the brain or accumulates above the brain on the outside of the cranium."
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	"For if the operation is performed in that case where the humidity is between the skull and the brain, and the aposteme is small, then you should cut into the middle of the head with a slit in the latitude, and let the length of the slit be about two digits so that the humidity can flow out, and this is the shape of the spatula:"
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"And therefore if humidity is more augmented and the boil is larger, then there are two incisions to be made in this manner:"
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	"And if the moisture is gone from his eyes, it is a sign that he has opened his mouth wide and water comes out when you press those parts inside with your fingers, but not from him swallowing."
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"Therefore, you should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:"
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	"and near the incision remove all moisture; and around the incisions strengthen with cloths and cotton wool; and on the fifth day pour over it a mixture of wine and oil, and then untie the bandage and dress the wound with tent-shaped compresses and ointments, and wrap the head evenly; and let the sick person eat dry food with little moisture until the member is comforted and healed."
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	"And there is another manner of incision, which you consider according to the size of the boil and the collection of water, for sometimes it is greater in the occiput or in the front or on the right or left side; therefore attend with the incision where the boil appears and the gathering of water, and do thus according as it seems best to you."
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	"And be sure that you do not cut the artery, and if blood flows abundantly, let the patient die because of that flow of blood with evacuation of moisture."
Capitol .ii.	"Chapter II."
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	"On the incision of arteries which are near the ears, called 'hilasseys'."
Capitol segon.	"Chapter second."
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	"When there occur ulcers or tumors in the eyes or ears, and it has lasted a long time, and the cure of medicines does not help, then the last cure for this is the incision of those two arteries."
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	"And therefore when you wish to incise those that the sick person has under his head, and first rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the sick person with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulsates; and the places of each side above the places which are near the ears below, and they are hidden except in some men."
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	"And therefore indicate on the artery with a thread, and then incise each one with a scalpel of each sharp point with incision entering into the bone, and let this be done through the width of the head."
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	"And if you wish, insert the scalpel within the artery and cut that one with incisions at the points above."
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	"And let the length of the incision be about two of those points, for when any vein is incised blood exits with pulsatile egression, which flows forth by frequent flow."
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	"But if the artery does not appear to your satisfaction, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space for three points, and indicate with a thread, and then incise into the bone."
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	"And as much blood should be let out as is necessary for the illness, and sometimes more or less is drawn out, and all this depends on the quantity that appears of the strength of the illness and thepletion of the artery."
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And therefore consider the wound, and if there remains some cause of the phlegm on the bone, then incise that in order that it may not turn into a cauterizing abscess."
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And therefore strengthen the wound with cotton and linen cloth bandages, and then cure it with ointment within until it is healed."
Capitol .iii.	"Chapter III."
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	"On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples."
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	"When there occurs an old migraine or sharp catarrh, due to humid heat and quality in the skin of the temples, or if it is old and violent and resembles those, and it is treated with medicinal remedies but does not improve, then we have recourse to this for these illnesses: extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown."
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	"And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the sick person shaves the hairs which are on the temples; and understand where the artery appears in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulsation, and it is hidden except in a few men due to the violence of rubbing."
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	"And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the neck of the sick person with some cloth; and rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you."
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then take the scalpel of which this is the form:"
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	"And then cut the cord with that one with ease until you reach the artery; and then strike in it and extract that one at its upper points until you extract that from the cord and uncover that of the tunics which are near to that one, on every point."
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	"But if the artery is subtle, then envelop that one with the extremity of a needle, and then incise one point according to the quantity by which the extremities of it are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not incised the blood will not rise up at all."
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	"And then evacuate blood from three to four pints."
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	"And if the artery is large, then tie that one in two places with doubled strong thread of cedar or with long cords, and do not cause it to putrefy before the consolidation of the wound and there will be no flow of blood."
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	"And then incise the superfuosity that is between two bandages; and do this at that hour or another."
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	"And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery within the bone with a small cautery on its extremities until incisions are made and it will serve instead of that same operation."
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	"It is better not to perform this operation if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion because cauterization helps those causes that contribute to fine humidity, and therefore it is better in judgment."
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	"And therefore in the extraction of arteries that appear at the ancient wound site, powders should be gently applied to it and then cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow and with ointments until it is healed."
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	"If while performing another operation there occurs bleeding from the artery, then stop that blood flow either with cauterization or apply pressure to the wound site and strengthen your hand until the blood flow is stopped."
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	"If none of those causes are present to you, then press your finger on the place until the bleeding stops, and bore the place with cold water from vigorous rubbing until the sharpness subsides, and strengthen it as necessary."
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	"It is easier in extracting an artery to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two teeth because you have seen both places beforehand, and then quickly ignite each one separately so that they reach the bone and incise the vein at two places in order that it may be elongated between its extremities because it is not completely consolidated by this cautery."
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	"This is the form of the cautery:"
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	"And let the sharpness of the two teeth be like this:"
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	"But if they have a smaller sharpness than two teeth is better because if they are very sharp it approaches each rubbing too closely and does not cut the flesh with speed."
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	"Therefore since they have some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut gently."
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	"And this operation is better than all others and also easier."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	"And let the space between two teeth be equal to the thickness of the finger."
Capitol quart.	"Chapter Four"
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	"About the cure of eyes with acute and acid tears from eyelids."
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	"When acid tears flow, and it is the body of those veins which are above the top of the head that is affected, and you do not find in this any cause for medical cure, sometimes the face of the patient becomes reddened and they seem to feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were the crawling of ants, and their eyes are weakened, moistened so much that even the hairs of their eyelids are wet, and the skin is scratched by the sharpness of the tears, ancient doctors are most skilled in the treatment of these afflictions, and this treatment is not done with a simple cure."
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	"You command the patient to raise their eyebrows and then carefully make three incisions in the forehead, equally spaced according to its length."
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	"And if the length of each incision is too short: the first should be equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little below the movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side."
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	"And be careful not to cut into the arteries that are located on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws."
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	"And if the space of each incision is equal to three fingers' breadth."
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	"And if you have a dry sponge or cloth cut into pieces with which you can wipe away the blood."
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	"Then insert the spatula of two pointed extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision:"
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	"Which refers to the division of temples entering into the second incision."
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	"Excise everything along this line which is between two incisions with the saw which lies upon the bone, and immediately make this second incision enter into the second incision."
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	"And immediately remove this spatula and insert it into the primary incision again with another tool called a cutting spoon, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	"And pause the cut at that sharp edge close to the attached flesh along the line, and at the bone's edge inside it, and employ this space that reaches the middle fissure, and sever with it all the vessels descending from the head to the ears."
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	"Let the incision continue along that line until this point is reached, and immediately make it enter into the other fissure."
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	"And when enough blood has flowed out, express the places where the clots of blood have gathered."
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And immediately pause in each fissure where there is old bone, and lay upon those powders compounded with wine and oil of vitriol, so that there may not follow a purulent ulcer."
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	"And on the third day untie the ligature and administer a large infusion of cold water or decoction, and immediately cure it with Basilicon ointment with rose oil and other remedies so that the wounds may be healed."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter Five"
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	"On the treatment of headaches and earache arising from defects inside the head."
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	"When someone suffers from a continuous headache and there is often pain in the ears, and they are weak, with debilitated eyesight, inflamed eyelids with loss of eyelashes, and severe, sharp pain in the forehead with consequent external pressure, you should know that these symptoms arise because matter and catarrh do not come out except from tiny veins originating inside."
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	"And the best treatment in this case is to have the patient wash his forehead, and immediately make an incision in it at the middle point of the forehead, about a finger's width across (beginning with the left temple and extending to the right temple; and let the incision go deep into the bone; and lengthen your hand through the temples' muscles which are hard and thick from chewing), until the bone is exposed."
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	"Dry up all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and immediately fill in between the two lips of the incision with old bone powder or linen."
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And immediately sprinkle on top with powders compounded of wine and oil, so that there may not follow a purulent ulcer."
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	"And when you have tied that up and afterwards when the ulcer has decreased, then it is necessary to scrape the bone where flesh has grown back over it, and immediately dress it with a drying remedy which causes the flesh to grow again, such as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together and make an plaster from them, and apply it to these wounds to promote natural healing."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter Six"
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	"On the treatment of earache."
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	"The cause of earache is one of four kinds: either it is due to mineral matter or something similar to stone, such as iron and copper, or it is due to plant matter like chickpeas or broad beans, or it is due to fluid matter such as watery discharge and sour wine and their likes, or some small creature."
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	"And when there is earache due to mineral matter or some other similar cause that does not fit into nor grow within the ear, and the ear is closed up, then apply warm oil of violet or sesame seed oil drops into it, and immediately administer its extraction, and make him sneeze with condimentum and plug his nostrils against the arrival of sneezing."
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	"And then apply to the opening of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear outwards from above, because many times it is forgotten with these causes."
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And if it has not been forgotten, then administer its extraction with the instrument called 'epicycled gesture', of which this is the form:"
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	"And if it has been forgotten with a gesture, then good. But if not, then administer its extraction with a subtle hook of few doublings."
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	"And if it has not been forgotten by this, then make a cannula of brass and insert its extremity into the passage of the ear, and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula may be opened."
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	"And then extract it with a strong breath of air, because many times with this method we have succeeded."
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	"But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take some salt of alum or sometimes prepared with which birds' chicks are taken by the foot, and place that on the tip of the arrow, and immediately wrap around that well-placed point."
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	"And then insert that into the passage of the ear with ease, and immediately remove the ear from moisture."
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	"And if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have mentioned, then cut off that before it results in a purulent ulcer or spasm."
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	"The manner of cutting it off is that you first sanctify the sick vein of the temporal vein and extract the blood according to its virtue, and then make a cut between your thumb and index finger and turn the ear upwards, and finish with a small incision in the ridge of the ear over where it was pressed."
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And let the incision be crescent-shaped so that it reaches the stone, and when the stone is loosened, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments. And immediately sew up the incision at that time with speed, and dress it until it is healed."
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	"And if the cause of pain in the ear is one of the hairs that grow and swell, then administer its cure and extraction. But if it does not obey your attempt to remove it, then take a thin, subtle spatula according to this form:"
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	"and use it to perform the excision of that hair which has fallen into the ear."
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	"But do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place many pieces on it, and then extract them with hooks or epicycled gestures, or with excision as mentioned above, because its extraction is facilitated."
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	"But when water enters the ear, it is necessary that the patient sneeze with condimentum at first, and fill his ear with some warm cloth, and jog over that ear in which there is water. And if it is not forgotten by this, then good. But if not, then take many thin pebbles and lentils according to the length of the finger, heat them on the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of them into the passage of his ear and shake on one side of that part and strike with another pebble over the pebble which is inside the ear."
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	"So do not cease doing this until all the water has been removed."
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	"And if the water is not removed by this means, then take some paper or cotton, and put one end of it into the ear and stretch the other end towards the fire until most of it burns."
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	"And then put in another cotton and do this many times until all the water has been removed, and then clean it out with a cannula as mentioned above about the stone extractor."
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	"However, in the extraction of a beast entering that ear, if it is of small size, thus push and release it; but if it is of great size which appears at the entrance of the nose, then administer its extraction with gestures and onions, and the cause of it is easier than all other causes that occur in the ear."
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	"However, in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, if you cure it with what we have said in this division and in the treatise on distillations, but your cure does not succeed, then you should examine the ear towards the sunlight."
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And therefore if there appears any cause of worms here, then extract it with delicate gestures or with subtle tweezers; but if no cause appears, then take a cannula like this: narrow below and wide above, of which this is the form:"
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	"And insert the delicate extremity of it into the ear according to the quantity that it can suffer; and then suck with it strongly, and do this many times until all the worms are expelled."
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	"But if this does not obey to your attempt, then plug the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which are already described in the ancient cure for worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations."
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And this should be your method with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form:"
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	"And make it of silver or bronze, narrow below, with a small hole, and flat above."
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	"And therefore let it be made in such a way that what is contained within the concavity of the cannula may come out here where it will be necessary."
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	"And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it neatly around the extremity of it; then pour oil into the concavity of the instrument, or juice from some herb, or whatever medicinal substance you wish into the cannula — which is in the ear —; then insert the wick with its cotton on top, and squeeze it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the instrument and the ailment feels the oil inside."
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	"And whatever is poured into the ear should be first cauterized with fire a little bit."
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	"And see to it that what you distill into the ear is not too hot, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate this."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter VII."
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	"Of the treatment of obstruction of ears."
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children sometimes exit from the bellies of their mothers unperforated, and this has happened to some men, opacity in the meat of the ear for plague or for flesh born there; and this opacity sometimes is made in the front of the tube of the ear which does not conceal the appearance, and sometimes it is in the parts outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happened on his forehead, which did not comprehend the appearance, was in those with major dispositions difficult to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that one where it succeeds the appearance, you must pause the ear of the sick towards the sun and look at that.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if sometimes opacity appears, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is its shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it in which is little the latitude, of which one part is sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be of two sides even for that it does not make harm to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore if the opacity is for flesh born in the ear or in the meat of it, then you should take that with fine tweezers and cut that violently until all the flesh is taken out.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if opacity is on the front of the ear, then take a subtle ray of sun and warm that with fire a little bit, and approach that to the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you have felt opacity with that which the sick takes with facility, because of gravity of hearing, force the oppression of it with facility; and take care that not plague the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And approach in the ear wrap of it according to the quantity of the width of the wick which you have involved in the Egyptian ointment; and do that for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plug; or what takes and inserts that in ears and pulverizes over it thrice treated and uses of it; and if sometimes the ear is already apostematized, then it is necessary that you extract the wick and replace that with another wick which you will wrap in cerote which is made with roasted olive oil, until the apostema caut be given out; and then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if it happens blood flow, then immerse and wring out a cloth in fresh water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure which restrains the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	About the care of athezil (inflamed eyelids)
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	"Dry up the excess moisture that sometimes collects on the eyelids of the eyes; sometimes they are dry."
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	"Therefore you should have those tweezers or forceps, and separate those hairs from their roots, and then carefully pause on the locations indicated."
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	"If blood flows with pain, then cauterize that spot with a small silver-tipped cautery."
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	"However, the best cauterization is one that closes up incisions and prevents them from reopening when there remains some cause of their appearance; and when they are cauterized with fire, those hairs are burned and do not return."
Capitol .ix.	"Chapter IX."
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	"Cure for swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes."
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	"Sometimes it happens in the eyelids of the eyes that some cause appears, which resembles hardness and firmness, and therefore it is called swelling."
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	"And it is an aggregation of thick humidity in the lower eyelid and above it."
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	"Therefore the operation in such cases is to consider whether the swelling is proceeding from within, appearing through the eyelid and swollen all over; and the cause of it is light."
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	"Therefore make an incision over that with a scalpel along its length, and carefully explore the whole area with facility until it evacuates, and then suspend it with a bandage and cut it off."
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	"But if the incision of that is not apparent unless you penetrate the eyelid with an incision little by little, then it indicates no cause."
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And if the swelling is large, then adjust it with suturing; and cure it until it is healed."
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	"And if it is small, you will not suffer any harm from that because the ointment of it restores it and heals it."
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	"And if the swelling is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid inside, then evert the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage only, without making any incision, and press it all over; and if the eyelid is elongated by incision, then there is no cause for it."
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	"And after the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and cure the place with whatever heals until it is healed."
Capitol .x.	Chapter X
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment of inflammation in the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	The eyelid is inflamed and this condition begins in the tunics of the eyelids, especially in children. It aggravates their eyes and affects their sight; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun due to tears flowing from them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And therefore those ones always wipe their faces with their hands and sleep with their faces covered. And so the eyelids of theirs are constantly wet and inflamed, and there is a threatening danger apparent in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel a hard tumor within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is a certain manner of operation in those who suffer from this illness: they place their head in the hollow of their hand and hold cloth over it and around their eye. Then they make a circle according to the amount that contains earth of all parts, and they place this on that and press with their fingers throughout so that the tumor is aggregated in the middle of the circle. And then they finish in the middle of that moisture with a cautery incidentally through a fissure by the latitude, and the fissure should not be greater than the fissure made in trepanation.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But before you cut the thread all the way through until you reach the tumor, for in most cases it proceeds by fissure according to the shape of a grayish-white spot.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, take out that with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the parts before and wound around between the right hand and left hand until it is separated.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to adjust in the fissure lest with the cautery you reach the eye and burn it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not see your tumor at the beginning of the fissure, but rather adjust in the fissure with facility until it proceeds, then take that out as we have said; and then submerge cloths in water and wine vinegar and place them on the location and rinse those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And some say that they crush salt and place it in the concavity of the fissure lest what remains of that moisture
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if you happen to burn the location with the cautery, then treat that with cataplasms of celandine until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of manners of touching the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eyes there are born tumors due to pressure from the growth of eyelashes and they become old, then those touch the eye and cause ways of illnesses such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and tissue whereby that may be the cause of destruction of the eye which is called touching of the eye, and it is cured in four manners: either by cautery with fire; or by acute medicine according to what has been said earlier in the chapter on cauteries; or it is performed by incision and suture; or by cantharides according to what I shall say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore it is necessary to place the head of the illness on its seat; moreover, turn over the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned over, well; but if not, insert a needle in that in which there is hair of the parted pus below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread above, and that be — close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow — close to the hairs, and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it over with the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then make an incision in the parted inside of the eyelid below the hairs with a cautery incident on the greater lacrimal entering to the lesser lacrimal; and then take out the thread and place cotton or cloth below the eyelid, and then sew up above the eyelid with needle and be as it were like a fig leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But nevertheless the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for that is already diversified among people, for there are those who need that it be incised much from the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then make with the cautery over the two lines which you have sewn, and begin from the greater lacrimal entering to the lesser lacrimal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural hairs such as is the thickness of a grain
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then put the needle in one of the two corners of the thread, and then tear out that entirely, and then join with the suture the two lips with wax or thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of threads over both brows with some adhesive causes if you wish to do so, but otherwise do not bother.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then leave the suture of the threads inside for three days or four, and then cure that
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the plaster without suture, and cure that with what dries and constricts, for the eyelid is elevated because of the sealing of the plaster and the aggregation of pus; but suture is better. Therefore this is what the ancients say about touching.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But nevertheless if there should be solicitude concerning the illness, it is of good operation and there is not fear in him.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another manner of touching, and it is that you sew over the eyelid like a fig leaf, and then lift up the eyelid with three needles separated and gathered thus:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"However, if this is not possible, hold the nails, and if it's unequal, then take a needle with thread, place it in the middle of the figure, insert another thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct. Adjust these threads evenly between your fingers, and then gently raise your hand upwards, raising the entire chain equally as we have advised."
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"Then adjust both lips of the wound with stitches, and care for the area that has been healed."
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	"However, if an abscess occurs after your incision or fissure, lance that abscess with a cautery and its surroundings, and seal it."
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	"And sometimes the edges of the eyelid become inverted, so you should use what we have mentioned about incision for that purpose; but suture in such a way that is more natural."
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	"To cut with scissors it should be done in this way:"
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	"And if you invert the eyelid and incise the figure that is described below according to what I have explained, then next make two thin needles or two thin probes whose length is equal to the length of the eyelid and whose width is less than the width of the spatula."
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	"And once you have incised at both ends where you have the threads."
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	"Next, gently pass each thread underneath the eyelid edge that protrudes excessively, then tie both threads tightly at their respective ends, and leave it like this for a few days. This is because the chain will die from the tightness and be rejected, and whatever was inserted will naturally fall back into place."
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	"But if it has taken too long, then break it with forceps, and afterwards care for the wound until it is healed."
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	"So when it has healed, the eyelid will be elevated and the hairs will not irritate."
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	"And here is how you make those needles which you should make like this:"
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	"And have the length and width neither more nor less."
Capitol .xii.	"Chapter 12."
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	"About elevating irritating hairs on the eyelid using a needle when the hair is hard."
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When it is by supernatural causes, harsh and rough and piercing the humors, then the operation on him is that you take a subtle needle and place it in this vein of cedar wood and lion's bone, and then adjust his limbs with great subtlety.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the needles be like the measure of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then you shall quickly place another subtle needle next to it, and reuse its ends if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's head on the tie-se pillow, near the sun for your work to be declared, as it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the skin of the adjusted part which has required engraving and make it penetrate swiftly under the eyelid before extracting it from above the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull out the skin upwards and insert it into the incisions, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then take your hand away so that the skin may dry out with the incision on the eyelid, keeping the natural skin outside.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the skin is incised and not cut away, then you shall cut away from the sides with the needle which you have prepared with that, so that it may be cut away from underneath.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Then cover it with a bandage, looking at the wound, for then you shall cut away the incision and the needle, and close each one carefully and clean the wound, leaving the stitches in place for two or three days until the skin adheres to its place and grows good flesh on top of it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is too short, then you shall adjust one long hair from the natural hairs and elevate it with that, or let it lie there until it lengthens somewhat and is elevated.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of inflammation which occurs on top of the eyelid
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When inflammation occurs on the eyelid, it is characterized by contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upwards, either on the right or left side, due to improper healing of wound or section or cautery. This condition is called "leporina" and this inflammation may be natural or accidental. It can occur as a result of improper healing of wounds, sections or cauteries or by appearing similar to those who are affected by it.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	"The manner of the operation on him is that you should cut away that solidification and separate the lips of it, and place in it what is between those a cloth soaked in water, and bind them together so they may be healed."
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	"And you should use remedies for him from causes which dry and constrict, because if you do this it will return to its former state worse than ever before."
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	"Use on it remedies which soften, such as fenugreek, and cook with water in which celery seeds are boiled and poured over, or liquid diacylglycerol made from some of the oils, and immerse the cloth in that and treat him with it."
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	"And the treasure of your cure is that you should perforate with everything that is not solid according to the form that was at the beginning."
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	"And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but a certain correction of chilblains which do not return to their former state."
Capitol .xiiii.	"Chapter XIV."
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	"Of the cure for chilblains that occur in the left eyelid."
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	"This chilblain which occurs in the left eyelid, which is truly called a chilblain; and it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental."
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	"But accidental ones are caused by blows, cuts, burns, or other similar causes."
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	"And the way to operate on it is that you should take a needle with a double thread and insert it into the flesh, and pass it from the left tear duct into the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh."
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	"And then extend the flesh at its edges with the needle and sew it up with the needle, and cut it open with a broad spatula."
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	"And then if the eyelid returns to its proper shape, that is good. But if not, take a thread and place it in the slit, and with it turn back the eyelid and close both slits on the left side of the eyelid."
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	"And let the ends of both slits be at two angles of the incision which you have made, so that they may meet and form an angle when they come together, making a proper shape."
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	"And this figure is called in Greek: 'the lambda'."
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	"And then cut off the flesh from there by the amount on the inside of the left corner of it, as much as secures the eyelid."
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	"And then join together the separated parts and sew them up with a thread of wool; and then treat it with what we have said about softening medicines and compresses until it is healed."
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	"And if chilblains occur again due to a slit, stitch or burn, then it is necessary that you cut with a flat slit over the skin of the eyelid as has been described before."
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	"And then separate with a compress between two lips according to what we have said."
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	"In summary of the sermon on the treatment of chilblains when they are above or below, that which occurs in its operation, according to what has been prepared about its shape, is in various shapes."
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	"And the skilled artisan always prepares in every possible way for each manner that is possible to him so that he may bring back the shape to its natural form or close to it, and this disease according to what is suitable for it with regard to the operation and tools in the best conditions."
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter .xv."
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	"Of adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea."
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this condition occurs in many men, such that the eyelid is solidified upwards with the albumen of the eye, and prevented from its natural movement and functions, then you must insert the tip of a needle underneath the eyelid and raise it up, or extend it with tweezers.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you cut the adhesion with a fine scalpel, which should not have too sharp an edge, taking care to make it blunt enough so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation. Remove the scalpel carefully so as not to hurt the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Make your incision such that it easily cuts through the adhesion, ensuring that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and that all adhesions are healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then you apply saltwater to the eye, with which you rinse it; or distilled water dissolved in honey.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the eye using a cotton swab dipped in egg albumin, and apply a compress soaked in egg white to the eye. On the third day, use healing agents to promote healing of the wound.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On Incision of Nail and Removal of Carnal Protrusion from Lacrimal Ducts
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that there are two kinds of nails: one is nerve-like, similar to hard, fine matter; the other is not nerve-like and resembles congealed white humor. When you cut this latter type with a knife, it can be easily gripped with tweezers and then removed without the tweezers getting stuck inside.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	Both kinds of nails begin only in the larger lacrimal ducts and gradually increase, covering the eye and preventing light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	To operate for the incision of this nail, the patient should hold their head still and look up. Then open the eye widely with your fingers and lift the eyelid with your hand. Using tweezers with little duplication, grasp the nail and gently pull it upwards at its ends.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and thread through it a horsehair or cowhair or oxhair or similar strong hair. Fold the tip of the needle and insert it into the middle of the nail. Then pass the needle through the nail and grasp it with forceps. Gently pull the nail upwards at its ends, and carefully remove the lateral edge of the nail that covers the pupil using the thread.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you continue removing it until the end is reached.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then incise the remaining nail at its root using fine scissors or small forceps. This will release the natural lacrimal tissue and prevent continuous tearing from occurring due to the incision.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail can be removed with just one pair of forceps or with forceps alone, as we have described. The form of the spoon-shaped knife used for this purpose is as follows:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic with the spoon and avoid breaking it. Also ensure that the pupil is not pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After making the incision, apply a little salt water or rosewater to wash it and leave it for another day. Then rinse it with clean water and dress it until healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not nerve-like and you cannot insert the needle or grasp it with tweezers, then sometimes this type of nail can be treated with medications. In such cases, follow the methods described in the division (treatment) section.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to incise the nail, first open the patient's eye and take a fine spoon-shaped knife made of sharp steel with a point like this:
am subtilitat.	Sharp and subtle.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If sometimes the nail is rarefied and condensed, and adheres to its root, then distill some of your saliva into the eye with rosewater or with boiled water or salt water. Then close the eye for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then continue the operation until all of what remains is removed from the eye. But if a counter granuloma has formed in the eye, then leave it alone and treat the granuloma at the beginning until healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then continue your operation on that nail until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	"Suspend the eyelid with a hook to avoid great harm. Incise the upper one first, and do not cut too deeply to prevent tears from flowing."
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	"And subsequently, distill water into the lachrymal sac through a small opening so that it may be healed."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII"
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	"The incision of an abscess and about what is born from attached flesh in the eye."
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	"Sometimes in the eyes of some people, flesh is born that grows over the pupil, or approaches it and presses between the eyelids, forcing them apart, like the petals of a flower."
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	"First, operate on the head where the patient rests their chin. Then open their eyes and collect all that flesh with appropriate hooks. Remove it with forceps or basket, then cut away the flesh at its beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, taking care not to damage the eye during your operation."
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	"And your incision should be made with the same scalpel that we have recommended for nail cutting, or with small forceps, according to what comes next in this chapter."
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"Therefore, once your incision is complete and all that flesh has been removed, fill the eye with finely ground salt or distilled powder like those used in corrosive medicines. Then apply a bandage made of egg white to ensure that no infection occurs."
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	"And if there remains some cause for inflammation and infection appears, and you fear an infectious abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat that abscess with whatever will heal it. Then repeat your operation until it is healed, and do likewise for any attached flesh that occurs in the eye of this sort."
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	"However, you should avoid all care of the eye by means of herbs or any other accidental way. Do not use iron instruments or put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand the operation."
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On collection of cataract in the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	"Know that veins become hardened on the hip and hinder its movement; alleviate this condition over several days."
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	"Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the hip in which there is sciatica is strong and does not have another ailment called sciatica. Then collect that sciatica."
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	"And you must command the patient to put their head on your shoulder, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your judgment; and that ounce should be of fine doubled thread."
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	"or two ounces gradually in a body like this:"
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	"Then bind those veins with fine forceps, carefully and gently, and wipe away the blood little by little until you see those veins become detached from the hip and turned over."
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	"And be careful not to cut the hip with the sharp ends of the spatula. And if your operation is done in the midday before the sun, and you are firm in your operation, do not cut anything but those veins."
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	"And when you have completed this, then distill on the hip chief white or rose water because with its sharpness it will corrode what is detached from the sciatica."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"But if this is not possible for you to do all at once, then plaster it all with that which relieves the pain of sciatica and leave him like that for a few days until the pain is calmed and assured against inflammation."
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	"And then iterate upon it according to what seems best to you until he is healed."
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	"And this is the form of the forceps:"
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter XIX."
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	"On the reduction of nasal fractures."
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	"When you treat fractures of the nose with cautery or with burning medicine according to what is prescribed in its narration and it does not heal, then do not engage in it unless you cut above the swelling when it reaches maturity, and remove all the humidity that is in it until the bone becomes visible."
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then, when the bone becomes visible and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:"
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	"And it is called 'rough head' and should be made of iron, and the head should be round like this: pierced with points for piercing with a file or awl for fine piercing (as in the following form)."
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	"And place that upon the corrupted part of the bone and then turn it between your fingers and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped."
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	"And do this several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent causes."
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	"Therefore, if the area is consolidated and good skin has been produced in it, and the flesh has detached from the bone and remains like that for forty days, and there is no renewal nor inflammation nor any accident in it, then you will know that it is healed."
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	"If not, then do not engage in it unless you reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: and that is when you uncover the second bone with iron or with burning medicine, and when the bone becomes visible, then take tweezers of this form:"
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	"The tip of the iron should be triangular, and its stem should be thinly tapered to the tip as shown here."
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	"And then place that upon the bone and let it be near the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little away from the helmet, and then turn your hand with the tweezers until all of the bone enters, and he will feel pain because you find vent issuing forth there when you have his hand."
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	"Therefore, then restore the area with astringent drying medicines as you have learned."
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	"Therefore, when the skin is healed and the area has become hardened, then the matter that flowed out to the parts outside returns to the nose; therefore, this is gentle about the pain."
Capitol .xx.	"And Chapter XX."
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	"On the reduction of the prominence of the helmet."
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	"When the helmet is prominent with its totality and no harm or diminution occurs in its appearance, then it is necessary that you alleviate the pain, and then follow this: place vents on the nape of the neck without scarification and suck well; and then place upon the helmet a liniment made of aconite and aloe and frankincense and tragacanth gum, and then apply poultices to the helmet with hot powders."
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	"And the manner of the powders is that you take drags of lions' teeth and each drag should be folded into four pleats, and make them thus."
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	"And then place those upon one another according to the quantity that the helmet requires."
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	"And then place upon them a hard cloth with strong binding, and repeat the cupping with suction without scarification, and then remove the cups and leave the helmet bare day and night."
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	"But if meantime the bandage becomes softened, then it must be made tight again."
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	"And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said."
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	"And if the helmet is already reduced, that is good. But if not, then repeat the poultice with the powders and binding and cupping until it is healed."
Capitol .xxi.	"And Chapter XXI."
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	"On the incision of the prominence of the tunic of the eye."
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	"When there is a disturbance in the tunic of the eye and it becomes prominent and projects outside the eyelids like a grain of mustard seed, and appears rough like this shape of a man, and you wish to incise it, then the operation here is as we have recommended: that you insert the needle into the prominence of the vein from below above, and then insert another needle with doubled thread on the side of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the location of the doubled thread and lift away with it the part of the vein in the circuit of the needle, and pull that tight."
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	"And then extract the needle and place upon the helmet wool infused in albumen of a fowl and leave it there until the thread with the vein falls out."
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	"And then treat the helmet with that which comforts it until the wound is healed."
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	"And sometimes it happens that the whole part adheres with a circle of cloth onto the helmet's prominent eminence, and then it is perforated with a subtle spatula that comes to the front of the helmet, and runs the albumen humor, and descends the helmet and enters immediately."
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	"And then pull until it is healed."
Capitol .xxii.	"And Chapter XXII."
De curacio de alconati.	"On the treatment of inflammation of the eye."
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	"This illness called inflammation of the eye is nothing but heat that adheres to the helmet like descending water, and it is not this."
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	"But the manner of treating this is that you make the illness cease upon the prepared and straight saddle, and then take your head in both hands and move it until you see the heat coming to the parts below, and then dry it so that it does not descend, and close the light, and the illness sees its causes as if seeing."
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	"And if it does not descend below, know that it is water."
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	"But if the descent of the heat is not prepared with what we have said, then make the illness cease between your hands and then take a subtle spatula and wound it upon the skin surrounding a little below the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic cornea in the crown (as seen), until the heat is expelled."
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	"Therefore when it is expelled, then distill upon the helmet water infused with honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey."
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Capítulo XXII
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the treatment of descending water from the head.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already spoken of the kinds of waters in division and which are suitable for boring with clear speech.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you must place the patient between your thighs on a cushion and grasp their head with both hands, pressing firmly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their left eye if the water is for the left eye, or your right hand if it's for the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take some salt if the eye is left, or with your left hand if it's right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the salt near the crown of the eye for the thickness of a ray in the white of the eye from the direction of the tear duct, and then press the salt gently with your hand on that.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the eye until you feel that the salt has reached the bottom of the tear duct.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And the measure of the path of the salt should be like the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and that is the crown of the eye; for you shall see with that the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the salt into the location where the water is, and then gently squeeze it once or twice, and then if the water descends quickly, at that moment you will see the illness about which this person has been complaining quickly disappear from their eye, along with the salt.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then pause for a moment; and if the water has descended, then gently squeeze again but be careful that the salt is not spilled.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it has ceased and does not descend any further, then gently remove the salt with ease, and then turn it slowly with your hand again and again, and then dissolve a little of finely ground rock salt in water and with that wash the inside of the eye; and then place something outside the eye to stop it, such as cotton soaked in rose oil and alum and lint and bind it thus onto the eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we who are of this time pause on that which is written with white albumen.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not succeed in inserting the salt into the eye due to its hardness - for it is one of those men whose eye is very hard - then you must take the spatula which is called an "alberid" and which has this shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce with that the conjunctiva, but do not push your hand too far in and do not hesitate to make a way for the salt to reach its subtle location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the salt as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work by preparing the patient to sleep in a room with the lights off where they can lie on their back without any movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause the nature of the water so that its nature is clear and do not move their head to either side or up or down during this time.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the bandage be according to its arrangement in place on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then untie that one from that darkened room and expose them to the open air view, let them see some things, and then return the bandage on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do this during the hours of darkness or immediately after a bath.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Be careful to avoid doing this for someone who has an abundance of water, because water can play gently on the large and vehement eye.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess forms, then you must remove the bandage from the eye on the seventh day and correct it with something that will cause the abscess to burst.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then uncover their eye and pause on the face of their mouth so that they can regulate the movement of their gaze up and down for a few days while remaining in the darkened room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually lead them out of that room and expose them to things slowly.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	Know that in alchemy, the apprentice is not exempt from having vision some times, and therefore you should be bold about performing the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has already come to our knowledge that some of those who are knowledgeable in alchemy have said that one should make fire in the Alchemical Furnace called "Magdara" pierced with which water is sucked up.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however we have not seen this done in our land nor is it written in any of the books of the ancients that this has been perfected; and it is possible that this may be a new thing.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of "magdara" so that they can be understood by those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of brass or iron properly, and they have these extremities with this triangular subtlety, the extremity sharp thus as that is the shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of flesh torn in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are diverse pieces of flesh attached from which one cause is that it is assembled like a scorpion with many feet, or like a polyp with weight; and this illness is called "polyp" because it resembles that fish represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And its flesh is cancerous, pale, of dark color; but the lion's flesh is not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is in these lion-like but not fraudulent or cancerous flesh, you should squeeze the illness between your hands and put it in the sun, and draw out its moisture and cut off those pieces of flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the openings of its exterior, and then cut what you have comprehended of those with a sharp subtle spatula on one side until you know that all the flesh is removed; but if there remains any cause for which amputation is possible, then remove it with one of the subtle instruments easily so that nothing remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if there is bleeding or an abscess forms, then pause until it stops naturally; but if they are malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize that until the bleeding stops and all cavities are opened.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then sprinkle it in the nose with wine vinegar and water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and from it proceeds moisture into the palate, then you know that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is still flesh torn on the projecting bones of the nostrils which have not received amputation.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore you should then insert lead into it which has some thickness, and push it in the most of its nostrils, and pause between each push for the amount of one finger or more, and generate the illness and insert an extremity of the lead into the nose with wax or with another cause that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after that has been done, let them throw their head backwards so that the odor reaches the canals of the nostrils, and let it be poured over their throat, for several times children at school do this action and it is an easy cause for anyone who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extremities of the lead, one extremity that exits over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a suture of flesh on the holes that are in the lead, and do this until you know that the flesh is with the holes of the lead.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the lead, and pause in the nose with the abstraction of blood once a day, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a cannula of lead for seven days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you intend to treat by cauterization, use the cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the form of the purge-making instrument with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this of silver or copper, resembling a small open lantern, like a small jug, and the mouth likewise.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make it a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the purge-making instrument should be flat and open; have a handle on its end with which to hold it when pouring in the oil or water that you want from the saps and succulent causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these purgatives are precious: Take of castor oil, white balm, ginger root, saffron piltre, long pepper, scabious, ephedra seed one dram. Concoct with the sap of beet and celery, and make them into pills; take one pill dissolved in hot water and administer it to the nostrils of the sick person lying down.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	**Of the thills or wicks that are placed at the extremities of the nose.**
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times it happens that the eye appears in the extremities of the nose, and is enlarged and swollen during those days when much attention is paid to its care.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason you should insert it at the beginning of the appearance of that, and erase everything after that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Moreover, pause over the place where cauterization or medicine burns is situated instead of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its insertion is delayed until it has become enlarged, then consider whether it is hard, thick, dark in color, and insensitive. If this is the case, do not touch that with iron because it may be a malignant carbuncle. Many times that which you have inserted into this carbuncle becomes stuck there due to great mischief on that person.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the carbuncle is of a reddish color and not dark in color, sometimes insertion may be possible everywhere. In this case, evacuate the morbid matter and insert without fear, and cure the place with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity has been dissolved by an ulcer or wound.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is a dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages (the nose, lips, or ear), little confidence should be placed in that operation, except with certain skilled individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you encounter such a cause in someone, first examine whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood. Then immediately approximate the two lips of the wound with suture and apply proper dressing until healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the continuity have already separated and each is free from infection, then it is necessary to cut off each end of its apparent cord until there is no bleeding.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then closely approximate the two lips with suture and press them together. Then sprinkle dragon's blood powder on it and apply a poultice of diaphoretic plaster or another consolidative plaster, leaving that dressing for two or three days before removing it and replacing it. Leave it until the wound has healed by itself.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of suture is to join the edges of the continuity either with needles as recommended for abdominal closure, or else with thread in such a way that you know how to do it.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come between the two lips within wounds
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times it happens that in the midst of the lips of wounds there are hard pimples resembling pig fat, some small and others larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	"Therefore you should examine each of those hardnesses and divisions, and then make an incision in the place where the blood is concentrated, wash it with vinegar, and dress the wound with something that has astringent properties until it heals."
Capitol .xxviii.	Capítulo XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Chapter XXVIII: On the Incision of Adherent Tissue in the Gums
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Often there appears on the gum adherent flesh which the ancients called albulus; therefore you should suspend it with forceps or hold it with your fingers and cut it off at its root, allowing the sound tissue to bleed freely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And afterwards apply to the place where it has been cut a powder that is both astringent and cicatrizing.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, cut it again afterwards, and cauterize it so that it does not return again.
Capitol .xxix.	Capítulo XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	"Due to teeth made of iron."
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When the surface of the teeth in both jaws and those in front are tightly sealed with rough, sharp, thick deposits, sometimes blackened, and have green or yellow pus between them and the gum, this indicates decay and the teeth are loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore you should seize the patient between your hands and place their head on the pillow of their bed, hold open their mouth in which those deposits appear and cause such sand-like grit to arise from them that there is no cause for any decay, and this is done with respect to blackness and yellowness and other things that are altered.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore if this is what you want in the beginning of the reason, well then; but otherwise, later you should repeat the reason on those days two and three until it comes to its final statement in what you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require various types of tools with different shapes and forms according to the preparation for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore choose the rasp with which you remove the tooth from within the teeth that is different from the rasp with which you scrape between the teeth in other ways. These forms of rasps should be prepared by you, as you will soon see:
Capitol .xxx.	Capital thirty
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Extraction of teeth
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	But when you care for a tooth with all your skill and patience in its extraction, there is no reason why the vision should not be clear once it has been extracted, because it is a substance that becomes sublime during the extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But if the patient is forced to have a tooth extracted, you must be absolutely certain which is the painful tooth, for often the pain seems to come from a healthy tooth, and you extract one while the pain continues until the truly diseased and painful tooth is removed, as we have seen happen in barbers' operations.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you are certain which is the painful tooth and know it well, then you should scarify around the tooth with spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the gum completely severed, and immediately remove that with your tweezers, or with subtle forceps bit by bit until it comes out.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then with strong forceps hold the tooth firmly for good traction or extraction, and pause the head of the patient between your thumbs so that you may have it well held that it does not move, and extract the tooth directly in such a manner that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and put it behind the tooth on all sides with ease and effort to loosen it as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is cracked or decayed, then you must fill that crack and strengthen it with the extremity of a fine wire before tightening it with forceps on that tooth.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you must work carefully with scarification around all sides of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it or cause it to shatter apart from it, and return on the patient for greater good than the first pain of him.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity to eradicate teeth without administering what we have recommended; for many times they cause great illnesses upon men which are more difficult to treat than the tooth itself, and leave behind roots of removed teeth all together, or some of those, or extract it with some bones of the jaw as is often testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And when extracting it, wash the mouth with hot water or vinegar with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there are flows of blood from that, as often happens, then take some quantity of sage and sprinkle it on the wound, and if it does not suffice that sage, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and fine tweezers with which the tooth is held at the beginning should be of long extremity, short handle, and thick, so that they are not bent when using them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And let them be thus shaped with grooves on the inside of the thick handle such that when you tighten with those, they are not bent, and have short extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And let them be made of wrought iron, straight-edged, and on the extremities have teeth that interlock with each other for strong tightening, and sometimes the extremities are shaped like the beak of a bird called ciconia, which is wide, and they are of great force.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the Extraction of Teeth and the Extraction of Bones of the Jaw that are Locked together
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must extract a tooth that is stuck for some reason, then you should pause on the place with warm water for one or two days until that place is softened; and then introduce instruments or tweezers whose extremities are shaped like the beak of a bird called ciconia or wide-mouthed, in this way:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of their limbs are affected in such a way as though they were scraped or filed.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey to this command with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut over the wound and remove all flesh and insert the instrument called thus, which is a small lever whose shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And its end should be thick but short, and not bent in such a way that it does not catch.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the wound is forgotten because of this, it is good. And if not, help yourself with these other instruments, whose forms are as follows: The first instrument has a triangular shape with some thickness at its end
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The second instrument should be triangular and have a very thin tip
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And then, helped with this instrument having two branches, whose shape is approximately as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And also with other instruments which are like teeth for cutting, because much help is obtained with this instrument which resembles a large nut, and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of triangular tip bent or short, which has some thickness, and not bent in such a way that it does not catch.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments of moving teeth are also similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle craftsman finds for himself mates according to what he understands about the operation and various diseases. Because there are some diseases for which the ancients did not give or leave proper instruments because of their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is broken or pierced, then it should be carefully treated on that spot with whatever is convenient among the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with this gesture whose shape is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let there be some thickness little by little, and let it be bound or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is completely forgotten. And then restore the spot with appropriate medicines for that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small perforation in the bone, then remove that from that perforation and its blackness, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the care of prominent teeth above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	"When teeth emerge misaligned from their natural course due to form or are especially noticeable in women, particularly venerable elderly women; therefore, consider: if one tooth is too close to another and no shifting or ligature is possible, then extraction may be necessary. However, if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut that one with this instrument, whose shape resembles a pig's snout, made of sharp-edged Indian iron."
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	"And if your incision does not cut through the tooth in three days due to its hardness, do not attempt to remove another tooth."
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	"If it is an erupted tooth with an eminence requiring filing, then file it using this Indian iron file, whose shape is as follows:"
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	"And it is entirely made of India iron and sharp-pointed; and its cutting edges are thus like a file with which teeth should be filed little by little in many days with ease, so that no other tooth is injured or damaged."
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	"And appropriately smooth it at the end, then polish it with pumice stone."
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	"And if it is a tooth with a broken edge that irritates the tongue, then you should grind down that rough portion until it is smooth and flattened, so that the tongue is not injured and speech is not impeded."
Capitol .xxxiii.	"Chapter XXXIII"
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	"Of restoring broken teeth with gold or silver foil."
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	"When teeth are broken by concussion or removal due to percussion or falling, and the patient cannot chew their food, and you have treated it with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then it is proper to restore those that are strong with gold foil, not silver, because silver turns green over time, but gold never changes."
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	"And the foil should be made thin and fine according to the amount that can fit between the teeth. The method of preparation is as follows: take the foil and fold it twice between two healthy teeth, then carefully twist the folds of the foil between one or more broken teeth so that it reaches the healthy part of the other tooth."
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	"And then continue the filling within the portion where you began, and carefully press your hand with ease and skill so that it is not broken."
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	"And make sure to press the foil tightly against the roots of the teeth so that it does not become loose."
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	"And then cut off the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors, gather them up at each location, and bend them down and hide them between the healthy tooth and the broken tooth, so that they do not injure the tongue."
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	"And then press it tightly as with wax."
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	"But if it becomes loose or broken, then repair it or them with other foil in this same manner at all times."
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	"And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as shown in this drawing:"
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	"And when one or two teeth return to their proper place after falling out due to concussion and have been restored as we have described, but still become broken again."
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	"And this is only done by skilled and knowledgeable artists."
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	"Sometimes it is appropriate to use bones from cattle. They are shaped like teeth and placed in the location where the tooth has failed. It is then bound tightly as we have said, and remains there serving for a long time."
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capítulo XXXIV
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Chapter XXXIV
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	"This ligament which sometimes prevents the tongue from moving or is naturally present but accidentally occurs due to phlegm that has already congealed."
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	"And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth, lift their head back if necessary; elevate their tongue and carefully cut that nerve ligament according to its length until the tongue is freed from its recess."
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	"Moreover, if there is any hardness or firmness there, and this is due to the consolidation of phlegm, then you apply oil and cut it open along its length until you have severed the ligament and dissolved the firmness."
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	"And make sure that there is not too much opening of the flesh wound, and be careful not to sever any artery or cause bleeding."
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	"And carefully wash the wound of the incision with warm water or vinegar water or fresh water; and then leave the tongue at peace, that is, keep the patient's mouth closed in each night so that it does not become consolidated again."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	"But if bleeding occurs, apply powdered alum to the location; but if the blood continues to flow, then cauterize the location with a hot cautery that is suitable for this purpose."
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	"And also treat it with other causes according to how it is healed."
Capitol .xxxv.	"Chapter XXXV."
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	"For removal of a ranula from under the tongue."
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, a small tumor resembling a pea grows under the tongue and hinders its natural movement.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation involves opening the patient's mouth widely towards the sun and examining the tumor.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you find it to be dark colored or black, hard, and the patient feels no pain, then do not touch that which is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined towards whiteness, indicating humidity, then you should use a spoon to remove it, and carefully cut that thin sputum with scissors, cutting it entirely; but if blood comes during your operation, then pause for a moment until the bleeding stops, applying some powdered vitriol to restrict its flow.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have removed it completely with care, rinsing the wound with vinegar and salt; and heal it with another cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capítulo XXXVI
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Chapter XXXVI: Extraction of Tumors from the Ears and Those Found in the Throat, as Well as Other Tumors.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When there are tumors in the throat that are swollen glands which sometimes become enlarged and protrude externally, these are called "ears," and when you treat them with water as mentioned earlier but they do not heal, then consider whether the tumor is hard, dark colored, and causes little pain. If so, do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	"It is of red color and has a large root, therefore do not touch it with iron due to blood flow. Rather, let it remain until it ripens, then you shall remove it or break it apart yourself."
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	"If it is white in color and has a fine root, then that one should be incised."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And before your operation, consider the condition of the abscess: whether it has already ripened and is fully ready, or if it has decreased in size with some diminution. Then make the patient lie down facing the sun, with their head towards the east, open their mouth wide, and the servant holding their tongue with a suitable instrument, whose form is as follows:"
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	"And it should be made of silver or brass, and be sharp like a knife."
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	"Then, while pressing the tongue with that instrument and exposing the abscess to you, take courage and cut into it at once, inserting the knife gently into the opening and pulling outwards as much as possible."
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"After that, if some of the tunics come out along with it, then immediately cut them off with this instrument, whose form is as follows:"
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	"And it resembles forceps, but its ends are curved such that the tips of each face inward towards the other, being very sharp, and made of iron with a brass inlay."
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	"But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a scalpel whose form is as follows: It should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	"And after making one cut, make another according to this same method of incision. Then wash the wound clean with water."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is bleeding from the wound, wash it clean with water from a decoction of rosehip or myrtle leaves, adding to that any of the astringent causes at hand until the bleeding stops. Then dress the wound until it heals."
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	"And sometimes you may find other abscesses near those two ears, and cut them according to what I have said regarding the incision of two equal cuts."
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	"And now I will tell you about a woman who was afflicted with an abscess that had formed in her groin. It was dark colored and insensitive, the wound had already closed up, she was breathing with difficulty, and eating and drinking water were prohibited to her. She would have died within two days or less if something hadn't been done."
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	"And the abscess had grown so large that it had produced two branches that extended out through two tracks."
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	"I then carefully inserted my hand into one of their orifices and pulled out that which was stuck there, and indeed a large portion of it was drawn out. Then I pushed in the other end that I could comprehend of the other passage, and then I opened its mouth and compressed its tongue. Then I left the orifice in that abscess."
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	"And indeed a large part of it was cut off from him, and only a little blood flowed from him."
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	"Then the swelling of that woman subsided, and she immediately began to drink water, and indeed she took food. Therefore I did not cease to insert into that abscess many times over a long period of time, and it succeeded in healing the abscess in place of that which was prolonged."
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	"So I then took a cautery and burned the swelling of it, so that it might be completely removed. Then I wandered around and did not know what God had done with that one."
Capitol .xxxvii.	"Chapter XXXVII."
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	"On the Incision of a Swelling When It Is Abscessed."
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	"When catarrh descends to the swelling and it is abscessed and prolonged, then it is called perpendicular. And if it is located on the side of a fat person and is round, then it is called bubo."
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	"But when it is healed with that which we have said in the division, and does not confirm your cure, and indeed many times an abscess that has been cauterized is already completely healed and is thin, then it is necessary to insert into that which is aggregated roundly. And if it is at that length, and is sanguineous, of dark color or black, and does not have a center, then it is necessary to beware of the incision of it, for in that there is fear concerning illness."
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	"And when you see it according to the manner which I have described concerning its whiteness and length, that you make the illness cease and press the point of it with an instrument whose shape is processed thus and immediately place the onci in the new one and pull that downwards and incise it with one of those instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two melons."
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	"And it is necessary not to incise that except what is adapted over the natural term without addition, for if you incise more of it, you will cause its death."
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And immediately after the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two melons, and heal it so that it may be healed."
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But if the illness is frightened by the incision of it, then it is necessary to use a poultice in its cauterization without fear, and the manner of cautery on it is not except with hot water, and it is that you press the head of the swelling on its surface, and immediately press the point of it with the instrument which we have mentioned, and immediately take some of that hot water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and pour it with that live cause, and pause it neither thick nor thin, and from there you fill the cavity of the instrument whose shape is this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	"Place the end of it in the cavity where the medicine is applied like the cavity of a spoon's handle. Place the instrument with the medicine on the vulva and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not flow down through the inserted medicine into their throat, causing harm."
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	"Then press on the medicine with your mouth for about half an hour until you see that it has darkened and moistened from the warmth of your mouth."
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	"If you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the end of the ray. Submerge the cotton in the medicine, then insert the ray with the cotton into a cannula until the cotton adheres to that cannula. Repeat this process as many times as needed until you achieve the desired cauterization of the wound, and leave it alone for three or four days until it dries up."
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	"And if you need to repeat the application of the medicine, do so. And after cauterization, clean the wound's perimeter with cotton soaked in boric acid, and rinse it with water that has been boiled. Then dress it with ointment and bandage it properly until it heals."
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	"And this type of treatment was saved from incision and prolonged fear."
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	"Sometimes the uvula is cured with such subtlety that it does not require cauterization or incision, as it can be treated by sublimation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, saffron, camomile, brayd and similar herbs. Adjust all these ingredients, or some of them, in a mortar, and soak them with sour wine, then boil them. Let the mortar be well covered with decent lut, and in the middle of the mortar place a tube on which to set an enameled silver or brass instrument shaped like this:
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	The extremity has been inserted into the mouth of the patient while the vapour rises to the uvula causing it to become obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Proceed to rub that moist cloth until it becomes dry, and make sure not to perform this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, as it would be too tight on the abscess. Instead, you should declare the abscess of the cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not present, then take a reed and attach a cloth to its end, so that the mouth of the patient may be covered. For the cloth will prevent vapour from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and that which adheres in the throat, and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	"Often adhesions form on the bladder or spine of the foot due to some other cause."
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	"Then you must remove what is visible of that [tumor], on which the sight falls, because when you press the tongue with an instrument beforehand, it will be declared to you what is in the throat."
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	"And what is not visible and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach, because it is very easy to remove the cause from the throat through vomiting. Or the patient can swallow a piece of bread or some lettuce or a sip of water; or take a piece of dry sea sponge and tie it tightly with thread, and then make the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the spot where its spines are stuck, they will be removed at that time."
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	"And more you can take an eel and tie it tightly with thread, and let it inside the table and suddenly pull it out; or take a pot and suddenly put it in and suddenly take it out."
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	"And if those causes are not removed with what we have said, then use an instrument made of lead in this way:"
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	"And it should be thicker than a small reed, and at the end of it there should be a hollow into which you will insert it easily into the patient's throat."
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	"And the patient should raise his head up, and be careful that the instrument does not touch the bones of the throat, lest it cause harm to the body or hurt the bone or spine, or the hand of the doctor."
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	"But nevertheless the patient should insert it himself, if he knows where the cause is attached and hurts him downwards, and then pull his hand up with the instrument, according to how much of it has been prepared inside until it is removed."
Capitol .xxxix.	"Chapter XXXIX."
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	"Of removing a bloodsucker attached to the throat."
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	"When a bloodsucker has been treated with what we have said in the division of cure with medications and does not improve, then consider the throat of the patient under sunlight, because you should have prepared the tongue of it with that instrument which we have described."
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	"Then if you see the bloodsucker, remove it carefully with tweezers or gently with your fingers."
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	"And if it is not possible for you to remove it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and in the concavity of the cannula place a hot iron, and do this many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and removed from the throat) and make sure that the patient abstains from water all day."
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	"And then take a vein full of water that has been heated, and open the mouth of the patient into it, and wash his mouth with it; and do not let any cause remain in that water and hold it for an hour more with your hand, because the bloodsucker immediately feels the water cold."
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	"But if it is not removed with what we have described, then fumigate the patient with incense or asafoetida through that instrument which we have described in the fumigation of the uvula."
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	"Do this, until he falls asleep."
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	"And there is another way of operating in the fumigation of that, which is to take an earthenware vessel in which there are hot coals and cover it with a cloth, with a hole in the middle of it through which the extremity of the instrument should be placed; and then begin the fumigation; and place the patient's mouth on the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodsucker, because the bloodsucker will immediately fall asleep."
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	"And if it does not fall asleep, then repeat the fumigation many times, and make sure that the patient abstains from drinking and eating salty foods and salt, and does not drink water, because this regimen is necessary for him to follow."
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	"And this is the shape of the instrument with which bloodsuckers are removed from the throat when they are seen; it resembles tweezers like these, except that it has some curvature:"
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	"The one placed on the guolayro, its extremity being like the beak of a stork, that is a glove in which the sharpness of a file has been inserted."
Capitol .xl.	"Chapter XL."
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	"This one is about the sum of the discourse on the opening of apostemes and their sectioning."
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	"Different kinds of apostemes, with many different characteristics according to their memory, each one discussed in this book."
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	"And they are diverse in their perforation and sectioning for two different methods: one of which is specific to embedded apostemes; and what we learn about humidity."
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	"And the second method is for those locations where accidents occur in the body, because the aposteme that occurs on the head differs from one that occurs on the buttocks; and likewise, an aposteme that occurs in a fleshy location differs from one that occurs at a joint; and each has its own treatment through operation."
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	"More about apostemes: some of which should not be perforated but await maturity or completion of their healing."
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	"There are other apostemes which should be removed when they become hardened, even if they have not reached maturity according to their completion: like those that are close to joints. For an aposteme near a joint, its evil extends into the surrounding area and often corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or it is near a main member, and if you delay perforation until it is ripe, the main member may suffer harm; or it is near the buttocks, therefore perforate it before it becomes hard. And do not perforate one with incomplete digestion, but rather one close to the buttocks, lest its contents enter the rectum and cause elongation into the internal parts of the buttocks, forming a fistula or making healing difficult."
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	"And so you should know the time for perforation of an aposteme, and this is when it has reached maturity."
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	"And know that an aposteme has reached maturity when there is a cessation of pain and fever, along with a decrease in heat and pulsation, and the tip of the aposteme becomes pointed, along with other signs."
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	"And know that perforation should be made in the location nearest to the aposteme and where pus has come out from its tip during curettage."
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	"And always perform perforation along the length of the flesh or body if apostemes are located on the face, buttocks, hands, feet, nerves, arteries; and finally in all locations except those which are reflected, for in these cases use reflection during perforation."
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	"But when an apostema is in a fleshy location, it is better to leave perforation until digestion has been fully completed, as we have said; for if you perforate it beforehand, the wound of it will extend and much foul matter will be emitted, and often its lips are hardened and its depth increased."
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	"But some apostemes should be perforated across the width of the flesh or body according to necessity, or according to what that member requires."
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	"And you should make a small perforation for smaller apostemes, but for larger ones make a large and wide perforation or many sections according to the diversity of their sizes."
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	"And there are other apostemes in which the chain should be curved and incised when it has become like bread dough and is in a condition where it can already be opened, as happens with those of the groin and buboes."
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	"And there are those which are incised with three-angle sections, and those in which it is incised like a mitre leaf, as with apostemes on the angles."
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	"And there are also those in which a round section and a crescent-shaped section are used, similar to those."
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	"But for that one where it is not like the others, such as superficial lion-like apostemes, you should perforate it with a superficial or flat perforation only."
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	"And when the aposteme is large and has collected much pus, you should perforate it but do not attempt to remove all the pus at that time; having removed a part of it, then on the following day dress the aposteme again and subsequently remove a larger portion each time until it has healed."
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	"And even more so if the patient is a young child, or a pregnant woman, or an infant, or an elderly person in decrepitude; for often at the time of pus discharge the animal spirit is resolved and quickly death occurs, and you operate at your peril."
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	"So heed this chapter with great care, and when performing perforation on these apostemes, be sure to cleanse the wound and consider whether the wound of the aposteme is small or has a flat section; if it is small, then apply a poultice or an ancient cataplasm. But if the apostema is large and its incisions are many, then you must pause between each pull until they come out together."
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if a part of the chain has become separated or curved in its circuit within the aposteme, then you should close it with silk thread or linen thread, just as when you are tying bread dough or cheese, without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day. Then proceed to treat it with what is appropriate for wounds until it is healed."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	"But if blood flow occurs during your operation, then apply a linen cloth dipped in water and vinegar, pressing it against the location of the bleeding several times."
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	"But if the bleeding persists, then you should apply treatment and care and powders which have been recommended in many places throughout this book and elsewhere."
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	"But if it is wintertime and the location of the aposteme has many nerves, then you should apply powders made with hot wine and oil, pressing them onto those locations."
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is summertime and the locations are fleshy, then you should apply powders mixed with water and oil or with wine and oil, all of which have been strained until the third day, as we have said. Then dress the aposteme and cleanse it and treat it with whatever is appropriate for its care until it has healed."
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	"And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of apostemes in general; but according to the way of distinction, I have already spoken specifically about each aposteme and how it should be treated in separate chapters."
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	"About the incision of apostemes that appear on the chain of the head."
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	"On the chain of the head there are small apostemes and they have nodes that contain tunics. There are many kinds of them."
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	"And among them are pimples, some of which contain moisture similar to lime."
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	"And there are those that contain moisture like dust and those that resemble them, and those that are stony and hard."
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	"And in the sectioning of all these apostemes, there is nothing to fear about their extraction, for they do not cause any harm when extracted."
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	"The operation in sectioning these apostemes is that you should express them with an instrument shaped like this [illustration], called 'entromes', until you know what they contain."
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	"For if it contains moisture, then cut it open lengthwise with a superficial section following this shape:"
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	"And begin the section from line B to line G. Then, when the moisture has been evacuated, you should scrape away that part which contained the moisture and leave it without any cause whatsoever, for otherwise the aposteme may return if there is some cause remaining."
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	"And then immerse the wound in Egyptian tar if available, otherwise in water and salt; fill it with this and leave it overnight as it will corrode everything that is broken of that skin."
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	"And then apply Egyptian tar to that wound a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there are no broken parts of the skin left. Then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed."
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	"And if an abscess contains solid matter, then cut it open in this manner:"
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	"And make an incision shaped like a cross, place clamps between the two lips of the wound and tear it apart completely, then squeeze out all your strength to remove the tunic that contains it."
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	"But if your attempt fails, then do what I told you first."
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	"And similarly, treat the hard abscess with cutting and healing according to what I have told you. And cutting into a hard abscess is easier because it contains little blood and moisture."
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	"And sometimes these abscesses appear on the head in some men who have little moisture; this is because once you cut into an abscess on the head of an old woman and it turned out to be like a hard, rough, white stone that couldn't be crushed, and if someone were struck by it, they would be harmed."
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	"But in other accidental abscesses on the head that are not like this one, such as those that appear on the heads of children and around the ears, you should make a superficial incision."
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	"And pause the perforation of those that have been opened in order to relieve the body from the lower parts of the wound, for it is beneficial."
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	"And then treat those wounds with whatever is appropriate for their healing."
Capitol .xlii.	**Chapter XLII**
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the Incision of Scrofulas that occur on the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these abscesses appear on the neck, armpits, and groin areas; sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur on the neck are many and are often generated between them. And all scrofula of this type is within its own tunic, as in the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have explained.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofulas are many, for some are like stones, some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you feel to be of good disposition by touch, whose color is similar to that of the skin and is swollen all around but not annexed to the nerves of the neck, veins or arteries, and is not hard, it is necessary for you to make a superficial incision from above to below on the body line between G and B, then scrape away the entire swelling and extend its lips with tweezers or several tweezers if necessary, as we have said in the case of head abscesses, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious that you do not cut into a vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not harm your hand during the incision, or cause unnecessary injury; for if you cut into a vein or artery and interrupt your operation, at once apply vetriol plaster or other powders that stop bleeding, and then rinse the wound and allow it to rest until the swelling has subsided and the inflammation has eased.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is absorbed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation while it's still incomplete.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And appropriately examine the little finger if there is any cause of the other small swellings; therefore cut those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the vicinity of a large vein, then do not cut that scrophula from its root
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Take care to bind that tightly with folded linen and let it fall by itself without causing harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And appropriately fill the wound made from old linen that you have already immersed in Egyptian gum, and appropriately dress it
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut out that entire scrophula, then it is necessary for you to join together the two lips of the wound and dress it right away so that there is no remaining excess
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is some excess remaining due to the size of the scrophula, then it is necessary for you to extend and cut the root of that, and draw it out and administer suture and whatever else is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And concerning those scrophulas that contain fluidity, pierce it with a superficial perforation here where its maturity appears to you, and cease the perforation from that which is near the base of the body, as we have said
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And appropriately administer perforation, cauterize it with Egyptian gum and similar things, so that it may consume whatever remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And properly when you see that the wound is already clean, then dress it with Egyptian gum from generative flesh so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On section of the pile of an accidental aposteme inside the gullet.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients used this section in the epilhot, and there is hardly anyone in our land who has seen it done
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those people
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in humans suffering from quinsy, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the epiglottis, because through this there would not be any benefit at all since all the veins and the major ones of the inflammation are here
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have apostemes cauterized in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the canal, it is necessary to use section of the epiglottis to avoid the destruction which occurs through perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore when we want this, it is necessary to incise the epiglottis from its three circles of the cartilage of the epiglottis, or four with a small section across its width in that which is between two circles for quantity, so that the section is made in the cartilage and not in the cartilage itself. This place is convenient for the section because it is deprived of flesh and its vessels of blood are distant from it.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the physician is afraid, then it is necessary that he first extend the channel of the throat with an onion and properly cut the channel so that it may reach the canal, but avoid its vessels of blood if you see any cause for this.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And properly incise the cartilage according to what we have recommended. It is indicated about the section of the canal by the swelling which comes from there and that which comes from its disruption and by the suppression of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	"Let the wound remain open for some time."
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then at the hour when removal is feared, attach two lips of skin from around the wound, and cut that alone which is cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Also apply medications that cause flesh to grow within it so that it may heal.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the main point of this discussion is that veins which some of these abscesses have already filled up with pus, and the patient has come into danger, and the breath of the patient has become obstructed, and some wish to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the place of the wound for a little while, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore it is commanded to leave the wound open until the mischief of the disease is consumed; and this mischief lasts for three days. And then the wound should be closed up, and it will heal if properly cared for.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And this I have seen with my own eyes: that a servant took a knife and inserted it into his throat and incised part of the trachea, and I was called to attend to him. When I arrived, he was moaning like one who is dying, and when I opened up the wound, I found that blood had issued from it in little drops.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore it was confessed that that wound had not touched vein or artery, and air came from the plague, and that one was cured within as it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if it did not happen to the servant if she did not raise her voice, and after some days she returned to improve her conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now you say that in the section of the epitaph there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capital XLIV
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Regarding the section on aposteme which occurs in the groin area, and is called an inguinal hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This aposteme named hernia of the groin is a large aposteme according to the color of the body, and it is most common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the case of the natural one, it cannot be cured.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is of two kinds: the first resembles fat knots, and the other kind resembles an aposteme caused by the obstruction of an artery, in which there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to make a presumption about this with iron unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then you should examine that with your finger and investigate it with the said instrument. And if you find it similar to fat knots, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you should cut into it like nodes, and extract it with water containing it from the skin and bursa. And if not, then the whole of its nature should be scrutinized, and the place cured with what is necessary for cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Capital XLV
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Regarding the section on kinds of knots
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the many kinds of knots, I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary for me to point out again the difference between a knot and an exitura (hernia) in case there is any doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that in an hernia there is heat and fever and intense pain until the boiling of the excess moisture is stopped. And it is full putrefaction which then stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But in a knot there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains only chyle or lymph which is proper to the sac itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it appears according to the color of the skin, and its beginning is like a bruise, and it becomes like an empty sac, whether larger or smaller. And there are two kinds: some are fat and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a knot, it is necessary for you to examine it and inquire about its beginning with an instrument called intromes, according to what will come next in this chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the manner of inquiry for apostemes and all kinds of knots. You should take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place that you find in the aposteme, and you should move your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the chain.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then you should lastly withdraw your hand according to the measure of the size of the aposteme, and then withdraw the intromes and consider what is issued in its track.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if it is forgotten moisture that runs, of whatever color it may be, then you should cut it with a superficial section as I have said in other apostemes.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture found from the track of the intromes, then you know that it is fat
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And cut across it with a cross-section according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus as you have taught, suspend that one with a noose, cut the chain from all parts easily, guard the skin or bag if possible over it and extract that corruption at its root.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that corruption, and many times this happens there, so you should pull it out piece by piece until there remains no cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if there remains any cause, little or much, the knot will return according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if there remains some small part of it, then fill the wound with some corrosive powder and press it down, placing a plaster that draws out the inflammation on top, and cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the knot is large, then cut both lips of it and cure it with what encloses it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if there is a pulsating vessel on the contrary, or non-pulsating one, then cut and cauterize the place where it passes that is wet with vitriol, leaving it alone for two days or three until the wound purges itself and its inflammation calms down; and again return to cutting what remains of the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol xlvi
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of instruments necessary for sectioning and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Those are the forms of intestines, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	This is the form of a large intestine
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of a medium-sized intestine is this
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of a small intestine is this
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	There are three types of forceps: straight, curved, and angularly shaped ones. These should be used to quickly remove the intestines from the wounds.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of experience, which are called "albereds", and one of them is called "berid".
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large experience (experient) is like this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of a medium-sized experience is like this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small experience is like this
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is used for those wounds, exits, fistulas and swellings that occur due to bone fractures and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	There are also thick needles, large needles, lions' teeth-shaped ones, and those like large sewing needles with which the threads are sewn. They can be made of citrus wood, bone or metal (iron or silver). The best ones are those made of citrus wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	There are also the forceps called "forceps of black feathers," which are used to open those fistulas with a concave shape where reflections occur. These reflections should be avoided by lifting the feathers gently without touching them.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they come in three types: some are long, others medium-sized, and still others short, depending on the width of the fistula and the degree of its stenosis.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of a large lead forceps:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	"Form of leaden experient:"
Forma del experient petit de plom:	"Form of small leaden experient:"
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	"The shapes of hooks are of many species, for some are simple, which is only a curvature, and there are three species: large, few, and medium."
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	"And they have curved horns, and there are three species."
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And among them there are some with two curvatures, and there are three species."
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And among them there are some with three curvatures, and there are three species."
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	"And all these are necessary in their place."
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	"Form of a large simple hook, form of light:"
Forma de unci simple migier:	"Form of medium simple hook:"
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	"Form of small simple hook, form of shadow:"
Forma de unci orp gran:	"Form of large curved hook"
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	"Form of medium curved hook, form of light."
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	"Form of small curved hook, form of shadow."
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	"Form of large hook with two curvatures:"
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	"Form of medium hook with two curves:"
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	"Form of small hook with two curvatures:"
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	"Form of large hook with three curvatures:"
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	"Form of medium hook with three curvatures:"
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	"Form of small hook with three curvatures:"
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	"And these are the shapes of scalpels with which the knots and boils are cut and scraped, and there are three species: some are large, medium, and small."
Forma de scapel gran:	"Form of large scalpel:"
Forma del scapel migier:	"Form of medium scalpel:"
Forma de scapel pauc:	"Form of small scalpel:"
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	"The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not-sharp, and they are not paused in this manner, but so that cutting may be done judiciously in the scraping of knots without fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and thus the illness may be healed and tranquility obtained through a little cauterization which is useful after the scraping of the boil."
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	"And these are the forms of spatulas, and there are three species: large, medium, and small, as you see."
La forma de magda gran:	"The form of large spatula:"
Forma de magda migier:	"Form of medium spatula:"
Forma de magda pauc:	"Form of small spatula:"
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	"They are made of iron and are similar to a rod with which alcohol is made."
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	"And it has a pierced extremity covered with a spatula and on that side there are openings inside and outside, whenever you wish, as you see."
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	"The forms of spatulae, which are used between the said ones after the perforation of boils and do not cause harm, and there are three species: large, medium, and small."
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	"And these are the forms of those:"
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	"The forms of syringes with which the flow of blood is absorbed, and there are three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of lu:"
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	"They are made of citrus iron, round with some length, and they are subtle."
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	"And it is necessary that these species of syringes be large, medium, and small for you, so that with those the flow of blood may be absorbed quickly in case of necessity, and later when there is not medicine at hand."
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	"Expect that you do not use those to absorb blood from any part of the body and you should only use them in fleshy locations, such as the joints of the thighs and legs, and the joints of the arms, breasts, abdomen, and buttocks, etc., similar to fleshy moist joints."
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	"And sometimes these instruments are made in other small forms similar to tweezers according to this shape: for which blood is absorbed when it is done by phlebotomy, or in case of cutting a vein or artery."
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes they are made round according to this shape:"
Capitol .xlvii.	"Chapter xlvii"
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	"Of the care of men's breasts, which resemble those of women."
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	"Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen when they begin to grow hairy and then their breasts become swollen and resemble those of women, with pimples."
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if anyone has this condition, it is necessary to make a crescent-shaped incision according to this form, from the line of B. to the line of G., and then remove all the thickness, and then fill the wound with an encarnative plaster, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, and cure it until it heals."
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the breast hangs down towards one side and becomes softened by its size, like that of women, then it should be divided into two parts with two crescent-shaped incisions, each contained within the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from the line of B. to the line of G. And then remove the chain which is between the two lips of the wound, drain it and administer what has been said about suturing and powders as necessary in the treatment until it heals."
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if you do not complete the incision that is necessary because of the agitation of the illness and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and let that which has been corroded by it remain until it breaks off from the skin, and then cure it until it heals."
Capitol .xlviii.	"Chapter xlviii"
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	"Of perforation of boils that come from the left nipple."
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	"Those boils that come from the left nipple are of the species called scrofula, hard ones which contain a core that can be squeezed out."
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	"And among those there are some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent-shaped incision according to this form: from the line of G. to the line of B. And when all that is inside the boil has been evacuated, then fill it with wool and leave it alone until the next day."
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	"And then remove the cotton and cure it with an appropriate ointment for that purpose until it is healed."
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	"And if the boil is of the species called node or scrofula, then incise it according to what has been said in the section on engualment."
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	"But if the wound extends so that there is putrefaction, then administer a cautery according to what has been said about it earlier."
Capitol .xlix.	"Chapter xlix"
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	"Regarding the treatment of boils that occur due to an injury or inflammation."
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	"When an artery is broken and the blood vessel above it becomes clotted, often an abscess forms. The signs by which inflammation and abscess are known to be due to injury or inflammation of an artery are that when an abscess is caused by an artery, it extends along the front of the chest; and that when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rushing sound in it."
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	"And one that occurs due to inflammation of a vein is rounder in appearance."
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	"And the treatment of such an abscess is erroneous, especially when it occurs on the left side of the chest, in the armpits, and around the neck or other remote parts of the body. A large one should be avoided for cautery treatment with fire, but those that occur on the extremities or on the head can be treated this way."
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	"Regarding one that occurs due to inflammation of the mouth of an artery, it should be incised along its length. Then carefully spread the incision with forceps and expose the artery, and deliver it from the surrounding sheaths."
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	"And here is how you should proceed with that needle and make it penetrate on the other side, and bind the artery with double ligature in two places. This causes the disappearance of pulsation in both temporal arteries."
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	"And then punch the place that is between two ligatures with a spatha until all the blood in it is expressed, so that the abscess may be resolved."
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply treatment to generate pus within the ligatures so that they fall away. And treat him with appropriate remedies until he is healed."
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	"And if it is an abscess due to the incision of a vein, you should then grasp as much of the abscess with your hand as possible near the vein. Then insert the needle from the side that you have held in your hand and make it penetrate; and twist it with double thread so that you may extract it from the other side. And then ligate the abscess with good linen according to what I have told you about the linen of two parts with two extremities of the thread."
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	"But if you fear that the thread may be extracted, then insert the forceps with that needle from both sides of the entire abscess near the initial incision of the needle, and bind your forceps in four places."
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	"And then dry the abscess in its middle part until it has dried out what is inside. Then incise the excess skin and leave that which is adherent to it."
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then powder the place with the powder you have submerged in wine and oil, and apply treatment with hot compresses until it is healed."
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	"Chapter on abscess that occurs due to torsion of nerves."
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	"Just as an abscess occurs in an artery and vein, so also an abscess occurs in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive effort. And it happens similarly."
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	"And most often it occurs in the places of the forearms or ankles, or in any place where joints are moved excessively."
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	"And the abscess is severe, and it resembles the color of other flesh. And it has large amounts of pus within them without its outlet, and when they are pressed with great force, a kind of stupor-like pain is felt."
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	"And it is not aggregated in the front part of the body, and for that reason it is behind the vein. And it moves towards all parts but does not move forward or backward."
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	"Therefore, those that are in joints should not be cauterized with iron because it would greatly cause contraction."
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	"But that which is on the head or forehead near the vein must be cauterized with a hot iron."
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	"But if it is a small abscess, then grasp it with forceps and cut it off at its root."
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is large, then suspend it with forceps and scrape it out, and remove it. Then close the wound with stitches and treat it until it heals."
Capitol .li.	"Chapter LII."
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	"Chapter on incising an abscess that occurs from a boil that occurs on the belly."
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	"Certain people often see in the bellies of some and in other parts of their bodies those which are called funigules because they resemble those with fungi. Their root is subtle but its head is thick; sometimes its lips are open and it is small, or else it is greatly magnified."
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	"And I have seen one such, and in its belly there were two parts resembling fungi. There was no difference between them; they were white with thin roots."
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	"And the lips of those were turned back and split open, and moisture flowed from it all the time."
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	"So I incised them and removed the first one weighing eighteen ounces, and the second one weighing six ounces."
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	"And the operation in incising them is that you should consider whether the pain is humid, and if the color of it is white, humid, with thin roots. Then incise it with a wide hot iron spatula, and have cauterizing irons ready in the fire because much blood is often expelled during the incision. And if blood comes out, cauterize it."
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	"And if the pain is slight and fearful, guard against incising with iron. But then take fresh lead wire that has been made, and bind it around that boil according to the manner we have described, and leave it for two days."
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	"And then adjust it in the constriction of the lead wire. And do not cease binding the lead around that boil until it has been cut off and fallen away on its own without manual effort."
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	"But if that boil is thick-rooted, then there is some cause for fear and anxiety during its incision, especially those in the belly."
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	"But it is possible to incise most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	"And then treat it until the wound has healed."
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	"And guard yourself from presuming to incise a boil that is of dark color, with little sensation, and carefully observed because it is cancerous."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	"And I recall here about a crab."
Capitol .lii.	"Chapter LII."
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	"Chapter on the treatment of prominence of the navel."
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	"Prominence of the navel is caused by many reasons: either from fissures in the skin above the belly, or from tissue or bowel protruding through other ruptures; or from blood flowing from a vein or artery, as has been said before, or from constricted wind in it."
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	"But if it is from a fissure in the skin and from the protrusion of tissue, then the color of the boil is similar to the color of the body. And there is no pain, but it appears in various positions."
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	"And if it is from protrusion of the bowel, then its position with respect to that which we have described varies greatly. And when you press it with your fingers it disappears and returns immediately afterwards. And there is great pain with it, especially during urination and great effort."
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	"But if it is from humidity, then there is no pain. And it does not disappear when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted nor enlarged."
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	"And if it is from blood, then the boil appears dark-colored and declining."
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	"But if it is from raw flesh, then the boil is serious, large, hard, and deep according to its quantity."
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	"But if it is from wind, then touching it causes no pain."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	"If the belly's prominence is due to blood congestion, vein condition, or wind, then you should refrain from operating on them, for in that case there is fear and trepidation as taught in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses by arteries and veins."
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	"If the belly's prominence is due to bowel or tissue, then you should order the patient to hold their breath and stand extended. Then, carefully feel around the entire umbilical area with your tenting probe, and once found, command them to lie on their back between your thighs, and then circumcise with a broad spatula around the area where you've felt with the probe. Then, extend the abscess upwards with a large hook and tie it off strongly with thread or gut in proper fashion."
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	"And then cut the middle of the extended abscess toward the mesentery and insert your probe into that spot to seek the bowel. If you find it and preserve it with the mesentery, then extract it gently and push the bowel back inside the abdomen."
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	"If you have found tissue, then grasp it with forceps and excise its excess."
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	"But if it is an artery or vein, then encircle that spot and return to your operation. Then take two strong threads and pass them through needles, insert the needles into the tissue around the abscess in such a way as to cross each other like scissors, and penetrate them deeply. Then tie off the abscess at four points on the threads."
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the tissue to retract and fall back into place on its own. Or, excise that area once it has become softened and necrotic, and then cure it with whatever ointment is appropriate until it heals."
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	"If the prominence of the navel is due to fat or moisture, then you should uncover the abscess as we have said and extract any blood or moisture that you find there. Then cure it with whatever ointment is appropriate until it becomes firm."
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already spoken in the section on cancer of its types and how it can be cured with medicine, and that cure with iron is avoided because it causes ulcers. We have also said that cancer arises from the greatest carelessness in its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cancer can be eradicated in certain locations, such as those on the breasts or scrotum, and it is especially so when it is caught early while still small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when cancer becomes advanced and severe, it is not proper to approach it, because I have never seen any case of such a growth that could be cured by me or anyone else.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And when surgery is necessary for cancer, as we have said, it should be preceded by allowing the disease to run its course and purging with black bile occasionally. Then make an incision if there is a clear sign of fullness or swelling.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient for surgery by preparing the area where the operation will take place, and then make an incision with a knife that is suitable for the situation. Then excise all affected parts with careful dissection to ensure that no cause of the disease remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Then allow the blood to flow freely, and do not remove the tissue too lightly. Express the surrounding tissues and wipe away all thick blood with your hand or an appropriate instrument.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you have difficulty with thick blood from veins or arteries, then cauterize that area until the bleeding stops. Then dress the wound with appropriate medication until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54.
De curacio de ydropici.	"On treating dropsy."
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	"We have already discussed, in the division of this book, the kinds of dropsy and their signs, as well as how to treat them with medications."
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	"And that which is cured by an iron (instrument) is only the species of ascites alone, and it is not approached with an iron for the species of tympanitis or the species of hydrops testalis, because that is fatal."
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	"And when you have medicated this species of tympanitic dropsy with medications and it does not confirm the effect of your medication, then consider whether the patient has already achieved debility, or if there is another kind of dropsy, like that in the lungs or abdomen, etc., then guard yourself from treating them with an iron instrument, for there is danger involved."
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	"But if you find the patient to be strong and healthy, and there is no other illness but dropsy alone, without childbirth or age, then the method of operation is as follows: You raise the patient between your thighs, and the assistant presses the abdomen with his hands, expelling the water from below the navel, and then takes a spinal needle in this way:"
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	"It should be made of two pointed parts, with one sharp end like a spine, but it should have some shortness gradually along its length, so that during the operation you do not penetrate too deeply into the bladder and harm it."
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	"And then consider whether the dropsy has come from the bladder, because if it has, you should make your incision along the navel for about three fingerbreadths on the left side, over the pubis."
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	"But if the dropsy has come from a liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel for three fingerbreadths."
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	"And if the cause of the dropsy is from the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side."
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	"And ensure that your incision is made above the side towards which you wish to direct the flow of fluid, so that the superfluities do not run to that particular location."
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	"And then pierce with the instrument through the whole length of the incision, insert it into that section, elevate your hand with the spatula between the cord and the siphon, and extract it; if there is a quantity equal to a fingernail or less."
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	"And then pierce through the siphon until the spatula reaches its desired location, which is where the water is."
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then extract that and insert an instrument of this form:"
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	"And it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or bronze or lion's hair, and at the lowest part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other; and its tip is cut obliquely like a feather, thus:"
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	"And above its tip is an armilla, because when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately the armilla falls over the instrument, so that it discharges the water in the middle ear in just the right quantity; for if you discharge more than necessary at that time, it can cause the death of the patient through dissolution of their vital spirit, or bring on a convulsive fit approaching death."
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	"But discharge it according to the quantity of fluid and according to what you understand from the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse and the soundness of their nature."
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	"And then extract the instrument and retain the water which causes this because it is immediately retained by the cord, which retains the hole that you should pierce according to this manner."
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	"And then iterate the procedure on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water; do this for several days successively with caution, taking care that not too much water remains."
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	"But if you are afraid for the patient and have removed too much water, then treat them with a poultice of hot sand, bathe them with salt water, and expose them to sunlight for a long time; also treat them with drying medications until they are healed."
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	"And cauterize over the stomach, spleen and liver immediately after the extraction of water, as I have described in what has preceded."
Capitol .lv.	"Chapter 50."
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	"Of the treatment of children born with imperforate urinary openings."
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	"Sometimes, some children are born from their mother's womb with the head of their mixture not pierced (either the hole is too narrow or it is not in its proper place)."
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, you should immediately cauterize it with a perforation as soon as it appears with a very fine needle in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then, immediately take a fine leaden needle and cauterize it, and do this for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, he should be moved away and allowed to urinate; then return him to his place.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	But if you do not cauterize with lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the spot may not close this (wound).
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	However, that of which the cauterization is straight should be treated with a leaden needle, as we have said, for too many days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	However, those in which the cauterization is not done in its place, such are called hermaphrodites, whose cause is that those who are born with it have the end of the penis cut off so that they cannot urinate from below until they lift up the penis with their hand above; and this does not occur during generation because the sperm cannot arrive at the opening correctly, which causes a very serious disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient should lie on his back, and then seize the head of the penis with your left hand with great force, and incise the glans of the penis in the place of the perineum with a sharp spatula, as if cutting a feather, taking care not to cut any part, so that the middle of it resembles the head of the penis and the cauterization falls into its proper place.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful during your operation on a hemorrhage, for it often happens that this occurs; and pause until the bleeding stops, and dress the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capítulo LV
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	De albugo, which occurs in the foreskin of the glans penis, and about whiteness, blackness, adhesion of the foreskin to the glans penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	This whiteness often occurs on the penis, which is a fleshy eminence.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of that one is malignant and another is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	"No harmful, take a subtle hook and cut away that which you find there, cleanse it entirely; then press upon it gently with Egyptian gum; and afterwards, treat it with disinfectant until it is healed."
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	"And if it proves malignant, of dark hue, then you must apply cauterization near the incision and its cause."
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	"But if it is present in the foreskin of the head of the penis that has not been circumcised, and one part of the inflammation is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must remove the inflammation that is inside at its beginning until it is consolidated; and then treat that which is outside, for when you treat them both together, it is not certain that it will not be damaged."
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	"And if such decay occurs in the genitals and in the blackened foreskin and corruption, then you must excise all that is already darkened and that threatens to decay or has already begun to decay; and afterwards apply a liniment made with honey, which is prepared with flour of barley meal and three parts of crushed and sifted frankincense."
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	"And apply this treatment together with another cure until it is healed."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	"But if there is a flow of blood, then you must apply cauterization to the moon according to this form:"
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	"For cautery is of two kinds together: it is for the flow of blood and for the ulcer when it has begun to decay."
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	"And if the head of the penis is eaten away and totally destroyed at that hour, then you must insert into the flesh of the foreskin a lead cannula through which the diseased urine may pass."
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion occurs only in that which has been circumcised, and over it circumcision is not required; but when adhesion occurs through ulceration or by aposteme) then you must remove with a blunt spatula until the adhesion is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all parts."
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	"And if it is difficult to separate them precisely, then you must remove with a spatula some skin from the head of the penis and foreskin, for this is why the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily pierced by its very thinness lightly."
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	"And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thread of silk, which has been moistened in warm water so that they may not adhere again."
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	"And then treat it with styptic wine until it is consolidated."
Capitol .lvii.	"Chapter 57."
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	"Of the purification of children and the treatment of what happens to them at circumcision."
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not the sole solution for continence as with other plagues. However, when it is our operation and within our will, and this deed is properly performed on children, we should assign to that the best operation and gentle path leading to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	The ancients did not mention circumcision in all of their books, for they did not use it in their laws. This was because at that time, people had acquired the habit through experience, which is why most craftsmen and barbers practice circumcision using a razor or an awl. They also use liniment with pitch and incise with a fingernail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	"I have already tried all these methods and found no better modification with forceps, linen, or file in circumcision; for many times the skin has slipped away upwards because the foreskin has two tunics, leaving the outer one behind, which often results in another incision and certain pain."
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	"Circumcision performed by apothecaries is digital, used by barbers, but does not secure the incision of the tip of the penis, for often it enters the urethra."
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	"Often in the operation with a nail, iron enters and ruins your operation."
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	"And the skin of children is naturally short, often there are those who grow in such a way that they do not need circumcision; I have seen this."
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	"But with the modification that is done with forceps and linen with file, it has been proven for me to be good, because the forceps have a proportional incision, since the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; therefore when you press your hand proportionally with two sharpnesses and cut according to a comparison in one time, compression of the file is made containing the skin of the foreskin completely divided without any error."
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	"And the first manner of operation is that you should have the child hold still if possible, so that you do not simply place the file on his penis alone, and leave him for another day."
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	"And moreover, make sure to explain in all that manner that is possible to him so that he understands his intelligence."
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	"And moreover, make sure that he is between your hands and well prepared, not the least bit frightened; hide the forceps in your hand or behind your ear so that the child does not see them nor anyone else of the instruments."
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	"And moreover, put your hand on his penis and blow on the skin, then pull it out until the head of the penis is exposed, and immediately circumcise that which has accumulated dirt."
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	"And moreover, tie the marked place with a doubled file, and then tie another lien below that one a little bit, and then take with your hand holding the said lien on the outside with good retention, and cut between two liens."
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And moreover, raise the skin gently and extract the head of the penis; and then let the blood flow little by little, because it is better; and apply powder on top and over the powder apply cloth soaked in a mixture of egg white beaten with hot water well-known with fresh rose oil; and leave that overnight; and care for him until he is healed."
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	"The form of forceps used for circumcision is as follows:"
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	"Their form is such that the outer ones are not sharpened and the inner ones are sharpened so that the root of the claw does not come out, and the length of both points should be equal to the length of two bent handles."
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	"But the mistake in circumcision is when you remove too much skin from within or cut off too much on one side of the incision."
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	"Therefore, you should stretch that out during your time with your nail before the swelling of the spot and cut it according to equality."
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	"And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with tweezers and cut it."
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	"But if three days have passed and there remains still some swelling around the penis, then you should wait until the inflammation has subsided somewhat and gently cut away that which has grown over it according to what you have prepared."
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	"And be careful of the head of the penis, for it will not endure much."
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	"And therefore care for him with that which consolidates the plague according to the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders."
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	"And if it has been cut from the skin appropriately and you follow the instructions given above, then nothing will happen to him."
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	"And moreover, care for him with that which we have said until he is healed."
Capitol .lviii.	"Chapter LVIII."
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	"On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder."
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stone or by blood clotted together, or by poverty or hardness of flesh, and similar to those mentioned earlier regarding methods of treatment in division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and retention of it occurs due to a stone that has already entered the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their own knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And appropriately, you will place weights on that one's back and stretch their belly out from the part above their buttocks downwards, and the patient will strain as much as they are able.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is constricted there is expulsion of the stone towards behind, so that the urine may flow out.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what has been said above, then it is necessary to administer extraction of it using the instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver and carefully crafted like a feather quill pen, about as long as half a palm's width in its fineness, at whose tip there is a thin tube.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of extracting urine through that is: Take the doubled felt and tie it securely at the end of the wick or thread; then insert the extremities of the felt into the opening of the syringe, and if there are any excess threads on the felt, cut them off with scissors. Then insert the felt into the tube with force, and appropriate pressure should be applied to the syringe with a border and a plug made of wool.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	"Place the patient on the shield, grasp their thigh and vein, and grease them with warm oil, olive oil, and hot water."
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	"If it is difficult to reach the root of the vein; if it is doubled above the navel; and if it enters into that, then enter into that until it reaches the bladder, and if not done in this order, then it is wrong."
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	"And also stretch the thread with fine wool little by little, for urine dries wool."
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	"Also remove that and perform a cure with urine, using a catheter. Do not cease doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient obtains relief."
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 9
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the qualities of irrigation of the bladder with candlewicks and similar instruments which are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or congealed blood is present there, or it is obstructed by a stone, and you wish to drip waters and medicines into that, then use an instrument called candlewick, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but at the outer end of it is closed, so that it may not leak.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three openings: two on one side, thus as shown [in the diagram].
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning there is a hollow space, into which water is poured; and according to the quantity of water that fills it, without addition, until when some cause draws from it any humidity, it draws it out, and when it expels, with this it expels also, like a candlewick with which naphtha is ignited in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you wish to inject water into the bladder, insert the extremity of the candlewick into the urethra, and draw with it the water that is expelled through the openings above, for the water is drawn into the concavity of the candlewick.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And also insert the extremity of the candlewick into the urethra according to what we have recommended in the case of catheterization; and also expel the water with whatever you are expelling it with, for that water reaches the bladder quickly, and the ailment is thus relieved.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the thin catheter with which the bladder is irrigated, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	"It should be made of silver or lead, with its tip resembling a small feather; let it be inserted carefully."
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	"And then take a bladder, and place within it the moisture you wish to crystallize in the bladder, and tie that bladder firmly with two strong strings tied together in a double knot, and heat that moisture over the fire."
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	"And then insert the tip of the crystal into the vessel's neck."
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	"And then stretch your hand over the bladder with the stretched-out moisture inside until the patient feels that that moisture has reached the bladder."
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	"But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that circle throughout its entirety; and then insert thread strongly into those holes, so that it may be rotated; and then attach the circle as it is attached to other such circles, because you will place in that one what you wish of humidities, oils, and waters."
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	"And then tie that onto the instrument and proceed with it as you did with the bladder, expressing with your hand until you feel that the moisture has reached the bladder."
Capitol .lx.	"Chapter LX."
De extraccio de peyra.	"Of the Extraction of a Kidney Stone."
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	"We have already said in the division of the species of stone and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and stones generated in the bladder, and the signs of that."
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	"And we have said about the stone for which operation by hand or section is necessary."
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	"And the stone generated in the bladder properly speaking is that one which remains in the bladder."
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	"And we shall now recount it with manifest exposition and abbreviation."
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	"Therefore it is said that stones generated in the bladder are found mostly among children. And their signs are that urine which is emitted from the bladder appears like water in its fineness and clarity, and there is pain during urination and sometimes bloody discharge; also, the illness usually worsens at night."
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	"And it would be easier to treat children with this condition if they have attained fourteen years of age; but treatment is difficult in the elderly."
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	"But among young people, it is more common than in others."
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	"And if the stone is large, treatment will be easier; but if it is small, it is contrary to that."
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	"Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this condition, at the beginning of it we should cleanse the illness with a catheter which extracts all the pus that is in its passages; for sometimes that passage prevents the exit of the stone during the examination."
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	"And then let the illness be taken with its weights and be lifted up and moved about until the stone descends to the neck of the bladder or moves from its place."
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	"And then have ready between your hands the most prepared catheter and its weights, and put aside all other things, so that the bladder may be entirely inclined towards the parts below."
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	"And then seek it out and follow it entirely downwards."
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	"So if you feel the stone in that space, immediately cut upon it with a section."
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	"And if you cannot feel it with your touch at all below, then you should anoint the tip of your left index finger with oil, if the illness is a child, or the middle finger if it is a full-grown person, and insert that into its anus."
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	"And seek out for the stone until you find it below your finger."
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	"Then slowly turn it little by little towards the neck of the bladder."
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	"And then press upon it with your finger and expel it outwards from its place where you made the section."
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	"And command the minister to press upon the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand he shall extend the scrotum upwards, and with his other hand he shall raise up the cord which is below the scrotum, at the place where the section is made."
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then insert spatula B, which has this form:"
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	"And then cut with it into that which is between the anus and the scrotum, not in the middle place, inclining towards the left side; and let the section be made upon that stone, and your finger should be inside the anus at the time of the section, and let the section be transverse, so that the opening outside may be wide and inside narrow according to what is possible for the stone to come out through it, nor more, for otherwise you will compress your finger which is inside the anus with the stone during the section, and thus cause difficulty without need."
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	"And know that among stones there are some which have angles and edges, for the extraction of which is difficult because of this."
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	"And among those which are round like an egg, and spherical in shape, extraction is easy."
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	"So if it is one of those stones with angles and edges, adjust your forceps in the fissure."
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	"And if it is not thus extracted, then you should push upon it or press upon it gently with the end of this instrument which resembles a file with which you press upon the stone and do not slip off from it; or else insert this thin curved instrument below it."
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	"But if you cannot get on top of it, then widen the passage a little; and if you see flow of blood, cut upon it strongly with nitre dissolved in vinegar."
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	"But if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning you should press your hand upon the mouth of the bladder and cut upon it; and then press a little upon that place again; and similarly do this if there are more than two."
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	"And if the stone is very large, it is ignorance to cut upon it with a large section, for one of two causes happens to the illness: either it remains or else it engenders again from the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not entirely consolidated."
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	"But prepare for expulsion of that which has been extracted, or push it out from the fracture with forceps in pieces."
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	"So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with threads of aloe and dragon's blood, and sew it up."
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	"And place upon that a linen cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and warm water, so that a dry crust may be formed."
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	"And then have the patient lie on his back, and do not remove the ligature until the third day."
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	"And when that has been removed, wash the place with warm water and much oil, and then treat it with ointment of cinnamon and ointment of diacynthion until it is healed."
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	"But if in the wound there occurs a dry and corrosive aposteme, like that which resembles frozen blood in the bladder, and by this means urine is forbidden (and this is known by the exit of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it causes irritation of the bladder and putrefaction."
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply whatever is appropriate for all kinds of wounds according to what is suitable for its healing."
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	"And it is necessary during all the time of the treatment that you keep both sides covered and adjust the medications which are placed upon the place."
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the urethra, and is stuck there, and it is forbidden to pass urine, then treat it with what I have recommended before that you arrive at section, for many cases seen through this treatment are attributed to section; and now I will explain this, and it is that you take a steel sound, of which this is the form:"
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	"Of triangular shape, sharp, inserted into wood."
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	"And then take the stone and remove it from the bladder to prevent it from returning."
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	"Then insert the iron into the urethra, carefully piercing until the probe reaches that stone."
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	"And slowly turn the probe with your hand around that stone, pushing it through until you feel it penetrate to the other side; for urine is then released."
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	"Then press your hand on what is left of the stone from its exit point outside the urethra, because that is fragmented and flushed away with urine, and the patient is healed."
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	"However, if this procedure is not suitable for any reason that prevents it, then remove the stone and place another stone above it."
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	"And then cut the stone in that urethra between two ligatures."
E aprop extratz aquela.	"And next, remove that."
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	"And also untie the ligament and cleanse the blood congealed therein, which is formed in the wound."
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to leave bile in the kidney except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other ligature above because when the bile is released near the exit of the kidney, the cord returns to its place and regains its strength.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	Therefore it is necessary when you have released the bile above that you raise the cord to the parts above, or else it will return and complete its task, regaining its strength as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of the Extraction of Kidney Stones in Women
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	In women, stones in the kidney are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if they appear in any of those, their cure is difficult and forbidden by many ways.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that women are reluctant to undergo surgery.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is because you cannot find a woman who willingly exposes herself to a doctor when she is chaste, or is among those who are married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that there may not be any skilled women who know this art, especially the operation using the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	"And the fourth is that in women the sectioning location on stone is distant from the stone itself, thus requiring a thorough section and there is fear."
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	"And if necessity obliges you to this, then it would be necessary for you to take a woman who is well-known and not easily frightened."
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	"And if you are deprived of that [woman], then look for one who is experienced and skilled, or present a woman midwife well-known in the practice of women's matters, or a woman who has been instructed in this art."
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	"So have that woman present, and command her to do everything that you will order her from the investigation of the stone at the beginning; this is so that she may observe if the woman is a virgin, otherwise she must put her hand into the woman's vulva and feel for the stone."
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	"So if you find it [the stone], grasp that with your hand and then command her to insert her finger upon it."
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If the patient is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and examine around the stone, as she places her left hand on the bladder, feeling carefully with good skill.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then, if she finds the stone, she must carefully remove it from its position in the bladder through the opening of the vagina using her skill and strength until it reaches the entrance.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And furthermore, she should insert her finger into the appropriate position of the entrance to the vagina where the stone has stopped and carefully place the stone in that location without removing her finger from it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at first. Then insert the knife into that section and if you feel the stone, then adjust the size of the incision according to how much of the stone will need to be removed from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that stones are various in shape: some are small and round, others are large and sharp, still others are long and round, and some have branches.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you should know what kinds of stones there are based on what I've said about the topic at hand.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flowing, adjust the position of the vessel and hold it for an hour until the bleeding is stopped. Then return to your operation until the stone has been removed completely.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And see that you have prepared the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see blood flowing and know that the bleeding is coming from the artery that has been cut, then apply powder to that location and press it firmly with a bandage of linen and strict compression. Do not repeat this process; leave the stone alone and do not try to remove it, for otherwise the patient will surely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then dress the wound
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So after the bleeding has ceased and the location has healed somewhat after several days, then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On Incision for a Strangulated Hernia
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A strangulated hernia is nothing more than an accumulation of fluid in the white sac, which is left behind by the genitals containing the intestines, and it is called a hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is found in the proper skin, which nature prepares for it at the time of birth, where the intestines have grown through to become another set. And this is the cord of the genitals between the white sac that we have spoken of, and it is nothing more than fat.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	"Hernias are caused by weakness in the groin area. This happens when excessive matter accumulates there and sometimes occurs due to injuries sustained."
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	"This moisture has many colors: sometimes it tends towards yellow or red, or purple, or black and earthy, or watery white; this is the most common."
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	"If it is in the white cyphac that we have mentioned, then the swelling tends to elongate somewhat in a longitudinal fashion, resembling an egg shape. The groin becomes visible because the moisture covers almost its entire surface."
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	"If the moisture is in the proper panniculus, then the swelling resembles two eggs and it is believed to be a case of twins."
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	"If the moisture is between the groin and the white cyphac, then the swelling will occur on both sides."
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	"If you wish to determine the color of the moisture in a swelling, then observe the color of the moisture in the center of the swelling. Based on what is seen at the entrance of the opening, one can judge what is inside."
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	"Therefore, when it comes to the treatment of this condition with iron, if possible, we should command the patient to cough if they are able. This will help evacuate the contents of the swelling."
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	"And let him be propped up on his shoulders somewhat above, and cover him with moist cloths."
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	"And you should sit on the left side of him, and command your assistant to stand on the right side. Let them extend their urine tube about two spans along the groin down towards the navel."
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	"And then take a broad, sharp knife and cut through the middle of the groin towards the penis."
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	"And let this incision be made according to the rule of equal distances from the line that should divide the skin of the groin until it reaches the white cyphac."
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	"And then excise it, and observe carefully to ensure that you do not cut too deeply. Excise it so that the skin is suspended by only one thread, and carefully examine it according to its quantity as much as possible."
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	"And then make a large hole in the full cyphac of water, and remove all the water."
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	"And then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps and extend the cyphac at its sides. Do not touch the groin including the cyphac, and cut into it in whatever way is possible for you."
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	"And cut into it entirely or in pieces, especially on its sides more finely. For if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is no certainty that the water will not return."
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	"But if the cyphac extends outside of its groin during your operation, then after you have completed the incision of the cyphac, return it inside. Then join the two lips of the groin with sutures and treat him as you would other people, until he is healed."
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	"And if you find the cyphac corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary to ligate the vessels that are near the suspenders and remove the cyphac. Then treat him with what has been said."
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	"But if water collects in two places at the same time, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore cut into that part as you did the other one equally; and if it seems to be an operation, then perform it."
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	"And then wipe away the blood, and enter into the incisions cotton soaked in oil or rose oil. Then place another piece of cotton soaked in wine and oil over both groins and the navel. Then cover it with folded cloths and powders, and bind them together according to this form:"
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	"And then take two cloths and fill them with cotton wool according to this likeness. Then make the ends of them with which they are pressed together of wax or wet cotton wool, and attach them with a string in the fly of the breeches, and one end should take from the buttocks inward, and the other end should take at the navel, and two bands on both sides and two bands above, and all restriction should be adjusted in the fly of the breeches."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a caustic instead of an incision with iron; and it is that you take a sharp cautery knife and cut the groin with it. And ignite it according to what has been recommended until the white cyphac containing water is revealed. Then take a cautery in this form:"
e es asemblat a letra greca.	"And it resembles the Greek letter 'Gamma'."
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	"And then pierce that cyphac with it and burn until all moisture is expelled."
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	"And then extend the cyphac with forceps and excise it with forceps and cautery, carefully burned. And cut into it according to your ability until you eradicate it completely. And beware that the fire does not touch the cyphac."
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	"And know that this operation is safer and further from bleeding than an operation with incision."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	"But if an abscess occurs during the incision or cautery operation, or bleeding occurs, then you should treat that condition according to what has been said."
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	"But if the illness is dangerous and does not wait for a second operation due to its horrible nature, then perform perforation according to what has been recommended. And this is when you are certain, by what has been said about the meanings, that that hernia is aqueous."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	"Then you should make a seat for the illness on some raised cushion, and then perforate the abscess in its lowest part with a wide spatula, and perform the perforation according to the length of the body."
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	"And let the aperture be wide enough to release all water."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	"And then place cotton on that spot and bind it. And leave it alone for the remainder of the water to escape."
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	"And then treat him until the wound is healed."
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	"But if there is difficulty in the exit of water at that time, then perforate it: and this is done only when the white panus around the wound opening obstructs the exit of water. Then insert a pen or an instrument for removing water from hydrocele patients, whose shape is shown beforehand; or attach a small tube to the aperture of the wound."
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	"And know that water will return and collect again after about six months or less. And when it collects again, then perform perforation in the same manner as before, for this illness will thus have its days."
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of Incision on Fatty Hernia and Its Treatment
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in this section about this hernia, there is fear of losing the patient to danger in the worst dispositions; therefore, it is my view that dismissal of him and saving him by that better means should be considered.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	You are also remembering the operation on this one and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it is said that the abscesses are born in those bodies whose veins are inflamed and this happens for many causes: either by acute severe excess of matter that flows into the veins, or by blows.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess follows the color of the body, and it is not found in the area of pain, this is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	A hard, lifted abscess has dark coloring, and there is no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it happens due to the narrowing of the arteries and by inflammation of those that have already been perceived as remembered from before, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But what happens due to inflammation of arteries is known by the spreading of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers, and it does not need to be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which happens due to inflammation of a vein does not spread from it for any reason, even with compression by the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this type of abscess there can be made an incision and on the other flesh; it is to insert the chain of veins, and appropriate stretch out the wound above its parts, and extract that white fluid from it, and release the suspenders of vessels, and tie them up, and incise those suspenders that you have released from all parts of the wound.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the abscess is already united with those flesh parts, then it is necessary to extract that abscess and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion within some cause of the fluid or between that which is between the vessels, then it is necessary to release all that adhesion and make a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a formation of flesh in the place where the adhesion was which is behind it, then it is necessary to incise all that which is from it and extract the abscess just as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rosemary oil and wine; and appropriate care for it with another cure until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Concerning the treatment of a hernia that is of wind.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Wind hernia is an abscess surrounded by some sort of covering resembling a bud with softening of the testicles, and it causes difficulty in exercise and walking due to illness.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And for the treatment of this illness, fear is used as that from which memory precedes.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary to speak operation on it according to what was said first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that it is necessary to elevate the illness on a high pillow; and appropriate pull back the suspenders of the testicles from its sides; and appropriate take the chain of veins with your fingers where the vessels are visible at the pubic region; and appropriately have another assistant who will extend them with violent traction.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And appropriate incise with a sharp, broad scalpel for a transverse section on the right side of the vessels where they are visible.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And appropriate excoriate from all parts just as we have said in extraction of arterial ligatures which are on the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And appropriate place in those a needle with a doubled thread and tie it at the first of the places where wind hernia occurred and tie it again at the last one.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And appropriate incise those in the middle place for a straight section according to the length of the body and extract what has accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And appropriate care for the wound with cure of other wounds where you want healthy tissue to be generated so that the vessels which you have tied do not fall out, because it is not good for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if wind hernia occurs on all vessels, then it is necessary to extract the testicles or tie them up with the vessels because of which they become deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels and that they be sewn closed or tied up so that there is no benefit from them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	"Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernia."
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	"The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that occurs in the diaphragm extended over the abdomen from both sides of the navel, causing the intestines to protrude through that rupture."
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	"And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or an opening in it, and such cases occur due to many causes: either by percussion, by a sneeze, by coughing, by lifting something heavy, or by a sudden effort."
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	"And the sign of that, when it is due to an extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not occur suddenly; it is like an impostume that develops within the chest because the diaphragm compresses the intestine."
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	"And the sign of it is when it is due to a section of the diaphragm, because at the beginning it causes sudden violent pain; and it appears as an impostume different from that near the navel, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and its body lies on both sides of the diaphragm."
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	"And sometimes the tissue around the intestine is forgotten outside, and this type of hernia is called an entestial incarcerated or 'strangulated' hernia."
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	"And sometimes it occurs with windiness, and sometimes it runs in the intestinal crevice and gets stuck there, causing great harm to the condition; and sometimes it causes bad pain, especially when it is pressed upon."
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	"And in the treatment of cases of this disease with iron, care must be taken to avoid cauterization in that area."
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	"And the method of operating on this is that you should ask the patient to reduce the intestine with his own hand towards its normal position if it obeys its return; and then quickly press your hands upon its coil between the two arms, elevating its contents."
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	"And then stretch the scrotum which holds the cord of the testicles upwards, and cut through the cord of the testicles along its length; and then place two hooks on both sides of the incision to open the wound as you require."
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	"And if it is necessary to make an incision according to your judgement, do so in such a way that as much of that loop may be brought out as possible."
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	"And then strip away the sheaths of the intestine which lie near the cord of the testicles until the white shining wall of the intestine is exposed on each side."
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	"Then you should insert your finger into that which is the testicle, that is between the white intestine, which lies near the loop of the bowel, and behind it; and then separate it with that adhesion which is in the part behind the loop."
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	"And then carefully lift the cord of the testicles upwards with your hand, and at the same time extend the white intestine upwards with your left hand, elevating the loop of bowel with the intestine to the part where the incision is made; and then ask the assistant to extend the loop further upwards, and you should dissolve that adhesion which is behind it with a gentle solution."
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	"And then carefully examine all around that there may be no cause of the bowel being involved in the white tough tunic."
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	"But if you find any cause, then quickly push it back into the abdomen."
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	"And then take a needle with thick thread attached to it, and insert it behind the end of that white tissue which lies beneath the cut cord of the testicles; and then cut through the ends of the threads so that there are four threads left; and then tie some of them together in a cross-like manner; and then tie this white tissue, of which we have spoken as being near the cord of the testicles, with strong binding on both sides."
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	"And then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them with a firm knot, so that none of the vessels which have been cut may cause any inflammation hereafter."
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	"And then tie another knot in the same manner about three finger widths away from the first knot; and then cut away those two bindings from that white tissue which lies near the cord of the testicles to the length of your finger, and cut round the remainder; and then leave the loop."
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	"And then make an incision in that part near the cord of the testicles, through which blood and urine may flow freely, as we have advised earlier."
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	"And then apply lanum soaked in oil to the wound; and then apply the ligature which we have advised (and sometimes cauterize the white tissue near the incision of the blood vessel, as it often happens); and then leave the ligature so that it may fall by itself."
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	"But if the wound closes slowly, then cold water should be poured on it, and a dressing applied over it so that it may fall away as we have said."
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"And then dress the wound with the other treatment for wounds until it is healed."
Capitol .lxvi.	"Chapter LXVI."
De hernia ventosa.	"On Windy Hernia."
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	"There is no one who has been burned by the treatment of this with iron."
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	"And the first thing they said was that it should be treated in the same way as the hernia with wine, which is to tie up the vessels near the cut on that side with feacility; and then dry up the middle part around the inflammation with whatever works that; so that the vessels may fall away."
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	"And dress the wound as we have said until it is healed."
Capitol .lxvii.	"Chapter LXVII."
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	"On the Dislocation Which Occurs in Joints."
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some veins sometimes rupture in the ankles as we have said, and it appears enlarged.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not give any cause for the intestines to the patient; and if you do give one, it is little; and return in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this, an adjusted fissure occurs in the scrotum through which the intestine enters the scrotum; and this happens due to the extension of the scrotum, which is in the ankles as we have said, which causes the scrotum to become extended and softened, and the place becomes inflamed and enlarged.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And its treatment is with cauterization as described above.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between the two thighs, and then dry the place of the rupture of the swollen apostemas by sectioning along its width according to their quantity, three times.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the scrotum white that is below the tailbone so that it may be uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	"Then take the wand and place it on the prominent part of the hip joint, pressing gently on the abdomen."
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	"And place both prominent locations over the extremity of the hip bone, adjusting one against the other at the suture line."
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	"And then extract the extremity of the wand, ensuring that you do not touch any part of the hip bone, nor extend it too much, or cause injury as you know how to perform this intestinal hernia cure."
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	"And then cure it with the treatment for hernias, and if you incise the veins, cleanse them and restore the hernia before it solidifies, because the hip joint contracts and is not adjusted to the prominence of rupture."
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	"It is better to cauterize at this location, as it is closer to safety."
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVII
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	"Concerning the softening of the spermatic cord."
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	"Frequently in some men, the chain of the testicles becomes softened because the flesh between them is softened; it is said to be caused by neglect."
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	"Therefore it is necessary that whoever undertakes the treatment of this patient should make him lie down on his back, and cut all of the softened cord from its natural position; afterwards, he should join the two lips with a suture."
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	"And if you wish, at the beginning, it is possible to remove the excess of softened cord with three or four stitches and a firm suture."
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	"Then cut between the sutures; afterwards treat for other diseases until he is healed, and the wounds close."
Capitol .lxix.	"The sixty-ninth chapter"
De castracio.	"Of castration."
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	"Know that castration is condemned in our law, but it is permitted to me to remember this in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two ways: the first is because of the science of medicine when one inquires about it, so that he knows how to treat him to whom it happens; the second way is that often we have needed castration of other beasts for our pleasures, such as dogs, goats, pigs, and similar beasts."
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	"And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by tearing or by cutting with a section."
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	"In cases caused by contusion, the procedure is to immerse the affected part in hot water until its joints are softened and it is limbered, then hang it."
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	"And then take those with your hand, but only those that are resolved and do not appear to be left behind from the touch."
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	"In cases of castration done by incision and sectioning, hold the animal firmly and press on the cord of its testicles with your left hand."
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	"And then tie off the suspension ligament, and make an incision above each cut with a sectioning motion until both testicles have been removed."
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	"And then cut those that have already separated themselves from the body wall."
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	"Do not leave any cause on those of the scrotum, but rather remove the thin skin which covers the vases."
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	"And this method of castration is better than that done by contusion because strong contusion leaves no trace of the testicles and causes the animal to desire copulation."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	"And then dress the wound until it has healed."
Capitol .lxx.	"Chapter LXX."
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	"Concerning the treatment of hermaphrodism."
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	"Hermaphrodism in males occurs in two ways: the first is when it appears as a space in the cord of the testicles between which there are two testicles resembling an opening like that of a female, and through which sperm passes."
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	"And sometimes urine flows from that same cord of the testicles."
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	"But in females it is one species: that is, the opening of the female above the pelvis is like two testicles of a male, each of which emits a little urine at the time of emission like the penis of a male and two testicles."
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	"And its treatment is three species: two for males and one species for females."
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	"And it is necessary that you make an incision in those flesh folds where the urine flows out, and then dress them with the same care as other wounds."
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	"And in the second species of males where urine comes out from the cord of the testicles, there is neither treatment nor operation for it."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter XXI."
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	"Concerning lens and prominent flesh caused by females."
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	"A prominent lens is naturally adjusted during erection and becomes erect due to attention, but sometimes it is enlarged in some females such that it spreads out like in males and enters the vagina during copulation."
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	"Therefore you should grasp the excess of the lens with your hand or with a hook and make an incision."
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	"And do not lastly in the incision, especially on the glans penis, lest blood flow."
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	"And then dress it with the care of wounds until it has healed."
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But flesh born is flesh that appears in the horrific of the mother within which it fills up, and fortunately it is extruded from the openings externally resembling the tail (and thus some first called this “disease of the tail”). Therefore we should incise it just as we do for lens, and dress it until it has healed."
Capitol .lxxii.	"Chapter LXXII."
De curacio de alratica.	"Concerning treatment of arthritis."
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	"Arthritis is when the opening of the female is not perforated or has a small passage."
E es o natural o accidental.	"And it is either natural or accidental."
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	"Accidental occurs due to illness that has preceded it, and this is caused by flesh naturally adjusted, or by flesh newly born or thickened skin."
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	"And it occurs either in the front of the mother or on her sides, or above her pubic bone or below her pubic bone. It prevents coitus and pregnancy and childbirth, and often it prevents menstruation as well."
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	"And the diagnosis of this is made by examining the opening of the vagina if the obstruction is apparent. But if it is not apparent, you should examine it with your fingers or a probe."
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	"But if the obstruction is due to thin skin, and it is apparent between the two lips, then you should cut it open."
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	"And if it stops over the two pubic lips, then carefully insert your fingers on both sides of where it is most thickened."
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	"And the female should be on her back with her thighs extended. Then carefully pull apart the two lips with force until that thin skin is broken and the obstruction is opened."
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	"And then take wool moistened in oil and place it on that location. Leave it there for a day so that the skin does not stick together again."
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	"But if the skin is thick and hard, then you should incise it with a broad spath or with a myrtle leaf."
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	"But if the obstruction is due to flesh being born, then suspend that flesh with a hook and incise it."
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	"And apply medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as achati, dragon's blood, and frankincense mixed with album of egg white."
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	"And then insert a wide lead cannula to prevent the wound from closing too quickly."
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	"And keep it like that for several days and apply warm water compresses."
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	"And then dress it with the usual treatment for consolidation until it has healed."
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	"And sometimes during birth other flesh is born alongside. If this happens, incise according to the method described above."
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	"But if this is due to an embryonic tumor, then do not cause any injury with iron in any way to that embryonic tumor within the uterus."
Capitol .lxxiii.	"Chapter LXXIII."
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	"Concerning the treatment of hemorrhoids, prolapse of the rectum, and red tumor that occurs in the opening of females."
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	"Hemorrhoids are a prominence of many veins around the openings from which blood flows continuously. And when these hemorrhoids become old, they are called piles."
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	"And I have already spoken in the division about the species and signs of these, and I will say now which ones receive treatment and which do not."
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	"So I say that hemorrhoids and piles that are in the front of the uterus and cannot be felt do not receive treatment with iron."
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	"But those which are at the opening of the uterus where you can feel them are those that are treated."
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	"And you should make the woman lie on her back and then extend her buttocks with forceps or rough cloth and incise those piles with a razor."
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	"And then sprinkle powder on them that stops bleeding without biting, such as achati or similar ones."
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	"And then make her lie on her belly for an hour and apply a warm water compress to the wound."
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	"And if bleeding persists, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and the skins of pomegranates and figs and similar ones."
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	"And then take barley flour and mix it with honey, vinegar, and wine. Make a poultice with this and apply it on the back of her buttocks."
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	"And if bleeding is profuse, that is good. But if not, make it adhere with two cupping glasses and apply scarification to the breasts."
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then take wool and immerse it in juice of coriander or juice of agrimony or juice of garlic with white wine. Make it adhere to the location, and then dress the wound with egg whites until it is healed."
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	"But if there is prolapse of the rectum that is hard to reduce, you should incise whatever part of it appears according to what I have said about piles."
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And dress it until it is healed."
Capitol .lxxiv.	"Chapter LXXIV."
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	"Of accidental perforation of the bladder in the uterus."
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of ulcers occur in the greater part of the body, such as hard and fleshy tumors, and ulcerous growths and inflamed ones, and serpiginous and fistulous ones that are bloody and reddish.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already described these illnesses and their species and their symptoms, and their remedies in the division [of the book].
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary that you should speak in this treatise of cauterizing the ulcer which occurs on the body when it is of those ulcers which are hard to heal, and if you wish to know in what manner the operation is performed with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore it is necessary that you consider whether the pain of the ulcer at its beginning is sharp with percussion and swelling and fever, and if sometimes it reddens and if cats are attracted to it, then do not cut into it with a perforation, but cure it with water which aids in its maturation until the acuteness of the accident ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then it is necessary that you make the woman lie on her back on two pillows; and let her recline on her shoulders with her heels placed near the edge of the bed outside her belly, and let her legs be extended, and let her arms be placed far from her sides, and bind each one with a cloth conveniently.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife follows on the right side and administers the instrument with which the opening of the belly is made, the form of which will come in those causes that will be mentioned here.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And it is necessary that when you wish to administer this instrument, you should place yourself in front of the woman's belly and ensure that only the point of the instrument enters the belly and leads towards the ulcer.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the point of the belly, then it is necessary that you place poultices on the texture of the point of the belly so that the entrance of any instrument into the point of the belly is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you place the thread which runs through the instrument on the right side above, and that the one who ministers holds the instrument and turns the thread until the opening of the belly has been made.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the exit comes out and is touched with the hand and is loose and moist, then it is necessary that you dry that with a broad spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sanies has been evacuated, then it is necessary that you place in the wound a medicated wick soaked in rose oil or green oil with some astringency; and let the compress remain on the section of the point of the belly.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And then cover the belly and place over it clean wool immersed in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"Then it should be treated for about two days until it heals."
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	"Sometimes the wound is washed with honey and then rinsed with water in which iris root or long pepper has been boiled, and then it is returned to the wound."
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	"If the wound has gone deep into the flesh, then you should forbear from treating it with iron and instead use water as we have described in this section."
Capitol .lxxv.	"Chapter 75."
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	"To teach midwives how to treat women with abnormal uterine bleeding according to their figurative causes."
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	"It is necessary that the midwife know at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs. When you see the woman pressing on her thighs and desiring to smell the air, and she is relieved when something comes out from her above, and hastens the expulsion of the baby, then you will know that this birth is according to nature, and it exits onto her head, and the second one with its cord either suspended or pendant from the navel."
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	"Therefore, when you see those signs, then the belly should be pressed so that the baby may come out easily. When it comes out onto its head, the second one follows, and is cleansed of those superfluities with good cleansing."
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	"But if this is not that birth, it is abnormal and blameworthy, for when the baby comes out on its feet, its body comes out before its head and its feet, and its hand is one, or at its foot, or its head comes out with its hand, or at its belly, and its face is turned upwards towards its neck, such are the figures of abnormal births."
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	"Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, so that she may guard against error and deception."
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	"And I will show you all the figures of those births, and what kind they are in them, so that it may be understood by this and judged accordingly."
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	"When the feet come out first due to an upright position and it is violent upon the woman, and she has a difficult delivery, and her strength is already weakened, then she should do this: women should have her sit up, and evacuate her with fennugreek decoction and olive oil."
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	"And then the midwife should insert her finger between the baby's thighs and tear it open with that, or separate it with her nail within what is in it of humidity."
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	"And press on the woman's belly so that she may expel the baby."
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	"But if it does not come out, then the woman should be anointed with pitch and fennugreek mucilage mixed with nard."
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	"And then command her to be pressed down again, and make her sneeze with incense; and put your mouth and nose over hers for one hour, for the baby will soon be forgotten."
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	"And if both arms of the baby are forgotten at the beginning, then you should reduce them gently little by little."
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	"But if it does not obey the intermediation, then place the woman on a large stone and lift her legs up, and quickly push the stone down towards the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall due to the shock."
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	"And if the arms are not returned and the baby dies, then cut them open and remove the membrane of the baby or tie its body to your hand with cloth and remove it evenly, for that will soon be forgotten."
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	"On the emergence of the fetus feet-first:"
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	"When the baby comes out feet-first, then you should push those up, turn the baby around gently, anoint it, grasp its foot, and slowly extend it."
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	"But when it is already inside the uterus, then you should command it to come out, and make it sneeze with incense, for it will soon be forgotten if God wills."
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	"And if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then slowly return the baby into place according to its natural figure, for it will now be forgotten with an easy delivery."
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	"And if it is prohibited with all that we have recommended, then take some aloe mucilage and gum dissolved, grind them well in the mortar, and anoint the woman's belly, especially its lower part."
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	"And then make her drink warm water to promote contractions."
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	"And when sometimes the parts of her are inflamed, then perform fumigation of myrtle on her and apply cold compresses."
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	"And when fumigation has been done for an hour, then make her sit on a stone, make her sneeze and extend her mouth, lift her up, and press gently on the lower part of her belly, for the baby will soon be forgotten."
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	"On the emergence of the fetus buttocks-first and arms:"
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	"When the baby comes out buttocks-first and arms, then carefully insert your hand between its arms little by little; and let the woman be lying on her back with her legs hanging down, and place it on a soft bed, and bring its arms together."
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	"And then press gently on her belly little by little, and remove what is between its legs from the ears down until it is prepared for the lower opening."
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	"And if the baby is not forgotten, then take its legs and shake them with vigorous movements, and press gently on what is over the hips until the baby can reach the opening above."
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	"And then insert its arms and gently anoint the baby little by little, and command the woman to push until the baby is forgotten."
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	"On the emergence of the fetus lying sideways with one arm extended:"
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	"It should be gently reduced into place by its hand. But if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman up and make her walk."
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	"And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, strike its sides with vigorous blows, and administer liquids and mucilages which you have prepared."
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	"And if the childbirth has come, then make her sit on a stone, study how to reduce its arm, anoint the baby according to its natural figure, make the woman sneeze, and command her to push until it is forgotten."
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	"On the emergence of the fetus on its back with arms extended and face towards its mother:"
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	"The midwife should hold the baby's hand and gently turn it around until it is easy."
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	"And when it has been anointed and it has become easy, then place on its face what we have recommended of oil and mucilages."
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	"And then command her to shake it gently little by little. And when you have done this, then make her sit on a stone and let her lean over her right side, and command her to push; and make her sneeze with incense."
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	"Preparation for the emergence of the fetus onto its side:"
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	"When there are horrible cries from the mother according to this manner, consider, and then cut open the second one with your nail until it is evacuated of moisture."
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	"And if the baby is suspended over its face and its neck, then cut open that part with a caesarean section, so that it may not be retained and die."
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus into the parts inside that are open, and pause that which is necessary, and tell the woman to take some breaths, and he himself will come out easily, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or multiple fetuses
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that many times twins are born, and sometimes three or four, although this is rare and strange and should not happen; but there are several causes for this, not alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And it happens sometimes that they are multiplied, one after another, and separated by a membrane, distinguishable those inside the ligament in the navel of each one. And sometimes they come out like this as if there were only one fetus through natural easy birth, and sometimes they come out through difficult birth like we have mentioned.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them have difficulty with childbirth and arrive at what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you should take care of them as we have mentioned.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with ease and skillfulness, and with patience, and follows the method according to all figures as it was prepared for her by the master bringing about health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and miscarriages
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes there are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten embryos, and it has been verified that one woman miscarried six, and another one all ten that were formed. The cause of this was made known through the measurement by the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And therefore it is necessary for the midwife to know well this little figure of that which she may encounter, and thus she will be prepared for it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the dead fetus
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it has not yet come out, and you wish to use an operation with the hand, then you should consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and does not have any of the accidents which could cause harm to her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is necessary for the woman to be placed on her back with her hips elevated and her head lowered inward, and her thighs raised up.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant should hold both of her knees or she should be bound in that manner on the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you should moisten the mouth of the womb with oiled honey and dough made from marshmallow, fenugreek, and sesame seed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should grease her hand with those oils and doughs, and then gently insert her hand into the womb, and seek out with her hand where the hooks of the fetus are located.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the convenient places for this are: then you should consider if the fetus is prepared to come out on its head, and thus you should find the hooks in its heels or in the neck or in the mouth or in the palate or below the beard or in the clavicle or in the places near the ribs or below the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the coming out is on its buttocks, then in the perineum or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand and place the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and gently insert the hand and place the hook in one of those places which we have mentioned, until you reach the cause of the blockage.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and place another hook or the third if it is necessary, so that there may be equal attraction, and not only extension according to its nature.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And thus it should be done in all deliveries, so that the coming out of it is made easier just as it is done in teeth before their extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary that in that which is between them the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to grease some of her fingers with oil and gently insert them and rotate them where it has been retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore if the delivery of the fetus is delayed, then the hooks should be changed to another place where it can be more easily pushed out; and do this until the whole fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is extended before the other one and it is not possible to reduce it because of the constriction of it, then cloth should be wrapped around that one; and then extract that one until the whole is delivered, and cut it either at the junction of the hand or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus you should do with the other hand and with both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	"If the head of the fetus is large, or obstruction occurs during delivery, or it is in the contracted pelvis, then it is necessary to introduce the said spina spatula and split the head to remove the water, or use an instrument called 'alundat'."
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	"And similarly if the fetus has a large head by nature: and then it is necessary to use tongs, or use an instrument called 'alundat' as we have said before; and promptly extract the bones with forceps."
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	"If the head is exited but stuck beneath the pubic bone, then it should be split open so that the fluid in the cavity may drain out."
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	"But if there is no complication and no obstruction to delivery, then you should incise the head immediately as soon as it is possible for you."
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	"And if the left side of the abdomen is inflamed or there is a hydrocele, then it is necessary for you to puncture that area so that the fluid may be drained."
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	"But if the fetus is above its own weight, then its attraction will be lighter and its direction towards the mother's mouth will be easier."
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	"But if it is stuck beneath the abdomen and the cavity, then you should extract it with cloth that you will have wrapped around your hand, and split open the abdomen and cavity so that water may flow out from them."
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	"But if the other members are out and the head turns back, then insert your left hand; but if the mother's mouth is filled, then insert your hand into the bird's throat, grasp the head with it, and pull it with those instruments into the mother's mouth, and promptly insert a hook or two hooks and pull it with them."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	"And if the mother's mouth is obstructed by an abscess that has formed there, then it should not be troubled over it; but at that time it is necessary to administer evacuation of thick moist causes."
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	"And apply plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten."
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	"And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible it should be turned; and it should be administered as we have said for a live fetus."
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	"But if that is not possible, then it should be incised in pieces, and it should be extracted."
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	"And you must not leave any cause behind inside the uterus."
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	"And when you have completed all your operation, then administer as we have said for the treatment of burns that have occurred in the mother."
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	"And if bleeding occurs, then apply lint soaked in astringent waters and administer the other treatment."
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	"And I have already seen a woman whose womb contained a dead fetus, and she became pregnant again promptly thereafter, and the other fetus was also dead."
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	"It happens that an abscess forms in the womb for a long time; it swells inside until it bursts, and it begins to discharge watery blood."
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	"And I was called to treat it, and I treated it for a long time, but the ulcer did not heal."
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	"Then I applied plasters of strong attraction for these causes, and after some days an bone came out from it, and again after a few days another bone came out. And I was greatly amazed because there are no bones in the womb."
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	"And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus."
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	"So I healed the ulcer, and extracted many bones from it, and the woman remained in her usual condition, and she lived thus for a long time with only a little discharge of watery blood."
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	"And I do not affirm that this is strange, but rather it shows that in this there is science and help for what the skilled physician administers with his hand by means of treatment."
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	"Of the shapes of the instruments necessary to extract the fetus."
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	"The shape of a hook with which the uterus is dilated:"
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	"This is the form of the dilator on which the threads are wound, and to this winding are attached two hooks at both ends of two strings."
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	"But this hook must be more slender than the dilator, and it should be made of silver or of wood from boxwood."
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	"And each rod should be two fingers wide and one finger thick at the edge of each, and each should be a hand and a half long; and in the middle of both rods there are two attachments for that same rod which are already fixed, each of which is about a hand and a few digits long, and each is two fingers or a little more wide."
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	"And these two attachments are inserted into the mouth of the uterus so that it may be dilated with them when you turn the two specified hooks."
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	"Another form similar to this, but more slender and lighter:"
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	"It should be made of silver or boxwood according to the shape of forceps."
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	"But at the end of it there are two attachments like this, and each attachment is about two fingers wide."
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	"And when you want to dilate the uterus with them, then have the woman lie down on her back with her feet hanging down, and open what is between the lips of it."
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	"And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps when wound according to how much you want of the opening of the uterus, until it is as wide as you wish."
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	"The shape of the hook which the ancients called:"
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	"The shape of an elevator with which the fetus is pushed out:"
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	"The shape of a scoop with which the large head is covered"
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	"And it is similar to forceps, with teeth at the end like this, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this shape, with teeth like those of a rake with which it is inserted and covered."
Forma de amesidat pauc:	"The shape of a small scoop:"
Forma de unci havent una spina:	"The shape of a hook having one spine:"
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	"The shape of a hook having two spines:"
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	"The shape of forceps with which the head of the fetus is covered, with teeth like those of a comb:"
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	"The shape of tongs having two ends with which the head is cut off:"
Forma de dos espatums latz:	"The shape of two wide-spaced tongs:"
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	"All these instruments are used, and the more species there are of it and the better prepared they are by the artisan, the easier his operation is and the greater benefit he brings to men because of their quantity."
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	"And do not neglect these instruments, whatever they may be, for the use of them is not excusable."
De extraccio de la segondina.	"Of the extraction of the secondine:"
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	"When the secondine is retained during childbirth, then you should command the sick woman to hold her breath, and immediately make her sneeze with conditions, and stretch your hand over the mouth of it and over her nose, and if it comes out by this means, so much the better."
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	"And if not, then you should take some water and pierce it with a straw, and boil these herbs in that water to wash the mouth of the uterus: calamint, rue, aneth, camomile, scordium arabicum, cassia lignea, and centaurium."
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	"All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the cauldron, and then boil that over the fire."
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	"And immediately place a reed cannula into the mouth of the uterus, so that steam may come to the concave part of it."
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	"Then make the patient sneeze as we have said, and quickly remove the second one."
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	"If the previous treatment is not effective and the stone is not expelled, then order the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in an infusion of marshmallow, and with this she should enter the vagina and seek out the second stone, and once found, carefully extract it little by little. But if it is stuck in the entrance of the womb, then insert your second hand as recommended earlier, and when you have found the second stone, remove it gently according to the correct procedure so that the uterus does not suffer excessive traction."
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	"The sheets should be changed on both the right and left sides with ease."
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	"And also it should be adjusted in the amount of traction, for it will obey and avoid adhesion."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	"If the mouth of the womb is obstructed, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medication using olive oil with herbs."
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	"But if it is not expelled despite all the causes that we have mentioned, then make sure you do not tire yourself out in your efforts to remove it. However, what comes out of there should be placed on a cloth near the woman's genitals, and then it should be cauterized with pitch and tterafarmacon; for this will cause it to dry up little by little and dissolve and eventually come out."
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	"But when it dries up, it causes a bad odor in the head and stomach, which leads to illness. And at that point, fumigations and other appropriate remedies should be administered for this condition."
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	"But some of the Ancients were already aware of the use of fumigation with nasturtium leaves and dried figs."
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	"Method for using an instrument with which a woman is fumigated during the retention of menstruation and lochia:"
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	"Let bloodletting be done or a plaster applied."
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	"And let the narrow end be placed in the cone and the wide end over the fire, and gentle fumes be placed over the embers of the fire."
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	"And hold that until that gentle fumigation is consumed, then repeat another."
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	"Treatment for an unperforated child's buttocks."
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	"The child's navel and buttocks are not pierced; they are still subtle and closed."
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	"Then tell the midwife to pierce that navel with her sharp needle; if not, pierce it with a pointed needle, taking care not to touch the skin."
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	"And then place this linen soaked in wine and oil on it, and carefully clean that wound so that it may be healed."
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	"But if you fear it is closed, then place a cannula in the wound for several days until the child wants to feed."
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	"And if the wound closes due to a consolidation or an abscess, then it is necessary that this consolidation be incised and properly treated with what we have mentioned about treatment and lead."
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	"Regarding the treatment of fistulas that develop from these wounds."
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	"The fistulas that develop in the lower part of the buttocks are usually large and thick, those that develop near the anus outside or in the space between the two cheeks."
E es una fistula o motas.	"And it is one fistula or several."
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	"And since this swelling is ancient and comes from moist, thick white humors or subtle corruption, sometimes these fistulas have some penetrating openings."
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	"And these openings are known through that which is issuing from them by way of exit and windiness; sometimes the patient expels it themselves, and often worms come out."
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	"And sometimes these fistulas enter into the urinary bladder through those penetrating openings, and also into the flesh of the penis; and some of these openings extend to the junction of the thighs and into the groin."
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	"And the way to recognize a penetrating fistula entering the anus and not visible from the outside is by placing your little finger inside the anus and then probing gently with a fine thread of silk or iron until you reach the fistula."
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	"But if there is tortuosity (twisting) in that direction, then insert a fine thread of lead or horsehair into the fistula until you feel it brush against your little finger."
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	"And if you do not feel it at all nor perceive any cause of expulsion, worms, or windiness as we have said before, then you will know that the fistula is not penetrating, and therefore you can proceed to its treatment."
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	"And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then its significance is urinary leakage from that area, and prohibition of its use until the place is healed as it should be according to medical practice."
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	"But if it penetrates into the junction of the thighs or into the bone and its surroundings with pain in the affected area, then the sign is that the probe passes through there if there is no tortuosity within the bone, and pain at the outset; and that pus always issues from there, and that nothing helps, nor does it heal with ointments."
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	"And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is a matter of discussion among foolish physicians on which we do not stand firm."
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	"But in that one which is not penetrating and is not ancient, healing with iron is expected as I will recommend to you, and what I have already said."
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	"And the disease causes pain between his buttocks, more particularly on the left side and elevates the cheeks of the buttocks, with the thighs inclined towards the belly of the patient. Then insert a probe of lead or iron if there is tortuosity in the fistula until you know where it passes."
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	"And if that person feels pain around the anus, then you should insert your little finger into the anus."
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel the tent through your finger and it is already exposed penetrating, or if you feel something between your finger and that flesh, then certainly know that it has penetrated; and therefore do not work on that, for it is not in that area.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some say that it is healthy in some men to be hard-hearted.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the treatment by which it is hoped that the patient will be benefited is this: you kindle a cautery with great subtlety according to the width of the fistula, as was previously described, and insert that burning iron into the fistula until it reaches around the buttocks; and apply it again two or three times until you know that all those flesh joined by the fistula are already burnt, like the feathers of a bird's quill.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then dress that with wet bandages wrapped in wool until all those burnt flesh are healed, and afterwards dress it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, good. But if not, then it will never be healed by any other treatment at any time.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters but does not penetrate within the depth of the said buttock, and there is some space between that and the probe which is wrapped in flesh or cloth, then open the fistula where its surface is level with the spine, and cut off the skin at the beginning of the fistula, and insert the probe into the fistula until the incision reaches to the place where the end of the probe arrives; and through the probe it will be freed and cured.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those flesh joined by the fistula which are like bird's feather quills, so that they do not break off for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood often flows between you and your operation when you touch those flesh, then it is a wound, and it should be cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for cauterizing with fire is suitable for two habits: it joins those joined flesh together and cuts off the blood and dries out the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then dress it with wet bandages wrapped in wool or cloth until the place gets warm; and then cure the wound with medicines that generate and consolidate hard flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And those medicines are astringent and drying; when it is restored, then it will be healed and there will be no recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	"However, if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and extends beyond its surface, then insert your finger into the anus and explore with it."
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	"If you find the vessel, and between it and the rectum there is nothing but skin or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then do not operate on it, but rather through faith and hope."
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	"There are three ways to manage this: either cauterize it as we have said; or cut into it until you achieve the concavity that allows you to enter the parts and facilitate healing; but do not proceed with cutting unless necessary so as not to damage the contents of the rectum, and so that you do not incur blame for acting against nature's will. Rather, treat it with what we have said if you want a speedy recovery. Or else extend this membrane and cleanse the pus from within the perineum, as we have said, either with a probe or another instrument with a sharp tip; then thoroughly wash these fistulous tissues which are in the sectioned area using a cauterizing method; finally strive to restore all the parts that were cut away."
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	"And when the fistula is seen to be finished in this manner: namely, when you insert the probe into the fistula and it emerges from the surface of the skin around the anus or at the margin of the buttocks, then take a probe with a perforated tip, which is shaped like a needle for preparing hearts thus:"
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	"And insert it into that opening wrapped in linen or cotton, and then insert the probe with the filament into the fistula until you achieve its concavity."
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	"But if it is penetrating into the margin of the anus from behind, then remove the filament from that passage so that you can insert your probe as described earlier. Then extract the tip of the filament and tie the two ends together with a knot; twist each end separately; leave this for one or two days; and when you have incised the skin around it, cleanse it thoroughly so that those tissues which are between the two ends of the filament become exposed."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	"And then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed."
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way you have prepared yourself, but do so gently, for it is not your task to cause injury to the skin. And then treat it until it is healed."
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	"The shape of the spatha spinos used to incise the fistula is such that one end is very sharp and the other end is not sharp. This way you will not cut unnecessarily as often happens."
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	"Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the incision of those (hemorrhoids):"
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	"Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they are between the buttocks resembling coal or they appear like growths of fat."
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	"And those are small and large, from which blood always flows and is one, and there are many, and they are outside the anus, and at its extremities."
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	"But those that are outside the anus occur more often in those with little humidity, from which citrine water or a bit of blood continuously flows, and they vary in color."
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	"And the treatment for those inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and squeeze while they exhale, so that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear."
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	"Then you grasp with tweezers or your nail and squeeze those hard ones close to their roots."
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	"But if the tweezers do not hold those hard ones due to their humidity and softness, then take them with rough cloth or cotton or wool wadding, squeeze them with your fingers, cut them close to their roots, and apply some powdered myrrh near the incision, so that they are cauterized in place. Or else cauterize them as it was said in the chapter on cauterization."
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"And then treat those with the other cure until they are healed."
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	"And if the anus does not obey to evacuation, then cauterize the patient with a cautery having a small bite, and wash it with water that is in the anus so that it may evacuate easily when the patient squeezes."
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is slight, and it suffices for you to grasp them with your nail or tweezers, cut them, and then treat them with water as we have said until they are healed."
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	"And if you make an incision, then administer sutures in this manner: take a thread and insert it into a needle and then pull the hemorrhoid out on both sides. Then make the needle penetrate into the root of the other side, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the part that is far from the needle, and do this crosswise. Then tie the hemorrhoid tightly with the thread, and cut off the excess thread."
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	"And do this to all of them, leaving one alone without tying it, so that the superfluous blood may flow out from that one."
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	"And then put a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote on the anus, and put another one on the buttocks. Then command the patient to remain quiet."
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then leave that one inside until it falls off; and when it has fallen off, treat it with ointment or with another cure until it is healed."
De curacio de fistulas.	"On the treatment of fistulas."
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	"Frequently occurs due to dryness of the skin or constriction of nature."
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	"And since those are old and not useful for this medicine, it is necessary that you remove them with the point of a scalpel or with your nail until they are moistened and covered by pus on top, which prevents their consolidation; and thus cure those that have already consolidated."
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	"Then you remove them with a vehement scraping until the first blood appears and they are scraped clean; and thus cure those that have healed."
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	"And here is the key to treating hemorrhoids."
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	"Know that hemorrhoids, which are called the key of disease, are not round like the head of a nail, but they are found throughout the body and especially in those parts near the buttocks and rectum. And it is through these that you should examine them."
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	"And then it is necessary that what is in the circuit of the key be incised and held with forceps or a hook, and completely eradicated from its root; and thus cure it."
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	"If you wish, cauterize the second one that is mentioned in its chapter."
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	"But a verruca is a small, rough, flesh-colored bump with a round base that appears on the surface of the body, and many are found in children."
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	"The treatment for it [a verruca] is to stretch out and incise that [the verruca], or remove it with a file or a scalpel until it bleeds."
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	"And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or with an acute medicine, as we have said."
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	"And now that these external and internal hemorrhoids have been eradicated with the instrument which I mentioned."
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	"But a formica [wart] is a small, flat or fistulated bump on the surface of the body that appears frequently on the face. When it is touched, it feels like an ant bite and is found throughout the body."
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	"The treatment for it [a wart] is to take a quill from an owl or a vulture feather, and it should be thick. Place the quill on the wart so that its tip contains thewart within its circle; then rotate your hand with the quill so that you incise what is in the circuit of the wart, and press down on the skin around it, and thus eradicate the root of the wart."
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish, do this with a cautery needle or iron according to this method:"
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	"That the tip of the needle should be thin and blunt (i.e. not perforated), wrapped in such a way that when it is placed on the said part, its edge is sharpened and its rotation made easier."
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	"And if you wish to cauterize the wart according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery regarding anthrax."
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	"Regarding the forms of instruments used for giving cautery."
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	"Sometimes cautery is done with silver or lead or melted wax or dough. And sometimes it is done with those instruments which are small or large according to those that are used, for the one used in treating young children should be small; and those whose handles are curved or elongated, their cauteries should be small."
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	"The method of cautery that is large and rare:"
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	"That the head of the cautery needle above which the bag is tied should be wide in this manner, and that at its distinction where the bag is tied it should be like this."
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	"And the lower extremity of it which is inserted into the bag should be blunt (i.e. not open) and thickened towards subtlety; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays, i.e. the larger the ray, the wider the hole."
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	"And let the bag in which the medicines of bladder or sheep's wool are placed be one palm long."
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	"And it should be pierced with many holes around it, the space between which is equal to the thickness of the finger."
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	"And then insert into those holes strong boiling oil of unripe olives, or pour it around them. Then adjust the bag onto it [the cautery needle]; and when the bag is placed on it, tighten it at the head of the cautery between two distinctions with a strong constriction, and then cauterize each hole: But be careful to not let the medicine in the bag become too hot or too cold."
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	"And then the patient should lie on his back, elevate his buttocks, and place beneath them a cloth upon which he may rest or a towel. Then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or albumen of egg or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; then insert it into the bag easily, and then the assistant should take the bag and squeeze it with two hands repeatedly with vigor until all that is in the cautery is expelled into the bowl. Then remove the cautery and the patient should raise his buttocks against the wall."
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	"And if the medicine forces it out to emission, let him hold it thus until he can no longer. And if he sleeps with it overnight, it is more beneficial."
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	"But if you cauterize him in cases of loose bowels and emission of feces from the anus, then repeat the cautery until he is healed."
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	"And if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then use a thin and thick cautery needle like those used for children."
De curacio de las plaguas.	"On the treatment of plague:"
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	"And I have already mentioned in the section on the treatment of plague what was appropriate for this book, and now I will say how those who are sick with it should be treated with medicine according to the complete regimen."
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	"I say that plague is differentiated according to what kind of plague is present and according to the place where the plague strikes."
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	"And the causes for which plague often occurs are such as: cutting with a sword or knife, piercing with a dart or scissors, striking with a lance or club or arrow, and similar things caused by many causes."
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	"But plague that occurs in the parts of the body is such as: plague that falls upon the head, neck, chest, abdomen, thigh, and similar things on the members."
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	"And I am recounting the treatment of certain plague wounds because this reasoning and rule may also be applied to other kinds of plague wounds."
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	"And I will begin with simple head plague wounds, because the memory of compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	"I say that when a simple head wound occurs and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it was caused by a blow from a sword or similar thing, and the chain has been broken only on one side and it is a large wound and you fear that an abscess may follow, then promptly perform a cephalic incision and flebotomy on him and do not delay this; and draw out from him as much blood as possible according to the amount of its strength if there is no other cause prohibiting flebotomy, especially if the blood which has issued from the wound is little."
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	"And let the flebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part, and keep the patient from sneezing, drinking wine, and eating heavy foods."
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	"But if you prohibit some cause because of its minuteness, then let him be weakened in his diet and not approach meat or wine."
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	"And if an abscess follows upon the wound, then cut into it with oil boiled rose oil or with wine in which has been steeped."
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	"If you are certain of an abscess, then place a poultice on it, if it is fresh with its own blood and the air has not yet changed there around the powder which I will recommend shortly."
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	"And if the air has already changed there, then place a poultice on it until it is healed."
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	"However, if the wound is large or due to an incision and its edges are not aligned properly because of dust, then approximate those edges with stitches according to my instructions on wound closure."
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	"If the wound is already exposed to the bone and there's no retention of it but only a small suspension, then incise that area and properly cure the wound with medications. Restore the flesh appropriately in place of the cord. And command the patient to be fed on foods which are coarse: heads and entrails and similar things, until they recover."
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	"If you find putrefaction in the cord and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that is purulent and remove it. And properly cure it."
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	"But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and it is not severed by medications, then inquire about the artery. And if you find that one not incised, then incise it with a scalpel, or ligate it. And if necessity compels you to do otherwise than what has been said, then cauterize until the bleeding stops."
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	"And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is light. Therefore, you powder those with this powder, because they will consolidate before the air can change them."
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	"And the manner of making this powder is as follows: Take oil of sesame one part, blood of dragon's blood two parts, and resin of mastic three parts. All of it should be finely ground and sieved. Then fill the wound with it, and constrict it well so that it adheres to it, and coagulate it with the blood."
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	"And properly constrain that above with powders and let it be. And do not remove it while it is like this until it is well adhered, because the medicine will not desert it until it is healed."
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	"And sometimes you can use cautery alone when sesame oil and dragon's blood are not available."
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	"And this same operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to cover those with it and constrain them tightly. And these are fresh wounds with their own blood, which the air has not altered."
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"And if the air has altered them, and especially during summer time, then this powder is not intended for those wounds. But at that time treat those with what has been said above, such as applying these ointments: a mixture of white lead and olive oil, or flour paste with water and honey until they gain consistency; and properly treat those with the other remedies until they are healed."
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	"But if there is a fracture of bone in the wound and it is small, then remove that with a gesture (i.e., manipulation)."
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	"And I say here the treatment of fractures of the head as it is venomous."
De las plaguas del col.	"Regarding wounds of the neck:"
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	"But if the wound is on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound."
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	"But if the nerve or artery of the neck is cut, then if it is a nerve, there is nothing to do but avoid treating it with anything that causes violent contraction, such as vitriol and similar things which cause pain to nerves. It contracts."
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	"And do not apply any ointment to the wound because the substance of nerves is fatty and their continuity is with the brain, which is the father of all members."
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	"And if you treat it with light remedies like this: washing the wound with sweet water, sometimes infused in white or unrefined oil, and turpentine when washed with sweet water; and other minor remedies according to this manner, and moist ointments."
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	"But if the wound is large, then apply sutures or tie the lips of it, and properly treat it with powders until it is healed."
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	"But if the wound has depth or the bone at its bottom is broken into pieces, then make a hole in it at the lowest point."
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	"But if an artery is cut in the wound and there is bleeding, then separate or dry that, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary."
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the cervical vertebrae or all of them have been injured but the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with sutures over the windpipe and do not touch it; bind it evenly and reduce it to its natural figure, and properly treat it with bandages decently stretched, leaving it for some days; and properly treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed."
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	"But if the wound goes deeply into the bone and causes inflammation there, then percuss it. And if there are fragments of bone there, remove all those that you can; and what cannot be removed, leave it until the wound becomes suppurated, separated, and its inflammation is relieved."
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	"And if the wound is fresh, then powder it with that powder which I have recommended to you."
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	"But if there is a fistulous wound in the wound, then treat it with that of which I will remind you properly in its chapter."
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	"Regarding wounds of the neck or similar ones when they are between the shoulders and made with a slash or with a knife, sword, or similar."
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	"If it is a wound made by a sword or knife and its depth varies, then consider whether wind escapes from the wound when breathing; if it does, know that the wound is mortal."
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	"And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its blood, then put on it at first hour powder, but do not bind it so that the blood does not remain in the depth of it and return to the heart, aggravating the condition; rather put on a moist attractive ointment and wash it twice a day."
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	"And if the ointment is not available, then put cotton wool on the mouth of the wound so that it sucks what comes from the humidities; and make sure the patient sleeps over the wound so that what is collected there runs."
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	"But if three days or more have passed since the wound and there is no spasm nor heart failure nor respiratory difficulty in the patient, and other dispositions are good for him, know that the wound is saved. Then treat it with bandages and other remedies until it is healed."
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	"But if the healing of it is delayed and much time has passed, know that a fistulous wound has already formed. Then treat it according to its chapter."
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	"And if the wound is made by a slash or knife and is simple on the surface of the flesh or back, then treat it with what has been mentioned about sutures if it is large, or powder if it is small."
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	"But if inflammation has already occurred in the bone and pieces of it have been cut off, then twist the wound and try to extract those pieces if they are separated."
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	"But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound becomes suppurated, as their extraction will be easier then."
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	"And regarding other accidental wounds in the other members, the remedy in treatment is the same as what we have said."
De las plaguas del ventre.	"Regarding abdominal wounds."
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	"The condition that occurs in the belly may be great, small, or moderate."
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	"From a large hernia, sometimes the intestine or nerve of the intestine can be seen protruding, so the insertion and suture of them must be done with more force and more subtlety."
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	"And a small rupture is difficult to repair by another method, and so its reduction is more difficult if you don't promptly perform its insertion back into its place, because if it breaks open and becomes swollen then its reinsertion is made difficult."
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	"And therefore the best rupture is moderate, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the hernia, as is difficult in both kinds mentioned before."
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	"And you should know that there are four ways to suture the belly, but two of these sutures are common and suitable for the suturing of other wounds on the body."
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	"And the other two sutures are more specific to the belly wound, although they can also be used for other wounds."
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	"And I recommend to you each one with its exposition and explanation."
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	"Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the hernia has come out through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, there are two ways to do this: either because of the smallness of the rupture, as we have said, or because the intestine has become inflamed due to the cold air."
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	"And therefore, when it is like this, you should then make an incision so that you submerge a sponge or cloth dampened in warm water alone, or with vinegar, celery seed, and spice, and dress the hernia with it until the inflammation has been resolved."
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	"And sometimes do this with wine in which there is astringency, and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation."
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	"And therefore, when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you moisten the hernia with water in which marshmallow and mallows have been cooked, because this relieves the pain without much cause."
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	"But if the pain has not been relieved by this treatment, then cut the rupture a little with an instrument with which you have previously cauterized hemorrhoids."
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	"And the first treatment is better when it is proper that it not be cut, and there is no need to cut except in necessity and deficiency."
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	"What about the instrument? Describe its shape:"
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	"One part of it is cut sharp and the other not-sharp, with a pointed tip that is not too fine like a scalpel, rather it should be somewhat blunt."
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	"And therefore, when the wound has widened and the hernia has come out, then its reduction should be according to its natural form, in its proper place if possible, for this is better."
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	"But when the rupture is wide and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on his back and elevate his hips as much as his head; but if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then elevate the head of the bed and raise the feet as much as possible."
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	"And similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, then always place your intention and consideration there so that the side in which the wound is may be higher than the other."
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	"And this should be done for both large and medium-sized wounds."
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	"And in small wounds, do what you have prepared for it, but especially make sure that the one who ministers is among your closest associates, who holds the rupture entirely with his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and especially uncover from that to this so that the suturing may be done without any other cause."
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	"And this is the common method of suturing: first take the needle, or count needles according to the amount of the width of the wound; and then leave it at the end of the index finger, and thread the needle with one thread, but do not put a knot in both ends of the string, with two threads of the gut that is on the left side of the string, so that you make this penetrate from there into that part; and now you have four orders."
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	"And then thread with doubled gut around the needle, and sometimes thread two parts together, and then attach both lips and the wound decently by suturing; and then leave the thickness of your finger and insert another needle there, and then tie it with gut like the first one with its needle; and do not stop doing this until you have completed all the contraction of the wound."
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	"And let the needles be medium in thickness and subtlety, for thin needles cut too easily into the flesh, and thick ones are difficult to insert into the gut; therefore they should be medium in both thickness and subtlety."
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	"And it is not necessary to insert the needle into both ends of the gut at once, for if the flesh is cut too easily and the wound opens before its consolidation."
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	"And do not prolong the suturing so that the wound may not be hindered from consolidation."
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	"And then cut off the ends of the needles so that the patient may not be disturbed while sleeping; and then place over the suturing powdered breadcrumbs on both sides, which will hold the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the wound is consolidated."
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	"And these kinds of suturing with needles are more convenient for small wounds, for it is enough to suture them with one needle or two or around those."
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	"But the second kind of suturing is common: it is that you suture the four ends of the gut and both ends of the gut in one go with a needle which has gut wound around it in subtlety and thickness."
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	"And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that same part where you began, so that the gut may draw up from the most elevated part of the wound, so that the suturing is like sewing with cloth, in which the threads are drawn tight."
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	"And place between each suture the thickness of your little finger."
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	"And this suturing is known to men."
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	"And with this suturing, I closed a wound that had been accidentally inflicted on a man in his belly who had been stabbed with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was more than a palm wide, and it was issuing from the bowels around two palms of the bowel near the middle, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it after the bowel had been forced out by the wound for twenty-four hours."
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	"And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and I cured that man and he is healed; and even now he lives many years after, and is well disposed in his affairs."
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	"And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle he was healed, for I did not cure him with any ointment, for it was in a place where no ointment could be applied nor any medicine, but I put upon the wound cotton dipped twice a day in honey water until he was healed."
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	"But I will tell two kinds of suturing proper according to the narrative of the Word."
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	"And it is that you begin with the suturing of the gut, and enter the needle from without to within."
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	When the needle enters the spine and that joint, following the straightness and length of the entire body, leaving the end of the needle in what has been pierced; then make the needle enter from inside to outside on the other end of the muscle.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then when you have made it penetrate once, then make it penetrate again in that same joint of the muscle from outside to inside; and leave the end of the needle that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other end from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And then with that penetration where you make it penetrate into the needle at the end of the muscle which is on the inside, everything should penetrate.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And moreover, start from this same side and pull that with the end which is of the needle on the other side, and remove the needle from the spine which has penetrated, and then put it back into that spine and join the end of the needle which is on the other side with this end of the muscle; and remove that needle from the spine which is on the other side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and again, and do it once more with one more stroke inside that you consider everything is done according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you should use skin sutures with which to sew the skin, in such a way that you sew the needle once from the side of the spine's end, and then leave it inside until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Moreover, the second type of suturing which is specifically mentioned by Guy de Chauliac, and this concerns only the muscle and its recommendation is that you sew it in half with the aid of some medicine, so that each part adheres to its corresponding part according to nature; and they apply the end of one side to the other end of the muscle, and that is done according to what I recommend to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You should leave the needle in the end of the muscle near the defect and make it penetrate into the interior of that part, leaving both ends of the needle outside; then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from outside to inside through both ends of the muscle.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn those loops again, and make each loop penetrate from inside the interior part to outside the exterior part on both ends of the muscle except for that which is on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suturing is better than common light suturing, and it is the type of suturing which I have previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is what Guy de Chauliac said
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	Moreover, some say that abdominal suturing is corrected with two needles, so you should insert a thread into these loops and begin with the needle insertion from where it is necessary for you to do so, and make it penetrate inside the other side according to the suturing of those who sew the intestines equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the abdomen, abdominal suturing at that point is more difficult than elsewhere on the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the treatment of plague is judged by other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which means that when you encounter fresh plague with its own blood before the air alters it, and reduce the wound and sew it up and dress it properly, then you apply powder of cinnabar on it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then you apply to it some ointments which are present at that time before they make a hard crust and draw out the threads, and let them be consolidated both inside and outside; and then cure it like other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have medicines present at that time, then apply something to it immediately, for it begins to emit bad smell and soon changes color twice a day, as I have shown you, until it is healed, because you will not need other medications in many cases when the plague is simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the plague may communicate to the main limbs, then you should submerge lion's wool in good quality olive oil or rose oil and apply it around the area between the anus and leave it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in its bowels, which happens many times, then you should crystallize it with black treacle and vinegar, especially if the putrefaction has reached the bowel and an exiting wound has been made penetrating into its concavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that those which are in the large intestine have easier healing than those which are in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal that intestine which is called "gizzard" because it does not receive healing of plague that enters into it at all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it, and its great magnitude, and its subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the plague is tissue, and you encounter it fresh, then reduce it according to your discretion with which you reduce intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed some time and it has become green or black, then stretch it with thread over the location that is discolored from it, so that there comes out flow of blood, because in the tissue there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then incise that which is other than that thread and leave two ends of the thread pendant from the opening outside the plague so that you may be relieved of the attraction of it, because of the closing of the tissue and emission of the smell of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Reminder about plague when it occurs in the bowel.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When rupture occurs in the intestine and is severe, it may be possible to restore it in some men.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore I pursued the treatment of him as if he were not destined to be cured, but rather to subtiliate that wound which had been healed and the place was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw that the place was consolidated, therefore I advised him to pay attention to his health after this misfortune in his belly; and not to become too careless with his meals and drinks, but rather to enter between baths and exercise himself in his customs.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones have said that when rupture occurs in the intestine and is severe, it is necessary to tie it according to this manner: take frogs with large heads; then adjust the two lips of the rupture and place one frog of those that have their mouth open on the two lips of the rupture; therefore when it presses on them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and is not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And also place another frog near the first one, and do not cease doing this until you have used as many frogs as there is length of the rupture.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce it and close the rupture; those attached heads will remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed, without causing any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is also possible to tie the intestine with a fine thread made from the gut of an animal, because it is more suitable for this purpose. Take the end of such threads and remove as much fat as possible; then tie the end of it with the thread in a loop knot, and insert that thread through a needle and sew up the intestine at the rupture, reducing it there.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with frogs is merely a matter of faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the rupture is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, because then it does not result in mere suturing but rather in merely a narrowing, and not a healing of the entire intestine.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the treatment of wounds and fistulas
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every rupture or abscess when it becomes hollowed out and ancient, and is not consolidated and continually discharges pus without being cut open, then in whatever limb it may be, it is universally called a fistula, and we call it that wound.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And truly speaking, a fistula is a hard and rough nodule that is white in color and does not cause pain or discomfort, just like the concavity of the claw of an owl; therefore it was named "alcus rictus", which means "penis".
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in moist ulcers there is discharge of pus; but soon after the moisture is cut off, it becomes dry.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Sometimes this moisture is abundant, sometimes scarce and thick or thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	"As previously stated in the division, whenever I discuss ulcers that do not heal nor are on bare skin, they are not so except for one of these reasons: either due to scarcity of blood in the body; or due to the malice of the wound; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh preventing the generation of flesh; or because it has much lees; or because that ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter that passes through it is of bad quality; or because the medicine used in its treatment was inappropriate; or when corruption occurs in the region, and there is pestilence; or due to the nature of the region, such as Endevé near Saragossa, where difficult digestion of illnesses occurs and delay in the healing of ulcers happens naturally; or because it contains a bone or many bones."
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	"All these causes have been explained, along with their symptoms and the treatments for them in the division [of medicine]."
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	"And it is also necessary that I inform you about the treatment of fistulas, which is performed through surgery using a scalpel."
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	"And you should know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body. Some are related to large veins and arteries, others to nerves, the bladder, or some of the ribs, or certain vertebrae of the back, or certain joints composed by composition like those of the hand and foot; and there are also those that arise near the main member and similar ones."
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	"And therefore, among these fistulas, those that are difficult to heal and do not receive treatment are considered incurable. They are caused by carelessness, ignorance, and negligence."
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	"And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach those places that have been mentioned, and you hope to heal it but are uncertain about its treatment, then take a probe made of lead or iron, and if the fistula runs straight, examine it with that."
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	"But if the fistula is tortuous, then examine it with a probe made of thin lead, because lead due to its weight will bend and follow the twists."
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	"And if the fistula emits horrible sounds, it is not possible for you to examine it with a probe."
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	"Therefore, relieve the horrific sounds with your sounds, because the moisture that you use to rinse it will also go down the other openings and channels."
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	"And properly inquire and examine to determine whether you have touched the ear or nerve, whether the fistula is long or short, whether it has many openings with horrible sounds that are all covered by the skin of its entire surface. Then with your full strength, examine the disease, discover the cause of the pain through pressure with your hand over the area, and similar signs and accidental causes related to an abscess."
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	"And once you have examined all these causes with true diligence, then proceed to the treatment with confidence. Consider whether the fistula is close or in a sound location, remote from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the other places that I mentioned earlier."
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Now dry out the fistula as it was said earlier regarding its treatment. Remove what is inside that filtration and any rotting flesh, and also remove whatever has been born from the opening of the flesh or the boil and similar things. Then cure the wound until it is healed."
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	"But if the fistula is deep and runs straight, then you should insert into it as much of the probe as possible. Then carefully remove all rotting flesh from it. Next, apply compresses wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula that you have filled with iron."
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	"And do this several times until the sharp medicine has burnt away all the rotting flesh inside the cavity of the fistula."
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	"Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh, until it is healed."
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	"But if it is not healed by this method, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended."
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	"But if the cause of the fistula is an ear injury and you are certain of this, then examine it and dry it out according to what we have recommended, provided that you do not prohibit any cause related to veins, nerves, or main members as mentioned earlier."
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	"But if the ear is exposed and there is no rotting or blackness in it, then clean out that area until all rotting is removed. Then cure it with something that encourages flesh growth until it is healed."
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	"And if it does not heal and keeps oozing like before, then you should know that you have not yet achieved complete eradication of the rottenness. Therefore, uncover it again and carefully investigate its cause and thoroughly cleanse it with your strongest remedy. Then restore it."
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	"And if it is healed, then that's good. But if not, you should know that the rotting is deep inside the body and has not been reached. In such case, there is nothing more you can do for it."
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	"And if the ear is rotting and small, or if it is possible to pull it out, then you should pull it out with fine forceps suitable for that purpose."
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	"And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave behind any cause with your full strength."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	"But if you encounter any difficulty due to humidity during the incision, and there is no fear or mistake in its performance, then incise those membranes or flesh if it is present, and relieve the bones."
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	"But if you are not able to remove the bones at that moment, then place over the wound something that will prevent it from closing up. Leave it there until it is around those flesh and membrane bones, and guard the wound so that it does not heal and consolidate, and keep the section that you have incised in your operation open."
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	"Wait, if you fear that the wound may close up, place over it a poultice immersed in warm oil, or a poultice immersed in Egyptian pitch, or one of the green ointments. For when these membranes and bones are separated by ablation, attraction is alleviated."
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	"But if it is a large bone like the leg or arm bone, and only the surface of it is rotting, then clean out that area with a strong remedy alone until all blackness and rottenness are removed. Then restore the wound."
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	"But if a large part of the bone is rotting and the rottenness has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that up and completely incise it where the rotting has reached. Then cure it until it is consolidated."
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	"And I recommend to you what is suitable for a man in his thigh so that you place those things on it as examples and assistants during your operation."
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	"A young man of about 30 years old experienced pain in his thigh. An apostema had formed on the inside of the thigh, extending into the body so that the apostema was large. The cause was not external."
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	"And then much time passed with that because of the error of doctors in not opening up the apostema. Much matter flowed out from it, and its treatment was stopped until the leg became fistulous. Many openings appeared in the flesh around the wound which all released putridity and the humidity of the body."
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	"Then many doctors gathered around for two years, but there was little knowledge among them regarding this matter."
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	"And he saw the bed and the blood flowing from him, as if from a great wound; but his body was already stiffened and its color was yellow."
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	"And then I inserted my finger into one of those wounds and reached the bone."
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	"Then examine carefully all the orifices and find those which come from all parts of the chamber."
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	"And then you take and cut upon one of those orifices which you discover a part of the bone, and uncover that corrupted one, and it was already rotten and corrupt and dirty; and already a part of the chamber had rotted into which it had penetrated to the middle."
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	"And then you close that which I had discovered and prepared of the bone uncovered."
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	"And you knew it was not in the bone but in that corruption which you cut out and closed, and you had already removed."
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	"Indeed, we paused the restoration of the plague by consolidated medicine for a long time, but it was not consolidated."
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	"And indeed you opened and discovered upon the bone secondly upon the first discovery, and found continuous corruption with the bone."
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	"I closed what appeared to me from that corruption, and indeed you performed fair the cure of it and restoration, but it was not restored."
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	"And then you discovered upon it again and did not cease to cut into the bone little by little particularly and perform the restoration of it, but it was not restored until you cut around about a palm's width, and that extracted with its marrow, and indeed you restored that with medicines, and it is consolidated lightly and healed."
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	"And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it unless for the disposition of the frailty of it and for the scarcity of its tolerance of it and fear of death because it lies in all hours for superfluity of evacuation and bad syncope."
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	"Therefore, healed is by entire healing, and nothing remains in place of hard flesh; and it is well disposed in its proper body and returns its virtue; and it has been converted in its dispositions and does not do anything contrary to it in ambulation nor harm in any cause."
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	"But if it is prominent in place of the body already broken, then you should section it in this manner: and that you take linen and strengthen it on the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to stretch it out thus; and pause that linen bandage as thick as the first bandage; and indeed lay it upon the flesh that is distant from the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh away from its sides, and you uncover the flesh on the place where you wish to saw, so that the saw does not touch the flesh."
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	"And pause a piece of wood or board on the side of the bone decently, for when you do this the saw is not prohibited from cutting the corrupt flesh."
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	"And it is necessary that the sawing be done little by little on the corrupted place, for if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, force may have to saw it again."
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	"And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then it is one continuous part with another, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it; therefore you uncover the flesh from all parts altogether; and indeed pause wood on that side, and indeed saw it from the first part where the corruption is until it is continuous with the sawing of the other part."
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	"And let the sawing be done according to the place of the corruption little by little, as we have said."
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	"And if the corruption is at the joint, then incise that corrupted joint and saw the bone where it is continuous with the other part."
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	"But if from the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not reasonable but ingenious."
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	"And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot it is very difficult; however you should inquire how the corruption appears to you, and remove that, and cleanse it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with every ingenuity correct what you can, so that it does not harm vein or nerve."
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	"And know what are the incising tools and the saws for incising these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore you should prepare all kinds of appropriate instruments for that operation."
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	"And know that this operation signifies to you about the kind of instrument which you need; for when you have great study and long experience in the ways of this art, and knowledge of the ways of illnesses, then already you would have by yourself what is convenient for each illness among the instruments."
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	"And I will tell you in conclusion of this chapter the number of instruments which you will prepare with them simply with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience on others."
Forma de serra:	"Forma de serra:"
Forma de autra serra:	"Forma de otra serra:"
Forma de autra serra:	I'm not sure what you're asking. Could you please provide more context or clarify your question?
Forma de autra serra gran:	Large saw form:
Forma de ray:	"Rasp shape:"
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	"So that the head of this rasp is according to the shape of a star-headed key head, and its points are according to the shape of astraphox points."
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	"And it is not convenient but that with this should be rubbed the heads of joints when they are corrupted or if the mouth is wide open."
Forma de razori major dels autres:	"Shape of razor greater than others:"
Forma de razori menor:	"Form of smaller razor:"
Forma de razori lat:	"Broad razor shape:"
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	"Form of another saw properly made: let it be made in the form of a bow, its sharpness of iron, and its member made of well-made bone awl."
Forma de lu:	What do you mean by "forma de lu"? Please provide more context. Do you want to know the shape or form of something specific?
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	"Form of razor with concavity:"
Forma de razori autra subtil:	"Form of another subtle razor:"
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	"Form of another razor with curved tip:"
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	"A small knife shape resembling a lance."
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	"Shape of the incising tool with which bones are incised:"
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	"Form of another smaller incising tool:"
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	"Form of another incising tool: this one resembles a rasp, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of bones:"
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	"The shape of the rasp which is convenient for the ratio of that which is perforated by the bones:"
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	"And its extremity is triangular and has a sharp tip."
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	"And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly all the causes that we have said about razors and incising tools and saws."
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	"Of bone incision extremities and of bone sawing."
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	"Extremities can be affected either by intrinsic causes or extrinsic causes, whether you have medicated that corruption with curative medicines and the cure does not occur, or sometimes the corruption goes to the member which you do not perceive for any cause; therefore it is necessary to incise that member where the corrosion approaches, so that the illness escapes through that opening from death or harmfulness that is greater damage to the member."
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	"And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black where it was covered by fire, or the darkness approaches where putrefaction has entered into that member which seizes it and takes all the body; therefore it is necessary to incise that."
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	"And similarly if corruption is caused by the percussion of some venomous causes such as those of sea scorpi
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	"And if the corruption or percussion is at the tip of the finger, therefore you must incise the finger and not give space for the corruption to go into the hand."
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	"And similarly if it reaches the hand, therefore you must incise that at the radius of the forearm, and not give space for corruption to take hold in the forearm."
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	"And if you lift that one up, then cut into the arm between the elbow at the joint."
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	"And if another passes over corruption and envy near the joint, then death is there for the patient. And administering another cause other than that in cure is quantity of virtue."
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	"And likewise you must do to the foot when corruption reaches its end, then cut into it at one of the toes."
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	"And if you take the sole of the foot, then cut off all the foot."
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	"But if it can enter into the knee, then cut into the back at the joint of the knee."
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	"And if corruption has already reached the knee, then there is nothing to do but remission, and leave the patient to die."
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	"The manner of cutting off a limb or sawing it is that you stretch the ligaments at the place where you wish to cut, and stretch another ligament over the spot. And extend one ligament towards both sides, and extend another ligament above them. And separate the flesh which is between two ligaments with a wide knife until all the flesh is exposed. Then it may be cut off or sawn."
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	"And it is necessary that bandages of linen be applied from all sides so that the spot does not touch. And that a proper and healed scar come to the patient."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	"But if bleeding happens while working, then cauterize the spot carefully, or apply some powders that restrict blood. And return to your treatment until it is completed."
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then bind the member with a bandage in whatever way is convenient, and care for it until it is healed."
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	"And I tell you this that happened to a man in his foot, the accident which I and you are discussing, which is the fourth of its kind that occurred on his foot with burn-like inflammation resembling fire combustion."
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	"And this corruption happened initially in his toe so that it affected all the foot."
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	"And then that man prepared to have the treatment done on his foot with great haste because of its severe pain and burning sensation. He cut off that foot at the joint, and it healed."
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	"For a long time afterward, that same corruption happened on his finger of the left hand."
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	"And then he came to me, and I treated him for that swelling with what I applied on his hand for medicinal purposes. And the swelling did not decrease, but began to go towards the other finger so that it began in the hand."
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	"And he called me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to do that hoping for the recession of that swelling. And moreover, I feared the cutting off of his hand because the power of the illness was in its root."
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	"And since he left me, he returned to his land and came back to me saying that that man had prepared himself and cut off his whole hand, and it healed."
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	"And I have not related this story now except to be helpful about what can happen with this illness, and that it may be a sign for which it is signified and according to which it should be treated."
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	"Concerning the treatment of sinus and the quality of cleansing with medicines."
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	"When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then it ruptures and opens up, and the pus comes out, and the spot remains hollow like a vessel, and the cord that is above it appears thus like a thin cloth, and there is no return to corruption, and it does not imprint on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula."
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	"But if the space is prolonged until corruption impresses on some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus."
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	"And the treatment of it is to cut off that cord entirely as it is rolled up, and especially when it is thinned out and made like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the spot because of its corruption."
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	"But if you hope that the cord will adhere and that that corruption has not yet progressed further, and there is space in the cord for scar tissue to form, then you should treat it with a cleansing enema."
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	"And if you are considering the sinus, then if it is large and the arm that goes out smells badly, then cleanse it with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil, sour wine, and cinnamon received in equal parts, ground well together in a vessel, and cooked on the fire until it becomes thick like honey."
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	"And then take some of it that is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey. And cleanse the sinus with it, and strengthen the opening of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours."
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	"And then remove that with a probe. And do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the corruption is removed."
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	"And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes when this medicine is not present. And if you take the ash of vine, and put it on top of the water, then boil that and cleanse with it until you are convinced that the sinus is completely healed."
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	"And if the illness does not tolerate Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, then cleanse it with water and honey well mixed together, and cleanse with it wine and honey mixed together. For it is the property of honey to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is excess thickness and dryness in the wine."
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	"And when you do this several times and you are convinced that the sinus has been removed, then cleanse it with something that causes flesh to grow there."
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	"And if you take some powder of diachylon and dissolve it with rose oil and thick wine, or cleanse with other medicines and ointments that have properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments."
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	"And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the tube of the cleansing, then widen it gradually with a small iron instrument, and pause there while covering it with Egyptian ointment or Basilicon ointment until it is widened."
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	"And similarly if the opening is wide, then sew up its lips with stitches and leave in it only the quantity into which you can insert the cleansing without adding anything else."
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	"And if the opening of it from which corruption goes up to its parts above is elevated, then dry that in the pus itself where it is located so that the arm may run freely downwards, for when the arm is confined within the tightness of a sinus, flesh will be produced there."
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	"And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in the area of the pus itself according to your desire, then perform an operation on the member such that corruption goes out from it lightly according to what you have learned and that there is nothing retained within it causing obstruction."
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	"And take medicines that consolidate the sinus conveniently according to what you want to extend them over, placed on linen cloth."
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	"And the linen should be of such quantity that it covers all the communication of the sinus; and properly cut with scissors on the right side of the opening of the sinus a strip somewhat wider than the opening of the sinus, and immediately extend over other linen cloths of ointments according to the quantity of the strip, and place it over that at some distance from the opening of the sinus so that it may alleviate the discharge of corruption from there and not cover too much of the linen except for a few days once."
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	"He who stands over the opening of the wound should remove that which is stuck in it at all times, lest it come out again from the arm."
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	"And how to know if what comes out of the arm is too much or too little, digested or undigested?"
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	"And also consider the location of that wound: whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is an abscess."
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	"And when your treatment has continued in this manner for a while, and you see that the matter expelled from the wound is now adhering, then on the third day untie it. And when you untie it, immediately change the bandage for another one and renew the ointment."
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	"But if from the wound a subtle virus escapes over a long distance, do not despair of its adhesion, for the healing of it will be appropriate; because some people have slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and others have rapid."
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	"And if after many days the arm remains undigested, you will know that the wound does not adhere. And if the adhesion of the wound is delayed and this is due to prolonged treatment, then adjust the drying properties of the medicines. And if the medicines are humid in substance and virtue, they should be dried like a fine ointment, when there is an excess of addition of zinc."
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	"And the final advice in this treatment is that you should take a little bit of ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and put it on an ancient cloth, and apply that to the wound. And use it thus."
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	"And also do this action when there is no wound: take ointment and honey that has been cooked until it thickens, and use it. Or else take myrrh, aloe, and resin, crush everything together and powder it over the honey while it is on the fire. Then spread it on cloth and apply it to the wound. Also spread that same honey which you have cooked until it thickens, then powder it on cloth and apply it."
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	"And sometimes the treatment should be administered with long and thin roots of celery (which is celery) and flour of barley and centaure. Use these simples or adjust them, crush them and sift them and powder them over the honey that has been recommended. And use it."
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	"And if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, you should know that the corruption is in the bone of it. Then make an investigation in the bones or in the other hard members or ligaments. Therefore treat it with fistular cure, as is said above."
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	"On the treatment of cornified and thickened nails and nail trimming and finger amputation and sectioning."
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	"Panarici is an abscess that appears on the nail of the thumb or toe of the hand or foot. It commonly occurs on other fingers as well. And when it is prolonged and its treatment is delayed, it becomes a chronic abscess, or it becomes corrupted and rotten, so that it eats away at the root of the nail. And often the entire nail is corrupted, and its corruption extends to the bone, causing a foul odor. And the tip of the finger becomes reddened, and the color of it becomes dark."
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	"And therefore when you have that which we have spoken of in the division and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to cut away with iron all the superfluity that remains of the nail. And also cauterize the wound immediately after that, because cautery is very helpful in this case."
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the corners of the nail begin to press on the flesh inside, causing it to be pricked and painful, then you should make a subtle incision at the corner of the nail that is pricking the flesh, and push it up and cut away that flesh easily. And apply to that which remains of the flesh medicines that are corrosive until everything is removed. And then cure it with ointment until it is healed."
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	"But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then you should cut away the bone and extract it, because there is no time when bone that is corrupted will heal."
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if the corrosion and corruption extend to the finger, then you should cut it off at one of its joints according to where the corruption is most prominent. And then cure it until it is healed."
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	"But if the nail receives a blow or bruising and there is violent pain in that place, then you should first perform bloodletting for the disease. And then dry the nail with a sharp spatha using a transverse section from top to bottom. But make sure that the section does not reach the flesh that is under the nail, because if it does, you will cause violent pain and cause excessive flesh to form in that place. And then cure that place with something that relieves pain."
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	"But as was said above, this condition is found in most men. It is often entirely flesh-colored, and sometimes it is on the bones or sometimes it is on the nail."
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	"And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their origin is in some joints of the fingers."
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	"But that which is born in some joints of the finger does not cause pain. And that which is born at the joints often causes pain."
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	"And of those that are born flesh-colored, the section is easy. And you should cut it off at its root with a broad spatha."
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	"But of that which is born at the root of the joint, the treatment is difficult. And therefore beware of cutting it off."
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But in that which is born in the finger between the joints, you should first cut away the flesh of it with a round incision down to the bone. And then saw it off with one of those appropriate saws for this purpose. And then cure it until it is healed."
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	"But consolidation which occurs in the fingers between their joints viewed externally or by nature of the person who is born with it, or by scarring or burning of fire, or by resemblance, then you should remove that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form."
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	"And also put between their bandages pieces of soft wool soaked in rose oil so that they do not become consolidated too easily. And separate them with a thin sheet of lead if necessary, or put one between them to prevent consolidation as needed."
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	"And likewise, if consolidation occurs in some of the fingers on the palm, then you should remove that consolidation according to what is prepared and appropriate for the figure of the member."
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	"Regarding cutting off superfluities, there are six types."
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	"Vices are varicose veins. And there are six types of veins that are wrapped around thickly and full of melancholic superfluity which occur in many parts of the body. And they most commonly occur in the legs, especially in those who travel, work physically, or carry heavy loads."
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	"Therefore you should administer a purgative for the body of black bile several times with strong evacuation. And then perform bloodletting from the basilic vein."
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	"But the treatment of them with iron is done in two ways. The first way is to cut and draw out that black blood. And the second way is to elevate the vein and extract all of it."
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	"The section of it is done in this way: first moisten the leg with cold water from above so that the thick blood is resolved, which is like a sediment of the leg. Then press the leg of the patient from the upper part of the thigh down to the ankle with a bandage, and then cut the vein at one place, or two, or three with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood with the tieue ma from below the leg upwards until as much blood as you desire has come out, which is enough for the patient's constitution."
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	"And now seize that one, and order them to abstain from foods that generate black bile."
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	"And perform the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and it is necessary for the patient."
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	"The elevation of their limbs is as follows: you who raises the patient's leg if it is movable and brings it close to wash it with cold water until it reddens and veins are filled; or let them be exercised by strong exercise, if bath is not available until the limb is heated."
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	"And then seize the cord in the right side of the vein for section either at its beginning or end, or lower down near its root."
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	"And then open the cord with tweezers and strip the vein from all sides until it becomes apparent to the touch, and it is necessary for the one who seizes that rope to decline to blackness."
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	"And then remove the cord with the evacuator and you will seize that white which should be a thread."
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	"And then put that vein away so that it may rise up and be separated from the cord, and suspend it with tweezers or a hook."
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	"And then seize another section close to that section for three fingers, and then strip the cord from above the vein until it appears."
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	"And then elevate that vein and cut it in another section near its root, and then pull out that vein and elevate it until it passes through the second section, and then pull out that vein from the section that is above it."
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	"And do that until you pull out that vein from the section that is above all sections, so that it may all be pulled out; and then cut it."
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	"And if you cannot succeed in pulling out and elevating it, then insert a needle with fine thread doubled over and tie that vein and pull it out, or insert the vein and turn your hand all around until it may be grasped."
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	"And be careful that it is not cut; because if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate the vein and it will bring about illness through that injury."
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And once that has all been pulled out, then pause over the place of the plugged wound submerged in wine and rose oil and non-rose oil, and cure it so that it may be healed."
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	"And if the vein is constricted and has any tortuosity at which it may be wrapped around its parts, and is not straight as we have said, then you must cut over that at all parts of the tortuosity of the vein and at the places where it may be wrapped around it, and then suspend it with tweezers so that you may elevate it all."
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	"And be careful with your section that you do not cut the vein and that you do not plug it up, because it will be difficult to elevate if you do so; and use your discretion in this matter."
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	"Form of the incident in which a vein is severed:"
Forma de unci orp:	"A hook shape:"
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	"It is not sharp like hooks and does not have a pointed tip so that it may not plug the vein; but rather it must be of thick flexibility, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness. There must be in it an excess thickness as we have said."
De extraccio venae cruris.	"Of the extraction of a vein from the leg:"
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	"This vein is generated in the cambas of the tail lands such as those found in Arabia and in the dry tail lands of India with little tenderness, where there is neither grass nor bush."
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	"And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the tail."
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	"And its growth is due to putrefaction that comes from the spine, such as poison coming from within the body by means of snakes and worms and crabs and worms generated between the spine and the flesh."
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	"The sign of the onset of its occurrence is that this vein becomes inflamed in the tail, and it begins to swell up at that place, and then it starts to come out from the location of that swelling which resembles a root of a plant."
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	"And then when the tip of it appears, you must wrap around that tip a weight of lead which weighs one drachm between two drachms, and bind it up and leave the lead suspended from the tail."
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	"And whenever some cause makes it come out at other parts outside of it, wrap that up with lead and bind it up."
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	"And if it is prolonged, then you must cut off a part of it and wrap up the remainder; but do not cut that with a root-like edge because if you do so, it will be constricted and will go back into the flesh and will cause an aposteme and purulence in that place and bad ulceration."
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	"So that it may be gradually treated and extracted little by little, so that it all may come out from the end of it and nothing remains inside the body."
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	"And some men have said that this vein is as long as two cubits and ten digits, and I have heard of one which was twenty cubits."
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	"And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert a probe into the track of it and pierce that with a long probe through the body so that all that is in the material may be evacuated, and apply putrefactive remedies to that place for some days; and also cure it by means of the treatment of apostemes."
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	"And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and many openings come to it, and each opening has several branch veins."
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	"And therefore cure it as we have said in the division and with what is said above."
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	"Of cutting for worms generated under the skin, called bovine ailment:"
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	"This ailment is called in some lands 'bovine ailment' because often it happens to oxen and there is a worm which is born between the spine and the flesh, which goes throughout the body pushing and pulling, and it is felt as it moves from member to member until it breaks the spine and comes out."
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	"And its generation occurs due to putrefaction of some humors such as happens with worms, serpents, earthworms, and ascarids in the belly."
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	"And it is feared for its malice because when it goes through the body and rises up to the head, and arrives at the eye, then it breaks in there and enters and destroys the eye, which happens often."
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	"And therefore when you wish to cure that and extract it, then it must be done by following its movement and appearance as felt by the senses, and then you must press down on what is above it and on both sides of it with binding and constriction, and thus dry up over it and draw it out."
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if it is embedded in the flesh and cannot be removed, then apply a cautery with fire to that place until it dies there, for the greatest cause of concern is corruption of it with which it corrupts that place as we have said."
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	"And if you wish to prevent it from reaching the head near the eye, then press down on the eyebrow with strong constriction and also dry up over it, and draw it out; and this patient must use means of purification for his body using medicines that evacuate bad putrid humors, and he should avoid foods that cause putrefaction."
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	"Of cutting for the ailment called 'nafir':"
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	"This illness is named in our land 'nafir', and it is pain that comes to certain limbs, which then changes from limb to limb."
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	"I have already seen what you recommended."
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	"I was called to see a sick woman in a village. I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation on the vein near the elbow. After an hour had passed, I saw that inflammation move slowly upwards towards the shoulder, but more lightly than being carried by force, as if it were liquid silver flowing from place to place."
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	"And then pain came to that place and remained in the muscle. And this lasted for about an hour."
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	"And also it ran into the other chest until it reached the other arm."
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	"And he/she also told me to turn around so that I could see it all over their body, as much as I had seen. And they were too amazed by the transformation of the inflammation and its speed from limb to limb."
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	"And I had already seen something like this before in my practice according to that manner, but I have rarely heard people say that pain is transferred from limb to limb."
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	"But I did not see that in the wounds as with the woman."
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	"And I do not think it was anything other than because the woman was elderly, with rough skin and visible veins, and in this appearance that windy change of sensation seemed apparent."
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	"And it is necessary that this retro-cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have humid bodies with hidden veins."
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	"And when you want the cure of this inflammation, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to your eye as we have said. Then strike upon that place with your hand lightly and repeatedly until that windy sensation has gone out completely, and cauterize the place."
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	"But if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure that with friction of the body and with what drives out windiness, and apply those pills made from stinking herbs and pills of serrapie and similar things."
De extraccio de sagetas.	"Arrow extraction."
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	"Arrows vary according to species and the body locations they target. Their diversity lies in having large, small, concave, blunt, or solid points. Some have three edges, others tongues, while still others are star-shaped."
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	"If the arrow hits limbs or organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, or similar parts, then depending on whether the patient shows signs of imminent death (which will be discussed later), it is appropriate to avoid removing that arrow in cases where death would likely result. However, if these signs are not apparent and the arrow is not deeply embedded within the limb, then it may be removed and the wound treated."
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	"If the arrow strikes the brain and pierces the skull, causing damage to the cerebrum above it, symptoms may include sudden violent headache, scotoma (partial loss of vision), vertigo (dizziness), ringing in the ears, inflammation and redness of the eyelids, confusion or mixture of thoughts, vomiting bile, difficulty speaking with possible loss of speech, and leakage of watery, whitish fluid resembling flour from the wound site, accompanied by excessive moisture similar to that of flesh."
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	"Therefore, if these symptoms are apparent, it is advisable to abstain from attempting to treat the wound or remove the arrow unless it is protruding outside."
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	"If the arrow strikes near the left nipple and is deeply embedded in hard tissue (not soft), with movement of the arrowhead resembling a heartbeat, accompanied by bleeding of dark blood from the wound site, coldness or numbness in the extremities, profuse sweating, paleness, and syncope (fainting), then know that death will soon ensue without delay."
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	"If the arrow wounds the lung, there will be frothy bloody sputum from the wound site, coughing or choking near the collar area, change in the patient's complexion, rapid breathing, shortness of breath, and urgent desire for cold air."
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	"If the arrow strikes the diaphragm (velum), located in the lower chest area, there will be pain near the lower ribs, and accompanied by rapid breathing with intense pain and sighing. All movements of the muscles of the limbs are weakened."
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	"If the arrow strikes the stomach, there will be vomiting of undigested food from the wound site."
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	"If the arrow strikes the abdomen and is embedded within it, there will be a visible wound or tear in the skin, tissue, or bowel which has been ruptured. There is little hope for recovery with such an injury, as extraction of the arrow would be futile."
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	"If the arrow strikes the bladder and urine is expelled from the wound site, or if there are other signs of injury to external parts nearby, accompanied by intense pain over the affected area, then know that this is a fatal injury."
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	"However, other areas such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, and joints of the backbone, collarbone, and sternum are considered safe provided that the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not poisonous."
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	"And I advise you to consider this information about arrows for your own use in treating such injuries."
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	"Why is it that when an arrow struck the tear duct of a man's eye during battle, I removed it from the other side near his ear and the wound healed without causing any damage to his eye?"
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	"And when I extracted another arrow that had struck a Jew in the socket of his eye, leaving the eyelid intact and then partially closing it, I could not find the arrowhead as it was already concealed. All that remained was a small extremity attached to his cheekbone, and it was a large, sharp Turkish arrow with a lion-shaped tip that had no barbs."
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	"And the Jew survived, without injury to his eye despite this serious wound."
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	"And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been struck in the throat. It was an Arab arrow with barbs, and I cut into it between two guides and carefully removed it without causing further injury to the patient's throat, allowing him to recover."
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	"And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in the abdomen and believed he would die from this wound. However, after thirty days with no change in his condition or signs of improvement, I made an incision over the arrow and carefully removed it, allowing him to recover without further injury."
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	"I once saw a man in whom an arrow had become embedded in his back. The wound became consolidated over time and remained there for about seventy years, until it eventually emerged near the sternum."
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	"I saw a woman in whom an arrow had become embedded in her abdomen. The wound became consolidated within her and did not change her physical condition in any way; she suffered no injury to her natural functions."
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	"I saw another man in whom an arrow had become lodged in his face and consolidated. The arrowhead broke off, causing him little pain, but leaving him with many scars like these."
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	"I extracted the arrow from the chief of the king's guards that had struck him in the middle of his nose and was already leaning slightly to the right. The entire arrow was concealed."
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	"And I was summoned to treat him shortly after he received the wound, just three days later."
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	"And so I first probed the wound from the arrow quite narrowly. Then I carefully felt around with my finger but could not detect anything. But he himself felt a pricking sensation just beyond his right ear, and I suspected that this was due to the tip of the arrow."
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	"I then widened the wound using an instrument with which I could attract and digest matter, believing that this would help me locate the arrowhead so that it could be extracted."
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	"But I did not cause any significant injury to the wound despite having reached the arrowhead. I continued using the instrument for many days without causing any further harm, and meanwhile the wound had healed over. Then one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reminded me of this."
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	"Then I applied a strong caustic medicine to the wound for several days until it opened up again. With my finger, I felt around inside and discovered the tip of the arrow adhering to his cheekbone."
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	"Then I continued applying the strong medicine until the wound opened up enough for me to see the tip of the arrow clearly. This took approximately four months."
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	"Then, once the wound had healed enough for me to insert forceps and grasp it without causing any further harm, I continued trying various techniques of extraction using different types of forceps, as described later in this chapter. Finally, one day I managed to grasp it with forceps designed for downward extraction and pull it out. Then I restored the wound."
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	"Some physicians judged that the cartilage of his nose could not be restored, but I was able to restore it and the wound healed completely. He regained his health entirely without any further complications."
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	"I remind you of the method of extracting certain arrows because I will provide a rule and explanation for what I have not said, since the parts of this art and its definitions are not understood through narration nor those in the book."
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	"The wise artisan compares little about matter, and about what is present rather than what is absent; furthermore, he discovers new operations and new instruments as needed for the removal of foreign causes of the art when they occur."
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	"And therefore I say that arrows are not forced out of the limbs into which they are inserted, but rather by two methods: either by attraction of the place where it entered or by the contrary of the other part."
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	"And that which is thrown out by the place where it entered is either a procedure in a fleshy location, and is attracted and forced out."
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	"And if it does not obey the exit of the wound at that time, then you should leave it for a few days so that the flesh around it can heal, and thereby alleviate its attraction and exit."
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	"And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and does not obey the exit at that time, then you should leave it for a few days and repeat it with attraction and movement each day until it has been forced out."
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	"And if it does not obey the exit even after a few days, then you should pierce around the arrow in that bone with a fine awl so that the place is widened by the arrow, and then extract it."
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	"And if the arrow is inserted into the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the illness some of those accidents which I mentioned earlier, then refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it for a few days until its being is equalized; because if the arrow pierces the brain, death will not be prolonged."
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	"And if the arrow is only inserted into the body of the bone and does not pass into the brain, and the illness remains for a few days without any occurrence of those accidents, then you should use attraction of the arrow and attraction of that place."
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	"But if it is deeply inserted and does not obey extraction, then you should administer awls around the arrow as we have recommended, and then cure that place until it is healed."
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	"But if the arrow has already been swallowed in the place of the body and is obscured from sensation, then you should search for it with your hand, and if you feel it there, then attract it with some instruments which are convenient for attracting it."
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	"And if you cannot get hold of it due to the constriction of the pleura and the length of the spine, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein here, then incise upon the pleura until it is widened so that it will be possible to extract the arrow."
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	"And if it is in the ear which is being held, then deliver the flesh into which it has been inserted on all sides with all possible means; and manipulate that area until you achieve its evasion through fracture of the ear bones or torsion of those parts so that it will obey."
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	"And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then use torsion of your hand and forceps on all sides until it makes that part obey; and act with great subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and so that it will be difficult to attract it and extract it."
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	"And if you cannot succeed with that at your time, then leave it for a few days until the parts around it can be mobilized, and then repeat that because it will now have been alleviated."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	"But if you have trouble with the flow of blood, then administer what we said about treatment in its chapter."
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	"And preserve your skill in incising veins or nerves, and administer all possible means of the evasion of the arrow with facility, tranquility, slowness, and firmness as we have recommended."
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	"And once you have contracted the arrow, then perform traction according to the figure according to which the casing of the arrow was placed inside it, because this is more advantageous."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	"But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to those figures."
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	"But those arrows which are fired backwards due to the contrary part of another part, or where some part has already proceeded from it into its outer parts, or where there is hardness in the extremity of the arrow due to sensation of the flesh above the spine and it becomes prominent; then cut upon that; and make the section according to the quantity which the forceps can grasp; and then attract it because it will be easy to extract."
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	"But if it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand contrary-wise until the arrow presses against the bone and widen that place, and then extract it."
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	"And if not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat that when it has healed."
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	"If the arrow's shaft is in that [joint], then you push it with that."
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	"But if the shaft has fallen and you want to administer traction, then insert that [tendon hook], if it's hard, use a curved instrument concave on its end so that between the concavity of it and the tip of the arrow you can apply traction and pull it out."
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	"But if the arrow is concave, then press that with a tool entering into it, because the arrow is relieved by that."
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	"And if the arrowhead is barbed, then it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where it entered, if it is possible for you to do so, and then cauterize it with whatever is appropriate."
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And if the arrow pierces the bone or the belly or the bladder or the ribs, and is close enough for you to touch it with your hand, and it is possible to cut upon it, then cut above it and guard against injury of veins or nerves, and extract it, and apply a dressing if necessary, and care for it until it heals."
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	"Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:"
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	"The ends of them should be like the beak of a bird, which are made serrated so that they may not let go of the arrow."
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	"And of those are made various sizes, large, small and medium ones, according to the quantity of the size of the arrowhead and its narrowness, and the width of the wound, and the thickness of the flesh."
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	"Form of concave impeller for this end concave like the feather of a bird so that it may relieve the entry of the arrow into the flesh, and pressing of that wound:"
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	"Form of impeller with blunt end:"
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	"Like a rod, so that it may relieve the entry into the flesh around the concave arrowhead and is pressed with it."
De fleubotomia de las venas.	"On flebotomy of veins."
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy, customarily opened for phlebotomy, are thirty in number. Among them, sixteen are on the head. There are two pulsating veins near the ears, called auricularis by some. Two veins are in the temples that appear to be twins; two veins are in the lacrimal ducts of both eyes, called aspicientia; and one vein prepared at the middle point of the forehead, and one vein at the tip of the nose; two veins at the throat; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; these are called algelic; and there are two veins behind the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are opened for phlebotomy in the arms are five. Among them, one is cephalic and runs on the outer side of the forearm; it is called "the vein of the head" by the people. It is also a median vein composed of one branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic. The people name that vein "vena de tot le cors". Basilica is the vein located on the inner side of the forearm, called "citillar", or "vena del ventre" in common speech. The veins of the arm are three: the one placed above the elbow, which is opened for phlebotomy and appears clearly at the pulse; and the salvatella, which lies between the little finger and the ring finger, having two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the thigh and leg there are three veins. One of them is located near the curvature of the little toe on the outer side of the thigh; another one is called sophena, whose location is behind the knee on the inner side of the thigh; and the third vein is sciatica, found behind the knee on the outer side of the thigh. There are other veins in the leg that resemble those mentioned above.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The veins near the ears have been found useful for treating ancient diseases such as catarrh (sinus congestion), migraines, and skin conditions like eczema and ulcers on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The method of bleeding these veins is as follows:
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Approach and take the lancet knife, which is pointed, and then insert it into the vein in the elbow before the phlebotomy comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand gently over the vein and arm at its divisions, and cut into the vein with an incising incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	Make the length of the incision about two fingers wide or thereabouts, and let as much blood flow out as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then press with a powder and bandage that area until it is healed
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And as previously stated at the beginning of this book, those who have been cut and cauterized
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The benefits of phlebotomy from the two veins, arterial or venous, are useful for treating ancient migraine headaches and chronic diseases, as well as eye disorders that are persistent and excessive humoral fluids in the chest.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomy is according to what I recommend to you: constrain the illness by its cause until both veins appear clearly at the surface and their pulse can be felt, then proceed with caution.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then raise the arm over the vein at its divisions with your little finger and insert the phlebotomy lancet deeply, then raise the vein up and cut into it as you have done with the other two veins. Let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Then gently unbind the patient's ligature, place your thumb over the vein for an hour, then apply pressure to that area with cotton and powder, tightly binding it in place until healed."
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	"They were already preceded by memory of them, and their inscription and attraction from the beginning of the book."
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	"And thus the procedure of phlebotomy on the frontal vein is properly called phlebotomy of the cephalic, used in ancient times for ailments of the face and migraine, pain and foul ulcers."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"The quality of the phlebotomy of wool depends on what I recommend to you; it is that the patient should tighten their collar with a bandage so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument, named 'fossor', which has this shape:"
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Press the prominent point that is at the head of the fossor onto that vein and pierce it with a pen or other tool in this manner, then allow the blood to flow according to how much you desire; finally, remove the needle from the patient's wound and tighten it until healed."
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	"And sometimes it is useful to perform phlebotomy with a lat tool, but the flebotomy needle does not need to be of acute extremity like the others, so that its lateral extremity can cut across the transverse plane as the bone is close and hard, which could break the flebotomy needle if it were too subtle."
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	"But the benefit of these two veins that are in the lacrimals of both eyes for scabies of the eyelids due to itching and sebaceous matter in the eyelids, as well as illnesses of the face."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	"And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient should tighten their collar with a bandage and then have it performed on them, while you are standing over their head."
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	"And let the phlebotomy be done across the length of a little with a fine flebotomy needle, because in that place there is not much flesh, and if the flebotomy needle is too subtle, it may break."
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	"And then let the blood flow until you have enough, and press on those dots for a little while, and tighten it overnight, and finally remove it."
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	"But phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is beneficial for acute fever and violent sneezing, as well as illnesses of the face, migraine, and itching that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	"And the quality of phlebotomy of this vein is that the patient should tighten their collar and then place their nose in your left hand, and take a subtle flebotomy needle that is long and insert it into the middle of the head of the nose vertically, because the vein does not appear here by touch, and because the blood begins to flow soon."
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	"It is necessary that you withdraw your hand little by little with the flebotomy needle and let the blood flow according to your needs; then tighten it overnight because that vein is easily restored."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	"But the benefit of phlebotomy of both guides is for constriction of the throat and the beginning of leprosy, as well as many other illnesses such as itching and malignant ulcers that are corrosive like herpes."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	"And the quality of phlebotomy of those veins is that each patient should tighten a cloth around their own neck, and the practitioner should stand over the head of the patient, while the patient is seated on a stool."
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	"And then phlebotomize the vein along its length with an ample flebotomy needle little by little, and let blood flow according to a moderate quantity or as much as is necessary at that time, and do likewise for the other vein."
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	"And then untie the cloth and tighten both veins with a midrib ligature so that the patient is not fainted, and let them rest for the night because the inflammation will be healed by morning."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	"And the benefit of phlebotomy of the veins on the arms is that it helps with small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, decay of the gums, malignant ulcers and fissures, as well as malignant ulcers that are present in the nose and around it."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	"And the quality of phlebotomy of those veins is that you should have the patient sit before you, and tighten their collar with a bandage, then roll back the lips and look for two veins where one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by its darkness, and more so because there are small black veins around them, and then incise each according to incision."
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	"But if there is doubt about which one it is and you do not know which of those veins it is, then go ahead with the incision of the largest one, or the one that has evident pus."
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	"And do likewise for the two veins that are in the lips above."
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	"But it is more common to incise both veins that are on the left lip."
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	"But the benefit of phlebotomy of both veins on the left side of the tongue is for fainting that occurs in the stomach, for inflammation of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	"And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is that you should follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, elevate their tongue, and look for it on the left side where one vein is on one side and the other vein on the other side, and each has a color inclining towards darkness."
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	"And then phlebotomize each one of them, but be careful not to withdraw your hand with the flebotomy needle from those veins because they are arteries."
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those that are commonly found in all men, and phlebotomy of them is done in two ways: either by puncturing with a flebotomy needle of mulberry or olive shape with subtle inclination, or by cutting with a scalpel-shaped flebotomy needle, called an lance, and this is the way it is done:"
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	"And this lance should be applied to the section where those veins are special, thin and subtle according to their width and their tightness."
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	"Method of phlebotomy with a mulberry-shaped needle:"
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	"It should have its point like this, and it is used to open concave veins that are full of obvious thick blood vessels, and those that contain coarse, turbid blood."
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	"And this is the shape of a flebotomy needle with an olive-shaped point:"
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	"And this flebotomy needle is of lesser width and has a more subtle tip, and it is used for phlebotomy of thin veins that contain subtle, citrine-colored blood."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	"But the benefit of phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, is that it lets out blood from illnesses that are on the left side of the stomach and the neck, and for whatever affects the feet and the belly."
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	"And it is recommended for the phlebotomist, when phlebotomizing that vein, to be careful and cautious because there is an artery nearby, and if he errs in puncturing with the flebotomy needle, he will cut that artery and cause bleeding, so that it should not be punctured with a sharp flebotomy needle, but rather incised with a lance."
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then you should leave that and move to another vein, either find some branch of it or phlebotomize at the end of the arm where it is visible, and incise with a lance-shaped flebotomy needle as we have said."
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform phlebotomy on the patient, first place yourself in front of the bend of their arm and touch the spot within that you know is the pulse point. Then signify it with a cloth. Next, raise the arm and cut the vein with an incision concave like those we have mentioned; be careful not to strike too close to the artery space.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you press and there is no swelling at the point you indicated with a cloth, then that swelling is an indication of the artery. Thus avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If blood flows in the phlebotomy like a child's urine stream and is thin red, know that it is arterial blood. Then stop and pause your finger on that point for some distance; then remove your finger, and if the blood has stopped, many times it stops, then squeeze the arm and let that be.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And watch out for the patient's mucus, and be especially careful about them and do not move them for a few days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood does not stop, and you are present without medicine at hand, then cut the artery if it appears before you; for its end is contracted and the blood is stopped. Or take a piece of soft cloth or lint, apply that to the wound, then take another cloth and press that over the vein with pressure downwards using linen and cotton pads on either side for one day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is stopped, that's good. But if not, then treat it with what was mentioned earlier about powders stopping the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the arresting of the bleeding from there is difficult in many dispositions due to the smallness of the wound and the possibility of the linen of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But phlebotomy from the dark vein is useful for drawing off blood from the upper part of the head and from below the shoulders because it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And be careful during phlebotomy that you do not strike a nerve in the phlebotomy of it because below there is a nerve; and therefore if it hits upon the puncture of the phlebotomy and touches the nerve, numbness occurs and healing is difficult. And often that nerve appears to the touch; but sometimes it is hidden in some men and is subtle and does not show itself, then you should pause the phlebotomy with which you are performing the phlebotomy with a little cut of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves then cut along the length of it.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy from the cephalic vein is that it draws off blood from the head and relieves illnesses of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And particularly in this case, if you want the phlebotomy to be done with an olive-shaped phlebotome or a myrtle-shaped phlebotome because it is the safest of all veins since there is neither artery nor nerve below.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But nevertheless you must be careful that with the phlebotome you do not strike only the skin of the wrist and look for a lighter spot and do not hurt it unless you find it by percussion first where there is to be performed some phlebotomies.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But often an aposteme occurs in some people when it is not cut with the first percussion, but do not notice that aposteme.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the qualities of phlebotomy of that and its accidents are many, in which you must consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy should be administered only for the preservation of health and with hope of benefit and caution against the occurrence of illness, and that it should be performed in one of the veins which are on the elbow, namely the cephalic, dark, and basilica veins; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and near meals in winter when there are signs of repletion.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or at least three hours after the first meal.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But phlebotomy should be administered when it causes convenience and necessity for it, whether night or day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And children should not be phlebotomized until they are fourteen years old, and women who are pregnant should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month until the seventh, and elderly people who have passed sixty years of age should not be phlebotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And whenever anyone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason whatsoever, they should cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's clister if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw up the superfluities in the phlebotomy of the bowels which are cleansed and do not harm the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And patients with sacred nausea and drunkenness should not be phlebotomized until that has passed from them nor those with dropsy nor illness nor drunkenness; and particularly phlebotomy should be avoided near colic pain and vomiting and abdominal pain and copulation and effort and exercise of fasting or vigil or any cause that dissolves virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And particularly consider the subtlety of humors beforehand if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And particularly take a bath if there is no cause preventing it or if exercised by some exercise so that the blood may be subtilized.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause phlebotomy of him during the foot of the day, namely about the hour of tierce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And particularly take care that the foot of that day is guarded from all evil animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, such as effort and superfluous pain and copulation and similar things to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his seat let there be present the causes in the use of which men usually employ aromatics and fragrances and balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the phlebotomist sit on a stool that is higher than the patient's stool who is to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And particularly extend his arm and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist twice or three times, and particularly strengthen the limb with a bandage and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the ligature be moderate because if the ligature is too tight or if there is superfluity in it, then blood flow is prohibited; or if there is softening, then the course of the blood is hindered.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And particularly when ligating, he who is to be phlebotomized should rub his hands together between them until the veins are inflated and declared to the touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And particularly let the phlebotomist anoint his lancet with a little of proper old oil and particularly pause his left hand's finger on that vein where he wishes to perform phlebotomy so that the vein may swell slightly and percuss it so that among the veins there is one which throbs like a beating heart before phlebotomy, and among those it is full of windiness and when pausing the lancet upon it contracts before the lancet and is discovered by the phlebotomist; and the lancet does not wound the vein, and if it wounds, that vein is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	"And therefore, for this reason it is necessary that the phlebotomist be stopped and he should be attentive to all these causes."
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	"Moreover, after performing the phlebotomy, if the vein is not full, it would be good to try another location nearby; but if this too is unsuitable or shows signs of inflammation, wait a little while before trying again."
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	"If the location is inflamed or if the patient's condition worsens, it would be best to leave them alone for a day or two, and not squeeze the vein too hard, as this could cause inflammation, nor should they enter into a bath."
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	"And in case of iteration of phlebotomy if the love."
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	"And if the opening is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out as desired, then perform phlebotomy again on the same vein according to the rules and adjust the opening a little, and do this quickly before the location becomes inflamed, for many people have few openings."
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	"But if that location is already inflamed, then do not perform phlebotomy there again, as it will serve no purpose. Instead, pause for some time on one of the branches of the vein of oil, as this relieves the body's blood flow."
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	"And it is better in this location than in any other."
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	"And similarly administer the vein of oil in all phlebotomies where veins are cut to stop blood flow. This is done with treacle, alfalfa, and sage when pausing on one of these locations, as this thins the blood and causes it to circulate more easily."
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	"And if a large inflammation occurs at the site of phlebotomy, as often happens, especially in someone who has not been bled before or where the opening of the vein was small, then apply a sponge soaked in warm water and salt, slightly scorched, to the location for an hour, as this will dissolve it."
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	"And it is necessary that one does this appropriately with regard to the letting of blood from that vein with completion of it or from another vein."
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	"And if there remains in the location for a few days some blackness or greenness, do not worry about it. And if you wish, apply some mixture of Aloes and Myrrh dissolved, or some mixture of mint juice or chamomile juice, or something similar."
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	"And many times apostemata and prominences occur after phlebotomy in the basilica."
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	"And therefore place your hand over it and if you find softness under your compression, then that prominence is bad and harmful. And therefore guard yourself to apply some of what we have mentioned there, for much blood flows from the artery."
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And make an emplaster with something that has astringent properties so that the location may endure, and treat it with another cure until it is healed."
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	"And one must extract blood from every person according to their quantity of virtue and according to the prevailing color over the blood as it appears."
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	"For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red. And similarly if you find it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thinned. And similarly if it is sharp, then let it flow until its sharpness has abated."
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	"And one must make the phlebotomy of someone who is full and strong and needs an extraction of blood on a single occasion large, and let the incision be wide."
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	"And in those who are thin, one must do the opposite of that, and extract blood from them in several sessions, and let the incision be narrow."
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	"And it is better to administer a transverse section in phlebotomy of a vein than puncture."
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	"And this manner of phlebotomy saves from flow of blood and incision of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude."
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	"And to one who is accustomed to fainting during phlebotomy, you must treat him beforehand with some bread infused in vinegar of hemlock or simple oxymel slightly scorched. And extract blood from him in three or four sessions."
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	"And if there is frigidity of complexion, then beforehand for phlebotomy take bread infused in an electuary of myrrh or in an aromatic electuary sweetened with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in an electuary that is highly fragrant."
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	"And if fainting occurs during phlebotomy, and it is due to the letting of much blood, then one must take in drink beef water and a highly fragrant electuary. And use aromatics with aloe, and let him rinse his feet with that."
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	"And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation."
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	"And he who wishes to eventuate his arm and dissolve his blood according to the second session, one must let the person from whom phlebotomy is performed for much evacuation, whose virtue is thin, that he evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days."
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	"But he who wishes to eventuate his arm and draw out his blood a second time, and his body is strong, then let him do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy."
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	"But he who wishes to draw out blood from his body contrary to the part that declines, one must let it be eventuated on the second or third day."
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	"But in that body where there is much blood already scorched and it is sharp and causes fever to occur, one must draw out blood from him in one session, and let much of the drawn blood be, and let the aperture be widened until fainting occurs. And let your hand be placed over his pulse during the drawing of the blood, so that death does not happen instead of fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent."
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	"And when you wish to loosen the arm and evacuate blood a second time, since the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult to draw out blood, then press there with force and let him extend his arm gently, for this is very bad."
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	"Let him leave it until it is phlebotomized again; or remove that with the sharpness of the phlebotomy which has coagulated blood in the orifice of the vein; or place there tyrian aloe, or sagazena, and press there gently until the blood flows out."
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	"And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	"And if there is cause for you to provoke evacuation of blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then let him be phlebotomized on that spot or on the other arm in another vein."
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	"And the vein called 'the rope of the arm' is phlebotomized in place of the furcula or the basilica when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	"And the quality of phlebotomy of him is that the patient should place his hand in cold water until the vein becomes engorged and appears manifestly."
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	"And let him be strengthened on that with a linen bandage with moderate tension; and let phlebotomy be done transversely, not lengthwise nor according to the length."
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	"And let the aperture be wide and let your phlebotomy be such that you phlebotomize him on the junction of the hand a little."
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	"And if blood flow is prohibited, then immerse your hand in cold water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your purpose."
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	"But if it's summer and you're excused from immersing your hand in cold water, then place a cloth soaked in cold water on the body to slow down blood flow during winter."
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	"And the flebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins, because the patient has no palpable pulse or nerves."
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	"And phlebotomy of the little vein on the right hand's wrist is beneficial for liver ailments."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	"And the quality of phlebotomy is that you strengthen the hand by rubbing it with a linen cloth or your hand, after immersing it in cold water until the vein is inflated and clearly visible; then transverse flebotomy should be performed."
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	"And remember not to rub your hand too much during phlebotomy, as the nerves are exposed beneath the skin."
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	"And after immersing the hand in cold water, let the blood flow into that vessel, because if you don't immerse it in cold water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein and prevent its flow."
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	"And once the blood has been extracted according to what is needed, you should then press over the vein with oil and salt so that it does not heal too quickly; similarly, do this for any other branch."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	"But the benefit of phlebotomy from that vein on the left hand is that it is beneficial for stomach ailments."
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	"And do likewise in performing phlebotomy on this one as you did on the other."
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	"And the benefit of phlebotomy from the saphenous vein is for ailments that are below the body's surface, such as those relating to the womb, and retention of menses, and for ailments of the skin like scabies and ulcers on old wounds, and their similar ailments."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	"And the quality of phlebotomy for this [person] is that the patient should immerse their foot in cold water and rub it until the veins appear clearly; then tie a bandage around the junction of the foot with a cord; and the location of the vein is evident near the ankle, and from there it branches out into several smaller branches on the surface of the foot."
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	"And therefore perform phlebotomy on one of the larger branches or below the ankle near its junction with the leg, because it is better and more salubrious."
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	"And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that lie beneath it and make your incision at an angle, as if you were cutting across it."
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	"And may God grant you skill in performing phlebotomy."
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	"But if bleeding is prohibited, then immerse the patient's foot in cold water and let the blood flow into that vessel until it is evacuated."
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the phlebotomist makes an error on the first attempt, then make another incision nearby because that location is safe; do not fear causing harm, but rather beware of the nerves as we have said."
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	"And similarly perform phlebotomy on the other foot with caution."
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	"And concerning the sciatic vein, its location is as we have said: near the ankle and behind the inner ankle bone."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	"When performing phlebotomy on them, it causes hip pain due to bloodletting."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	"The quality of the phlebotomy on them is that the patient enters into a bath, and quickly and strongly presses their thigh flesh on the inner side above the heel with four such cloths placed one by one using a long subtle bandage so that only this appears."
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	"Therefore, when it appears, you should perform phlebotomy according to each person's ability and according to their transverse vein, if possible, or else perform incision or sectioning according to the location."
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	"And it is common in many men but not harmful. And if you cannot find that one, perform phlebotomy on another branch of the vein that appears at the back of the ear facing the little finger."
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	"And beware of nerves, and let flow as much blood as you desire."
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	"Then untie the ligature and pause on the location of the phlebotomy until it stops bleeding, because it heals easily."
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	"And regarding suction and the quality of using them."
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	"Suctions are made of horn, bronze, or glass."
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	"And suction is done in two ways: one with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other without scarification."
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	"And this suction which is called scarification, is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire."
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	"And the places on the body where suction is administered with scarification and bloodletting are fourteen in number, of which one is placed at the forehead, which is the last part of the head; another is midway between two parts of the neck; suction on the chin below the jawbone but above the mouth; suction on both shoulders; suction over the hip joint, which is near the buttocks; suction on both thighs."
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	"And bloodletting does not remove the blood from large veins, but only from small ones scattered throughout the flesh, so that virtue is not lost through it as happens with flebotomy; and it is not necessary for bloodletting to be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused bypletion until the entire body has been evacuated."
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	"But if bloodletting is provoked by illness or by continualpletion, we administer it at any hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle of it, and at any other time."
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	"The cause of this is that in some men there is an increase of blood which requires its evacuation by bloodletting, and they are subject to headaches and dizziness. And among these are those who exhibit signs ofpletion and heat on their face and head, and neck. And among them are those who show signs of swelling on their face and forehead and darkness and dullness in their eyes. And among them are those who suffer from hemoptysis. And among them are those whose laughter is excessive. And among them are those who have a bitter taste of blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is covered with ulcers and they spit out blood. And among them are those whose sleep is multiplied, and among them are those who dream of blood, fire, ants, plagues, and other causes that resemble them."
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	"And therefore when there is an increase in any of these causes, especially if it occurs in the third or middle of the month, we order bloodletting to be done three days or two days after that time."
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	"And the benefit of bloodletting from the neck is that when it causes heaviness in the head and dizziness, it must be evacuated appropriately throughout the entire body."
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	"And this bloodletting is done at the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein."
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	"But it is not allowed to use this method in those who have a fat constitution, or in those with catarrh, because it causes great harm."
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	"And therefore, it should not be used for the elderly, and for those who have illnesses caused by heat."
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	"But those who are continually subjected to it will suffer from forgetfulness. And therefore, it is necessary that you command the bloodletter not to press his hand too much on the vein at the beginning, so as to avoid generating forgetfulness."
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	"But bloodletting of the right arm is done at the location of phlebotomy of the black vein and the basilica vein: and therefore it causes asthma, constriction of the lung, splitting of the windpipe, cough, andpletion."
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	"And therefore, it is necessary that bloodletting from the right arm be done carefully, because if it is too deep it generates weakness in the body and stomach."
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	"And bloodletting from the left arm causes accidental pains in the head and ophthalmia, migraine, fever, and toothache. And it is done at the location of phlebotomy of the basilica vein."
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	"And you must command the bloodletter not to press his hand on the scarification lest he should wound the artery and cause a flow of blood."
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	"And bloodletting from the left cheek causes coldness in the mouth, gum disease, and signs of diseases that occur in the mouth. And it is done at the location of phlebotomy of the arteria helicalis which are on both lips."
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	"But bloodletting that is done above the two breasts causes catarrh, which occurs due topletion of heat."
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	"And bloodletting from the two divisions of the thighs causes benefit from phlebotomy of three veins: the basilica, black and cephalic veins. Because it attracts blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, as well as the small veins of other larger veins, so that the attraction can reach to the three veins."
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	"And command the bloodletter not to proceed with scarification, because the location is devoid of flesh and has nerves and arteries nearby."
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	"And it is a bloodletting done on the hip, which causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers nearby."
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	"And you must command the bloodletter to make a large bloodletting using a lancet because the location requires a strong section. And that the veins should be strongly pulled and then scarified with scarification."
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	"But bloodletting from the camber minusso reduces gradually through minute increments. Because it attracts blood from the entire body and causes ancient pains of the lungs, uterus, and bladder. And it provokes menstruation, and causes bothersome diseases. And it is done at the location of phlebotomy of two sophena veins, alahorcoben vein, and two cavernous veins."
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	"However, they debilitate the entire body and cause fainting in many people."
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	"And the benefit of bloodletting from the left armpit is similar to that of bloodletting from both arms."
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	"The quality of the position of bloodletting is that at the beginning it should be shallow and then proceed gradually by suction. And do not prolong the duration of bloodletting, but rather pause it lightly and remove it gently so that the humors come to the location by gentle arrival."
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	"And do not cease to repeat this until you see the location becoming reddened and swollen, and that the color of blood appears."
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	"Then scarify again and repeat suction little by little, and pay attention to the condition of the patient's body."
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	"Because that person who has tender skin with many pores, you must scarify him once and not more, lest the location become ulcerated."
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	"And command the bloodletter to widen the scarification a little and then proceed with gentle suction."
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	"And if the blood is thickened, then you must scarify twice because in the first scarification the path of subtle attraction to the blood and humidity of it becomes open."
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	"But in the second one, the extraction of thick blood is acquired through examination."
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	"And if the blood is very dark-colored, then a third scarification should be made to complete it."
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a small amount, one scarification is sufficient."
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	"And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we should make the scarification large. And if we know that the blood is thick, then we must scarify by a deep scarification."
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	"The term 'scarification' refers to the depth of the cut as far as the skin only."
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	"And if the skin of someone is thick, hard, dark, and their pores are narrow, then the locations for bloodletting should be anointed with gentle, softening, resolving oils; if it is in summer time, such as oil of aloe or violet oil, or doughnut oil, or celery seed oil. And if it is in wintertime, then use narcissus oil or lily oil or chamomile oil, or blood oil, and so on."
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	"If excessive humor is thick and cold, then oil of marjoram, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of aneth should be applied."
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	"If the patient is of tender flesh and wide pores, then oil should be prohibited, and the places around the wound should be washed with hot water or warm water infused with salt, or with decoction of wormwood, or with decoction of borrage, or similar remedies."
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	"And for one whose blood is excessively moist, wash their wounds with sour wine, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar remedies."
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	"And for one whose humors are thick, wash their wounds with old wine, or water of hyssop (majoram), or decoction of dill, or chamomile, and similar remedies."
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	"And the wound should be covered before bathing. It is necessary to apply it near the bath for one or two hours after bathing, and to sleep near the wound."
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	"What needs to happen in order to regulate the bleeding from a vein that has been opened before cauterization?"
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	"Consider this at the outset: If the patient or one to be bled is choleric and full of hot and inflamed blood, then one should take causes for cooling, such as sour grapes, endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secanabin, and julep, and their like."
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	"And pauses from their foods such as chickens, birds' flesh, roasted meats, and dishes seasoned with spices, and similar things."
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	"And for one whose temperament is phlegmatic, it is necessary to give them to drink syrup of almonds or syrup of hyssop with fennel seeds and sumac, and odoriferous wine between old and new; and that they be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods such as chickens, canary birds, pheasants, small birds, and pigeons."
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	"And on the day of venesection or phlebotomy, let drinking be greater than eating."
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	"And let some men be given to drink tyriaca alpharac, or musk medicines, such as muscata, or alcelita before venesection or phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members may be comforted and the blood subtilized; and let them not take that medicine afterward."
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	"But let those venesections that are not made for scarring be made in such a way as to pause from the liver, and on the spleen and podagra (gout), and on the navel, in the locations of the joints, and the armpits of the arms, because these members do not suffer scarification upon them."
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	"And they are not sought except for attraction of blood from the member, thus as venesection pause on the breast in illness of flow of blood from the nose; and they use that for the dissolution of viscous phlegm from the member, thus as pausing on the belly and the navel; because it rarifies the member and scatters it and removes pain by resolving phlegm."
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	"And already venesection is made on the temples when they happen in their apoplexy or palsy, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out the phlegm and expels the wind from its location."
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	"And similarly it does when venesection is made on the liver and spleen for resolving phlegm in those enclosed."
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	"And these venesections are administered solely with suction, and sometimes they are administered with fire."
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	"And sometimes they are administered full of water from the Tiber in illnesses of the spleen."
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	"This is so that the venesection may be full and larger, so it is water boiled alone or water in which herbs are cooked for this purpose."
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	"Form of venesection administered with fire: let the width of the opening be two finger-breadths according to how we have formed it; and let the quantity of pitch be the most of a palm; and let it be on the side of it, in the location that is in the circuit, the most of it, and let the wick be small according to the quantity that enters into it through a needle."
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	"Let it be made of wormwood or citron, of large margins, lion's tooth, purslane, and hyssop, for that they do not harm the member by their position over it."
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	"And let it be in the middle of it a transverse wick of wormwood or iron, where the candle is paused with fire."
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	"And already this venesection is much greater than that which we have recommended; and the little one is less according to the illnesses and the state of him who uses it."
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	"And the venesections of the old and weakened are different from those of the young and robust ones."
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	"And the quality of pausing this venesection with fire on the member is that it extends the wick with fire of decent wood before a small candle of wax, and pauses that on the middle of the transverse wick in the middle location of the venesection, for that the fire may be kindled around the parting of the veins so that not the body of the sick person may be burned."
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	"And approach should be paused on the member of the sick person, and let it be over the wick that we have said, until when we have the venesections and do not need to hold the candle and that smoke rises above that wick, then the venesection will soon be dissolved."
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	"And approach the wick according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary."
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	"More in venesection that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse wick nor wick, and it is not administered unless it be filled with water, and it is paused only on the member."
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	"And this is its form: And this venesection, the greater it is, the better, for that it can receive a great quantity of water."
Capitol .xcvii.	"Chapter XCVI."
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	"Bloodletting is not administered in most members but in those where it is impossible to place venesections due to their smallness, such as the eye and gum and similar ones; or in member devoid of flesh, such as the toe and nose and their like."
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	"And the quality of using those bloodsuckers that are found in muddy waters is if they are washed clean."
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	"And approach they should be laid day and night in muddy water until they are hungry, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and approach let the body be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and venesections; and approach rub the member of the sick person until it reddens; and approach they should be paused on it."
E cum son umplidas e caso.	"And when they are full and satiated."
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	"And if it is possible to suck from the location with venesection, it is more preferable in treatment."
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	"But if not, then wash the location with sour wine and approach with much water; and let it be rubbed and expressed."
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	"And if the body of blood is prolonged near the skin of the bloodsuckers and it is hot, then take a cloth of linen in warm water and pause that over until the heat is absorbed."
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	"And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle over it three-times cooked vitriol, or walnuts and similar ones of the causes astringent, until the blood be arrested; or let the most of roasted chickpeas be paused on the location, and let them be laid until the chickpeas adhere to the location, and the blood is arrested."
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	"And if necessary, iteration of bloodsuckers, when it is possible to change those."
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	"And if bloodsuckers are prohibited from suspension, then let the location be rubbed with fresh blood or put a needle in the locations until blood comes out; and approach they should be paused, for those when they feel some blood soon adhere."
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	"And when you want them to let go, sprinkle over those a little of thrice-cooked garlic, or salt, or ashes, and they will soon let go."
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	"So begins the prologue of the third part: of restoration."
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	"This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, it is the restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones."
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	"Oh, son, know that they boast of this chapter the foolish physicians and the common ones and those who at any time do not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter of theirs."
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	"And for this reason it happens that this manner of the sciences in our land is private; and I am not he who has forgotten at any time be all; and have not added what follows, except for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of theirs, until extracted the science from them."
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	"And now I turn to experimentation and study throughout my life."
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	"And now I have already described in this chapter everything that pertains to my knowledge and on which experiments have been conducted; for the sake of brevity, I have shortened it for you and relieved you from lengthiness; and shortened it even further by abbreviation; and shown it plainly enough in declaration; and formed many forms of instruments administered therein, as is done by addition in declaration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters."
Capitol primier.	"Chapter one."
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	"Summary and collections from the consideration of fractures of bones, from which a preliminary explanation is necessary before we begin to remember the members that are broken and diverse if any."
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	"Therefore I will say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of speech, and chapters at the understanding of which at the beginning the artisans are forced to stand still and deliberate about the truth of those; so it is you and those who are eager that know or learn this noble art other than you."
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	"And then I say that when some fracture or dislocation or torsion or compression occurs, immediately you should take flebotomy on the patient or let him bleed, or whatever ensemble, if there is no prohibition of any cause, such as debility of strength, or if it is a child to whom it has happened, or an old person, or during a time of great heat, or cold."
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	"And it is appropriate that he should be content with his diet of fresh herbs and of the flesh of birds and crabs; and let him avoid heavy meats and filling foods, and every food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of an abscess cautery, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member."
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	"And then return the patient to his usual first regimen, with which he is accustomed to live."
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	"And then when the broken bone begins to be restored, then the patient should be nourished with nutritious foods of thick and heavy nourishment in which there is viscosity, such as pastries made from wheat cooked with water, rice, milk, chicken, beef, fresh cheese, thick wine and similar ones, and with this regimen coagulation of fracture occurs more easily and better."
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	"And know that the bones of the elderly when they are in men who are in the first decline and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of the members of theirs."
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	"And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time due to the dryness of those members, and those that are theirs at the end of childhood are continued and consolidated, such as the bones of young children."
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	"But nevertheless nature is ordered and adapted over the broken bone of any part with some cause such as glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it until it is conglutinated and united together, until the end of fortitude and firmness comes, like fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits that from its works."
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And for this reason it is necessary to pause the patient's foods, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said."
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	"Great diversity of fracture according to diversity of member."
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	"And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves."
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	"And I come with remembrance of each species of fracture, explained in its own chapter separated from the others."
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	"Great diversity even within itself."
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	"And the species of bone fracture are diversified within themselves; for there is an arched fracture, other than that which occurs in stars; and sometimes there is a fracture according to the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the satagia and astellas and additional ones that proceed and do not proceed, such as is made in the pen when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with swelling and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture."
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	"And for each species there is an appropriate treatment in the restoration of it, which will come to remembrance later in its separate place."
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	"Many signs of bone fracture."
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	"And for this reason a bone fracture is known: there is tortuosity of it, and prominence and palpation of it to the touch, and that when you compress it with your hand."
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	"And then when there is no apparent tortuosity in the place nor is it felt when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not find great pain, then it is not here a fracture."
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	"It may happen that there is tortuosity or a small fissure, in which case you should not move it with your hand and compress all of it; rather pause over it with the medicines of which remembrance will be given at that appropriate moment for the place; and especially it should be stretched by subtle straitening."
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	"And know that the place where it is arched and not split in two or other than that which happens in the satagia, when all the part of its comparison has been removed, then you should begin from your hour to rectify it having cauterization done upon it."
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	"And if cauterization is applied to it, then leave it for a few days until the cautery has ceased; and meanwhile treat it according to each manner that you can of elevation and application."
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	"And know that the restoration and treatment of it is easier than for the bone in which satagie has happened."
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	"And especially strengthen it according to what will come to remembrance later."
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	"But if there are satagia in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and your hand."
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	"And let your position be such that you hold the member in its natural figure while the parts of the broken member are extended, then you should strive to return those additions with treatment and according to each manner that you can in their places."
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	"And guard yourself according to your skill that no harm comes upon the patient by your operation of them nor injury; and strive to apply one bone to its companion with the best forms you can."
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	"And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you touch it with your hand and if here there is any different cause, then correct it and treat it according to the quantity of your virtue."
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	"And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do who often cause cautery to be applied because of their operation, or cause contraction in the member as we have seen from the operation of many."
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	"And also connect, apply equanimity and decent operation and support of that member, and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make him avoid moving it during his vigils and sleep, and watch his revolutions and agitations, and direct all his movements with all your virtue; and wait until the position of the member is a position in which there is no pain, which is the cause when he feels in the disposition of the position of the member or injury. Then it is necessary to change that to another disposition in which there is no pain; and guard that the position of it be straight and equable so that the member does not become distorted when it is restored."
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the restriction in the broken limb is that which I recommend; so you should know that broken limbs are differentiated by their smallness and greatness and by their shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small like the arm and the hand and foot, then it is necessary that their dressing should be of very fine linen.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those that are large like the thigh or the leg, there should be a wrapping of linen and hard material; for this tight binding connects the large member and greatly strengthens it from all sides with restriction, ensuring that nothing enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And so beginning, so your bandaging of the fracture should be done carefully with proper binding applied there, over the place of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to what the limb deserves; and tighten it well with your hand using the linen.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then take the remaining part above the place of the fracture and tighten it even more than before with your binding to ensure that there is not too much restriction at the site of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then extend yourself with wrapping around the place of the fracture somewhat, and slowly loosen the binding little by little until you take one large part from it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around that other time over the place of the fracture with wrapping, and then go with the wrappings below the fracture; and let your operation be in tightening the wrapping and loosening it according to what has been said about the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the wrappings with a piece of linen or cloth with which to wrap around the tortuosity of the fracture if there is any tortuosity there; and if not, do not pause in it for any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place another bandage over it, and then wrap around these wrappings gently and evenly at once if there is no inflammation or pus there, and afterwards pause over that which sits on the pus or inflammation; and leave it for a few days; and then tighten over it with stitches.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the stitches be of mature cane, carefully made; or of oak wood; or of branches of palm tree; and let the width of each stitch be according to this shape and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	But it is necessary that the stitch which is placed over that fracture be thicker and wider than the other stitches, and the length of the stitch according to what is measured on the limb in magnitude and smallness; and then tighten over the stitches with another bandage according to your first tightening; and then lay over it with linen gently as has been said about tightening, and let your tightening be according to the place of the fracture more, and the further away from the fracture, the less the tightening.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and be of wool; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people doing when placing their threads of twisted cords, it is a great error, for when the tightening is too much, equality will not be obtained.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And also very fine threads are not convenient because with them you will not be able to tighten as much as you want, and there should not be less than one finger's breadth between stitch and stitch.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the illness is said to be caused by the ends of the stitches near the tightening in the raw places, then pause those with a piece of linen or woolen cloth between them so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes fracture occurs with plague, and disruption happens in the tendon, and I have written about that one in the chapter according to its particularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not all broken limbs should be tightened with stitches on the first day; for which reason is that when a limb is large, it does not require tightening with stitches until after 2 or 3 or more days, according to your certainty of the arrival of pus.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the bandages with which the Ancients restored fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	"Method of plastering as a remedy for the restoration of fractures, suitable for many complex cases and particularly for women and children, because it does not cause heat nor friction: take some flour powder, specifically the bran left after removing it from the walls of the mill."
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	"And if you find this too thick and coarse, sieve it through a clean cloth, then use the finer flour for your dough."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	"Another method of plastering for the restoration of fractures, dislocations and wry necks: take assafetida, laudanum, acacia, enula, and majoram, which is the root of wild celery, of each one dram; myrrh and aloe of each five drams; alochil of twenty drams. All these should be finely ground and sifted, then mixed with white of egg or flour paste if the patient's skin is scorched. This plaster has a good composition and restores lightly broken bones, suitable for many people."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	"Another method of plaster for the treatment of fractures and wry necks: take majoram, white lead, myrrh, aloe, acacia and gum arabic in equal amounts, each one dram."
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	"All of these are finely ground in a mortar with a wooden pestle and sifted, then mixed with water or flour paste and administered."
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	"A method of plaster for joints and separated bones in their places, which causes pain accidentally in those areas and also for fissures and fractures: take wool without grease, immerse it in vinegar, olive oil and honey, then place it on the affected area."
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	"Note that this plaster does not have virtue for restoration but serves to draw out pus, cauterize and expel pains properly."
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	"Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and poppy leaves, both together make a plaster of them."
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	"A brief method of plaster administration for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the remaining pus: take white lead, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, bran and flour, all together one part each; all are finely ground and mixed with wine if the member is not scorched."
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	"But if it is scorched, then use that with water of fresh coriander or simply water and flour paste."
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	"Another method of plaster which is very strong in resolving [pus], better than the first one, when a hard boil occurs during the restoration of the member: take white lead and its seed, balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, flour and bran all together one part each; all are finely ground and mixed with water of soapwort or sweet water or wine, depending on the quality of the member and the relaxation of its color."
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	"But Hippocrates in his book does not specify that it should be placed on the broken member during its restoration, but rather cerote made from wax and oil, and nothing else; and he recommends that it should have a consistency between thickness and subtlety."
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	"But it is seen in Galen that they should be placed on the broken member during its restoration and the causes of dryness with little heat are such as myrrh, incense and similar things to those causes that we have recommended."
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	"A method of plaster that relieves injury and pain: take gum, wax, human hair cuttings or feathers, white lead, salt all together one part each; finely ground and sifted, mix it to make a plaster."
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	"But the quantity according to how much the plaster should remain on it and appropriately be removed is this: if there is no pain or swelling and the bone is not broken, then you do not remove it for many days."
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	"And if severe pain or swelling or inflammation occurs at the place, then you remove it immediately or in that hour, and replace the plaster on it."
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	"And take a cloth of it and a damp sea sponge, and immerse that in hot water, and with that wash the affected area inside until the swelling subsides and the pain is alleviated; then let the member rest for an hour. Then place on it lanolin immersed in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and leave it on overnight until you are sure of a cauterized boil, and that the inflammation of the member has abated and the pain of it has been removed."
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then reapply that subtle bandage and plaster gently and do not tighten too much with your first constraint, and subtly with it until it is healed."
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	"And if at times the boil and the heat and pain and inflammation and all accidents are already removed from everything, and you need plaster and bandaging, then apply them again in the same way as you did at the beginning."
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	"And if no cause of those that we have mentioned occurs to the member, then do not remove it but let it remain for three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how you see it in the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh on it."
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	"And then adjust the bandage more than your first one completely, and adjust it to the thickness of the food of the sick person, according to how much is preceded by its restoration."
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	"But if you see that the place of the fracture is already dry and shriveled more than it should be, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore immerse it in hot water every time you remove it; do this for all three days. And loosen the bandage a little, and by this operation blood reaches the member, and it heals easily."
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	"But what foolish restorers of the fracture of the member do at another time when it is not restored as it should be and is restored crookedly, that is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were straightener then it would have increased the ancients in their books and guarded against this."
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	"And I have not seen any of them do that, therefore it is more reasonable that they should not do it."
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	"Chapter II: On fracture when it occurs in the head."
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	"Fractures have various shapes and causes. Some are caused by blows that break all the bone into its cavity, like a broken stick, and these are called 'ascial'. Others are caused when a blow cuts part of the bone without reaching the marrow, and these are called 'levatio absolute'."
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	"The plague of these two fractures is either great or small. The fracture that is crushed or bruised results from a blow with force or fall on stone."
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	"This fracture is penetrating and approaches the periosteum of the bone or is located on the surface of the bone. The severity of these two fractures can be great or small."
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	"And there is a fracture that occurs within the bone itself, in its finest detail, like a hair's width; this type of fracture is called 'capillary fracture'."
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	"And there is also fracture that occurs due to falls or blows from stone or similar objects, which causes fragments of bone to be driven into the interior of the bone itself, particularly in concave areas like those found at the elbow joint when it suffers a blow and becomes fractured."
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	"And this happens more often in the bones of damp places, as is seen in the heads of infants."
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	"Therefore, all these species of fractures are painful like stars separated by intervals."
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	"And I have come to remember all this in its proper place."
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	"I know all these species of fractures through detection on those bones and inquiry by touching and observing the rotten flesh that is on them."
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	"A capillary fracture is recognized because when it is exposed on the bone and cleaned, it appears black to the touch."
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	"But in the treatment of fractures, one should first consider the accompanying conditions of the illness. If the patient has symptoms such as vomiting from cholera, syncope, loss of consciousness, fever, pallor and redness of the eyes, and similar symptoms to those found in serious conditions, it is not advisable to attempt a cure."
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	"However, if the patient does not have any accompanying symptoms, then you may begin treating the fracture."
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	"The reason for this is that if the fracture has already begun to set before you have attended to it, particularly during the cold days of winter, then you should study the bone tissue in detail on the fourteenth day according to all its dispositions."
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	"But if it is during the summer days, then you should expose the bone on the seventh day, ensuring that what remains of the bone tissue has become corrupted by the surrounding flesh, and that the symptoms we have mentioned occur."
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	"If the fracture has already reached the skin covering the brain and is in many small fragments and adherent, then you should incise the comminuted and adherent fragment, following my instructions."
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	"Therefore, you should carefully shave the patient's head and uncover the bone according to your custom and manner as best you can, following the appearance of the fracture, so that it is light upon the patient."
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	"If it happens that you must make a detection of the bone, with blood flowing or a hot abscess, then you should postpone the operation until what is necessary has been done. And this is how: you should dress the wound with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil, and allow the fracture to rest until the abscess is sedated and you are sure that there is no longer any bleeding. Then begin with the circumcision of the bone and the ablation of it."
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	"This is according to one of two operative methods."
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"The first method is that you should incise the bone with a straight incision, using an instrument such as this: ... And then use another instrument of similar shape but slightly wider..."
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	"Then use an even wider instrument."
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	"You should have a variety of instruments available to you, some wider than others, and some shorter than others. They should be sharp at their tips and made of iron or bronze."
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	"Use them with ease in percussion on the incision to avoid striking the head or causing pain to the patient."
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	"If the bone is strong and hard, then you should first make a hole around it before inserting the instruments with their shallow blades."
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	"These are not called 'non-depth' blades but rather because they do not reach the end of the bone head and thus cannot be submerged or pass through the thickness of the bone."
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	"It is advisable that you take many of these blades with you, each suited to the thickness of each bone, so that in all cases where the bone head is present, its sharp end should be equal in length and breadth according to the thickness of the bone."
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	"This is the shape of three types of trepan: The purpose of using a trepan to drill around the broken bone is that you should place the trepan on the bone and turn it with your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then move the trepan to another location, keeping an interval between each stroke equal to the thickness of the ray or thereabouts."
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	"Then incise with instruments between each stroke of the bone, making it as subtle as possible at the end, as we have said. Do this until you remove the bone, either with your hand or for some other cause using tools such as tweezers and fine forceps which you will have prepared for that purpose."
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	"It is necessary that you take great care that the incision does not touch any cause of the brain."
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	"Then when you have completed the perforation of the bone and separated it from the brain if it was attached to it, you should extract it. It is necessary that you rasp and scrape it with an instrument similar to a scalpel but finer and sharper than the others."
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	"If any small bone fragments remain and are scattered about, then remove them easily with whatever instrument is appropriate. Then dress the wound with linens and dressings as we have mentioned."
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	"The other method of operation is easy and far from fearsome, which Gaudentius praised highly for his great skill; this is the speech about it: In the beginning, you must begin by uncovering the bone fragment in the place where the fracture is most violent and manifest, until when you have uncovered that fragment and placed beside it the pointed end of this gentle and cheerful scalpel, which has this shape:"
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	"And the lenticular part is for guiding and not for cutting any tissue, while the pointed end is on both sides in length, as you see. The lenticular part should be adjusted to the brain with the sharp face incident upon the bone."
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	"Then strike the scalpel with a small hammer so that you cut all of the bone easily as it rotates. Be sure that no panic arises in any manner, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant, certainly he would be asleep."
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	"Then if any attached tissue remains on the bone of the panicle in some places, cut that with the lenticular end of the scalpel and remove it easily, for it is removed without harm or fear."
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If bone fracture does not penetrate into the soft tissue, and that which is cut off or removed from the bone is its outer surface, leaving behind roughness and subtle spurs, then it becomes necessary to remove this roughness with delicate razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that they may be administered at all suitable locations with the greatest precision according to how you perceive your operation on the broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	You must administer your razor with which you began removing the bone using the broadest aspect of its blade and gradually proceed to use its finest edge, ensuring that you continue this process throughout until you have removed all roughness from every part of it.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Also in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you must administer treatment according to how you perceive their rectification.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	But it is necessary that they are not confused by all those who have studied this art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	"And based on what we have written, we have shown this in cases of large fractures."
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	"And if the panniculus is retained when you excise the bone, then you should take linen according to the size of the wound, immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; and also take another piece of linen folded or tripled, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first one gently so as not to press too hard on the flesh; and then apply latement, but do not stretch it except according to the size of the wound alone."
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	"And leave it like this for one or two days until you are sure that the wound is healing; and then remove the dressing and apply medications that promote dryness, such as lint seeds and iris flour, powdered frankincense and aloe, and similar substances."
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	"And if you make these medications into powders that are finely powdered and applied dry to the wound, and generally speaking, apply only those medications whose property is to cleanse without biting."
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	"And guard yourself according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean and not obscured by grease or other impurities; do not allow moisture to accumulate there, for when it settles on the membrane of the brain it corrupts it and causes harmful illness."
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	"And if it happens in the membrane of the head, especially when the bone has been removed and the wound is being treated, and there appears blackness on its surface; then consider whether any of the symptoms that we have mentioned occur, so that you may know that it is a serious case without doubt."
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"But if the blackness appears only because of the medication that has been applied to it, and that medication is the cause of that blackness, then you should take some honey and three parts rose oil, and with those saturate a linen cloth, and gently place it on the membrane; and then treat it according to the usual methods until it heals."
Capitol .iii.	"And if it happens in the membrane of the head, especially when the bone has been removed and the wound is being treated, and there appears blackness on its surface; then consider whether any of the symptoms that we have mentioned occur, so that you may know that it is a serious case without doubt."
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	"On restoring the nose when it is cut."
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	"You should know that the nose is not broken into two pieces simultaneously rising up, nor is one of those parts ever seen cut off, because it has two bones, and the cartilaginous part is not broken, and nothing happens to it except rubbing, twisting, and bending."
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	"But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert the little finger into its place, and gently press that fracture inward with your little finger from within and your thumb from without until the nose returns to its natural shape."
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	"And let this be done by you easily, and take care not to cause harm to the patient through your operation."
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	"And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your little finger cannot reach it, then use the extremity of a reed that has been made somewhat thicker."
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	"And if both parts are broken, then you should make them similar to each other."
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	"And strive for the restoration of it on the first day after the fracture if possible; and if not, then on the seventh or tenth day you should apply cautery to the swelling."
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	"And insert into the extremity of the nose a wick made of linen if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces of cotton if it is in both parts, and make them thick enough to fill up the passage of the nose."
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	"But some of the ancient restorers say that the cotton should be wrapped in wool and changed every day, but this is not seen by me. It should rather be dipped in album of egg yolk mixed with powder of mallow; and let the wick remain there until the bone is firm and the cartilage has hardened."
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	"And sometimes a feather made of lion's skin is inserted into the nose in place of cotton, especially if there has been severe fracture of the nose and the patient cannot breathe through it."
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	"And this cause is not necessary for you. And if you wish, do that, and if you wish, use cotton."
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	"And if another swelling occurs after cautery, plaster the nose with wax or cerote mixed with vinegar and rose oil, or with diaclycon."
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	"But if there is no swelling after cautery, then you should plaster it outside with flour of sesame and powder of iris roots mixed with albumen of egg; and gently apply a lion's skin over it, and do not touch the nose for any reason."
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	"But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed together, then you should cut over them and extract them using instruments that are appropriate for them; and then suture the incision and treat it with something that encourages healing and consolidation, and with plasters that are suitable."
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	"And if a ulcer appears inside the nose, then you should treat it with cotton and administer leaden tubes until it is completely healed."
Capitol .iiii.	"Chapter iv."
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	"On restoring the jawbone when it is broken."
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	"When the left jawbone is broken and the fracture does not have an ulcer, first examine whether the fracture is outside only, and not divided into two parts and curved inward at its ends. If it is so, then its diagnosis will be easy."
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	"And then, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert your right index finger. And push gently with that finger the swelling of the fracture inside at its ends outside, using your other hand to press the outside part of the bone in a similar way."
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	"And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two parts, then you should apply traction to both parts according to a straight line until it is possible to reduce the fracture."
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	"And if some teeth are loose due to dislocation, then strengthen those which you expect will remain with gold or silver wire or silk thread. And then plaster the broken jawbone with cerote, and apply a folded cloth on top of it, and apply a large round piece of felt well made, or a sole of leather stretched out along the length of the jawbone. And finally bind it gently from above according to how you have prepared the bandage and what is appropriate for its application, taking care not to destroy it."
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	"And instruct the patient to rest quietly and avoid drinking hot liquids."
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	"And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in some way, then on the third day try to remove it and correct what has been altered from it. And plaster it with powder of mallow, albumen of egg, or flour of sesame after removing the cerote, and apply a lion's wool cloth over the plaster."
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	"And then when the plaster is attached and adjusted over it, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it there until it is healed and strengthened. For many times this fracture heals in three weeks."
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	"And if another time an ulcer forms after the cautery, then apply what has been said many times in this book for its healing, and remove that ulcer."
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	"And if the fracture is complicated by plague, then consider whether it is due to separation or suppuration. If it is due to suppuration, then be careful to remove that suppuration with whatever is appropriate for its removal among the instruments."
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the opening of the plague wound is narrow, then widen it using forceps according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have finished those procedures, and nothing remains to be done, then if the opening of the plague wound is wide, but if not, place over it one of the plasters that are suitable for this purpose and cover it until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Frequently, the collarbone breaks at its midpoint in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it breaks, either it is separated, or it is separated into two parts without any displacement of the fragments; this type of fracture is easy to restore. Or else, it is such that displacement has occurred in it, and restoration of it is difficult. Or else, it is such that the fracture is accompanied by a plague wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in this case, when the fracture is not accompanied by a plague wound, is that you should have two assistants present, so that one may hold theadjuster and follow the broken collarbone, while the other extends the neck on either side of the fracture.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then carefully approximate the fragments with your fingers within such time that the desired form is achieved without any prominence or concavity at the site of the fracture.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then place a pad of linen or wool on the side of the wound, its size according to your need. Then extend and elevate the collarbone and compress the pad with your hand until you have approximated the fracture as desired.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you are unable to draw the end of the collarbone out beyond its fragments, then have the patient sit up on his haunches and place a bolster made of thick cloth under him.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant presses on the muscles of either side of the fragments until the bone of the collarbone is elevated above its position in front. Then you shall reduce and approximate the fracture with your fingers as described above.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel that there are displacements of the collarbone and they are mobile, then incise over it and remove those fragments with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the fragment is retained in the bone, then make an incision on it with one of the incissors that you have prepared for this purpose. This instrument is made of wood or iron and has the following shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it resembles a spoon with this concavity. Its width should be according to your need, depending on the size of the bone or the prominence of the fragment.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But its length should be as great as possible for the operation; it should have two extremities like this, one being broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you made when you removed the fragment from the bone is large and you fear an abscess will form, then approximate the two lips of the wound with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small or you fear an abscess will form, then fill the wound with linen and powder according to the size of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess forms, then take some linen dipped in sour wine and rose oil mixed with wine, and apply it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the compression of the bone when its wound is closed and cut open is that you place a poultice made of flour ground from bran with egg white on it, and apply it to the site. Then also compress the pad with linen, if necessary, and press it gently onto the titillic of the wound if needed. Then take a long bandage, its width being about a palm or more, and fold it in two lengthwise. Then place that over the poultice and compress it gently. Then take a thin board, its width being three fingers, and its length similar. Then wrap that in linen and wrap the linen with the board over the site of the fracture. Then take a bandage made of soft cloth, wrap it around itself so that it is twisted, place it on the neck of the bone and around the titillic of the wound on both sides. Then reduce that bandage over all fragments, and when you have reduced the compression of the fracture with compression downwards, this is what should be apparent to you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all of this is done so that the splint does not move over the broken bone. And you should check the dressing every day to see if the bandage has softened or if the splint has shifted, and if it has, then correct it and tighten the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the dressing over the bone and on both sides of it under the armpit at night so that with this elevation the assistant raises up the arm on that side, thereby elevating the fracture of the collarbone above its muscles. Or else you may bind the arm to the chest with a sling.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the dressing until about twelve days have passed without any signs of infection or abscess having occurred in that place.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And also renew the poultice if you see that its effect is diminished, and adjust it to fit the compression and restore it until it has been restored and the fracture of the collarbone has healed.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And in about twenty-eight days it becomes strong and comfortable. But sometimes in some people this takes less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of fractures of the shoulder
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The blade of the scapula is broken on its lateral side, and only its margins are broken.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And so when the blade of the scapula is broken and it is only known by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare for its reduction and reduce it in every way that you can by ingenuity.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place powdered flour with egg white and linen on it, and also place a folded cloth poultice. Then also place over that a thin board splint according to the size of the entire blade or slightly larger.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if on one side of the splint there is a concavity in some places on the blade, then fill that concavity with linen and also make the splint even.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then bind it firmly above with a long bandage having downward compression and with firmness of the splint so that it does not shift from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Check the dressing every day. And whenever it becomes softened, change it and tighten it again and adjust the splint if it has shifted from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Keep the limb on its own side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The blade of the scapula is restored in twenty days or at most twenty-five.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And so when this number is completed, then you should dissolve the dressing, and be sure that it is of those bones whose union is not delayed nor their healing slowed.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the site of the broken bone and place your hand on the shoulder blade, then incise there and drain it if necessary, and do as we have said regarding the fracture of the collarbone for treating an abscess if one should occur here.
Capitol .vii.	De restauracio de fractura de la clavicula.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	"To treat a broken leg."
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	"The leg is sometimes fractured in the middle of it and this can happen even if the ends are only cracked or shattered."
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	"And when the middle of it is broken in accidents, it leans towards one side and causes pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, and vomiting blood. The fracture can be felt in the cavity of the bone and is not hidden to the touch."
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	"And in the treatment of it, the patient should be placed on their back and a cushion put between their thighs; then press gently upon the muscles of the leg and adjust the bones of the leg as well as possible, according to all methods that are appropriate and convenient, until the shape of the bone is restored."
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	"And then apply bandages and gauze or linen cloths soaked in saltwater or chalk water and similar things, carefully wrapping them around the broken bone so that it is not moved. And sometimes tie a splint on the back to maintain its roundness, and tighten this with proper binding. And observe the dressing at all times, tightening it when it becomes loose."
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is necessary to remove the dressing due to corruption or pressure, pain, swelling, or an abscess occurring in that place, then gently remove and replace the dressing, and correct whatever has happened there with care using proper methods. And then reapply the splint, sometimes changing its position; and adjust the bindings until healing occurs."
Capitol .viii.	**Chapter VIII.**
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	"For the healing of the ribs when they are crushed."
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	"Know that fractures of the ribs do not occur except in large spaces where there is flesh on the back; and at their ends, near the cartilage, it rarely happens except for that reason."
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	"And its recognition is not hidden from feeling through inquiry with them."
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	"And the healing should be done as follows: align the fracture with the said servant according to the most possible manner, so that it may be healed according to what is necessary, and properly apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if necessary."
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	"And if the fracture of the ribs is declinant towards its ends within, then it often happens that there is sudden sharp pain and puncture, such as occurs in those who have suffered pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane. And it also happens with difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting much blood; and this is difficult to cure."
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	"And already the Ancients knew how to treat that with many remedies."
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	"Thus they say: Cover the patient with warm foods that generate heat and windiness, so that the belly may be inflated and extended, and the fracture pushed outward."
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	"However, we should avoid this because it could cause an easy boil to form, unless otherwise necessary. And if one were to occur, this would help alleviate it."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	"They said some of them that it should be placed on windiness and open so that it may suck strongly; and this seems like reasoning, but however it is feared that the windiness may draw the superfluities to the place due to weakness."
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	"Some of them said: Cover the place with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and powders should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the wrapping may fit well according to its roundness; and let the illness be treated with pleurisy cure of food and medicine."
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	"And if the illness causes violent constriction which is not endured, and the bone pierces the velament with a puncturing wound, then they fear about the illness. Therefore, one should cut over the place, uncover the broken rib, and immediately place upon it that instrument which preserves the ciaphac, the memory of which has been previously mentioned, and gently cut the bone and extract it."
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	"And also, if the wound is large, sew its two lips with stitches, and dress it with plasters until it heals."
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	"And if an abscess forms inside, then take some powder and mix it with rose oil and apply it to the place, and let the illness be treated with what is appropriate for the internal abscess."
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	"And he should be propped up on pillows so that he may sit while sleeping until he is healed."
Capitol .ix.	"Chapter Nine."
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	"Regarding the restoration of fractures of the spinal column in the back and neck."
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes it happens that fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and sometimes it happens to their articulation, similarly with the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if this happens to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, then examine whether sometimes his muscles are softened, stunned, and deadened so that they can neither move nor extend nor contract. And when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and he does not feel any pain there, then you know that it has not healed. In such cases it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	But if he can move those muscles and feels constriction with pressure or puncture there, then you know that the bone is saved and the illness will go away with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	But if it seems that the vertebrae of the neck are similar to this case and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider their position.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you find that some of them are already softened, it happened as in this case. And especially when he lies on his back, he feels ventilation and expulsion without his will, and sometimes he is raised up on his back and wants to urinate but cannot. Then you know that it is mortal, and at that point do not bother with its treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	"But if none of those occurs, the cause is better and more lightweight."
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	"The treatment for it is that you apply sedation to the abscess that has formed over the inflamed and infected area with some cotton soaked in hot water; place it there several times a day until the abscess is sedated."
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and press it onto that area with a bandage. Command the patient to rest and remain calm, and not sleep on the side where they feel pain until they are healed."
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	"And if the inflammation of the bone sets in or some other cause that has already separated from it occurs, then you must cut into the flesh and remove that bone. Then join the two lips of the wound together with stitches if it is large; and then treat it with a poultice made from honey, until it heals."
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	"But if the head of the bone is broken off and it is the end of the cure, then you must insert your left thumb into the anus and grasp the broken bone with your other hand according to what is possible by means of a traction device. Then apply a poultice or plaster and bandage it."
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	"And if you feel broken fragments within it, then you must open that up and remove them, and treat the wound with the appropriate cure until it is healed."
Capitol .x.	Chapter X
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of restoration of the ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankles are sometimes broken and when they are, their fractures are only contusions at their extremities and they incline toward the inside. And it happens that the patient feels pain in that place and puncturing, and the foot becomes stiff when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you should stretch your hand over it until it is above the fracture as shown in the figure.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at its extremity, then you should grasp it according to what appears appropriate for traction until it is brought together in its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long bone or one that already inclines towards the inside of the foot, then you should have the patient lie on his/her stomach until you are prepared to perform the reduction of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have grasped it, apply a plaster and also apply splints of wood or bone, and bind them tightly without fear of puncturing the fracture or displacing the splints.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And then fill in the concave part with whatever is at hand so that it takes up the pressure equally and commands the patient to sleep on their back or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an inflammatory swelling occurs, then you should cease the extension and reduction of it until the inflammation has subsided, and apply whatever is appropriate to subdue that inflammation. And then return to the reduction of it and bind it as is necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if fragments or splinters occur in the bone, then you should remove them
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of restoration of fracture of the clavicle
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The clavicle is that which is between the chest and the head of the shoulder
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then its restoration is by one of two methods, the first of which is that you should take a flat piece of wood of moderate thickness in this way:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let there be attached at both ends two cords and then it shall be suspended from an elevated place
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And then have the patient sit on a chair and then place their broken arm over the wood so that it reaches to its tip in the middle part where the curvature of the wood is attached
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend some heavy weight from it, or have the patient extend it towards the left side and then the physician should hold both of its ends together so that the fracture returns to its proper position
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other method is that the patient should be propped up on their neck and have their collarbone suspended by a cord. And then command two assistants to hold it, one above the fracture with both hands and the other below it, and each of them should extend towards his side
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you wish for the extension to be stronger, then bind it with one cord above the fracture and another below it, and each of the assistants should extend towards their respective sides
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	Therefore if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then half of the cord should be placed on the tip and the other half below the fracture towards the chest
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly if the fracture is close to the chest, then the cord should be placed on that location and also on the chest
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Grasp it gently and without struggle and then when it has been grasped as is necessary and applied properly, then bind it if inflammation does not occur
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if inflammation occurs, then leave the splint on for seven days and apply to it a compress of flaxseed boiled in vinegar and rose oil until the inflammation has subsided, and then bind it
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of binding it is that you should place plaster on the fracture and then place a wrapping of moist cloth over the plaster and then adjust the arm over that clavicle and place its covered hand on its own muscle
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And then wrap the cloth around it and bind the arm over the clavicle so that the arm is in its proper position, unless some cause prevents it from doing so due to the broken bone
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then apply splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And then place on the fracture that splint which is broader and stronger than the others and insert between each splint the width of a finger and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers on either side
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then bind over the splints with the splint which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And ensure that your binding over the fracture is as tight as possible
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture has healed, then the binding should be looser
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Therefore if you find yourself in the situation of having applied splints and binding as we have said at the time when you are restoring the limb to its proper position, then do so
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear inflammation, then leave the binding and splints on for seven days as we have said
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the cord in all parts for three days so that it does not cause pressure or inflammation there, or so that food is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess tightness of the binding, and therefore correct everything as we have said
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you suspect that nothing will happen due to your carelessness, then do not loosen the bandage but rather wait for three days or more
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a bolster full of wool on the clavicle and ensure at all times during the night or day that neither the figure of the broken limb is disturbed nor that the cord becomes softened, so that you may correct everything with your skill
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And provide food for the patient according to the order which we have mentioned earlier, so that the food is soft at first until binding begins and then gradually make it thicker.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	As for the custom of the splints and bandages, they should be bound for forty days. Then they should be loosened and a bath given and medicinal ointments applied which can correct them
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture has been properly healed, then do not remove the binding and splints until after ten days or two months
Capitol .xii.	"Chapter Twelve."
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	"On the restoration of a broken arm."
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	"The arm is composed of two bones called the two forks; one of which is small and is that which holds the aforementioned fist, while the other is large and is placed next to it on the side facing downwards."
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	"And sometimes only the larger fork bone breaks, or only the smaller one; but rarely do they break together."
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	"When the little fork bone breaks at the top, its restoration and healing will be easier."
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	"But when it breaks below the fracture, its restoration is difficult and its healing takes a long time."
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	"And even worse than that is when two bones break together."
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	"Therefore if the bone that is broken is the small fork above, then it is advisable for the doctor to perform a simple reduction with ease before it heals."
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	"But if the large fork is what has broken, then traction must be applied forcefully."
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	"And if both forks are broken together, then you should apply traction even harder."
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	"And you should place the figure of the hand in its proper position during reduction and traction by extending it on a pillow; placing the thumb above all other fingers, the little finger lower than the others, and the patient lying on their side facing upwards."
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	"And place a pillow in front of them at the level or behind the elbow to prevent him from moving around."
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	"Now have one assistant extend the elbow below with their own hand or with linen, and another assistant extend it above in the same manner."
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	"And now let the surgeon reduce the bone into place by aligning it according to its best possible position."
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	"If there are any irregularities in the fracture of the bone, then you should press all your weight on it to reduce it back into place."
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	"But if there is separation of the bone ends with displacement of the elbow joint that does not reduce spontaneously, then you should proceed as follows:..."
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	"But if the fracture is compounded (open), I have already discussed this case separately. Therefore, take care of that."
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	"And if you encounter an aposteme at the beginning of your reduction, then take a cloth smeared with cerot made from rose oil and white wax, which should be neither too thick nor too thin. Place this cloth over the aposteme with subtle tension until it subsides. Then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared with powdered mallow mixed with egg whites, and also apply plaster strips; make sure that the plaster strip placed on the fracture is wide and strong."
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	"And know that in the case of fractures of the arm, there are usually six plaster strips applied, either for a fracture of one fork or for two forks together."
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	"Now apply your traction even harder and more vehemently over the fracture site, and if necessary, increase the tension even further on the proximal or distal parts of the fracture according to what is described at the beginning of this chapter."
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"And the cloths wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moistened with water, not hard or rough. The bandage used for tension should be of moderate thickness between subtle and thick, as recommended earlier."
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	"Keep the limb immobilized for several days."
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	"And if there is any cause that requires repositioning, such as swelling of the limb, then you should immerse the limb in warm water until the swelling subsides."
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	"Leave the limb at rest without traction for a few days and then reapply the traction."
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	"And if the traction has been sufficiently maintained and the bone has already reduced well, then you should now finish everything with your own strength."
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	"And if there is any obstruction of nourishment to the limb due to excessive traction, then you should relax it a little and leave it alone for a few days until circulation is restored, and then apply traction again."
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	"But if the limb shows no signs of any of the conditions mentioned earlier, then there is no need to remove the traction for more than about 20 days or so."
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	"Then have the patient use his own strength to move his arm around and make him lie on his back to sleep."
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	"And know that this fracture is usually restored in 30 to 32 days, but sometimes it can be restored in as few as 28 days, depending on the condition of the complexion and the strength of the patient."
Capitol .xiii.	"Chapter XIII."
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	"On the reduction of fractures of the thumb and fingers."
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	"Know that at the tip of the hand and in the joints of the fingers there are often fractures, not actual breaks but frequent dislocations."
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	"And when there is fracture or dislocation of the hand, the patient should be made to lie on their back with their arms extended out in front of them, and place their other hand over that one to keep it steady."
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	"Then the servant should extend the broken bones and the physician will align them, making sure they fit together well with proper alignment."
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	"And then a plaster and bandage should be applied, unless there is already a wound that needs cauterizing. Afterwards, apply a splint according to the size of the location, and you have already wrapped it in linen."
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	"But if the fracture is on the palm side of the hand, then make a sling from cloth and tell the patient to hold it with their palm pressed against theirs. Afterwards, bind it securely with a long piece of cloth."
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	"And the splint should be made of leather wrapped in cloth that is elevated on one side so that the leather touches the palm. Then bind it securely as needed."
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	"But if the fracture is on the outer side of the hand, then apply a splint on top and another splint from the edge of the palm to the wrist so that the hand is upright and straight. Then apply the bandage in this way, as if the hand were turned towards the little finger between those parts."
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	"And if there is a fracture in one of the knuckles of those parts, then if it's the thumb, align it as needed and bind it to the palm. And if you wish, apply a small splint on the outside to elevate the fracture and prevent movement."
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	"But if the fracture is in one of the other knuckles, such as at the middle joint or the index finger, ring finger, or little finger, then align and bind it with the finger on which it occurs. Or they can all be bound together continuously, which is better; or apply a small splint over that area, as we have said for the thumb."
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	"And when you are performing your restoration and bandaging, consider the location of the wound, cauterization, and opposition according to what is needed in case any cause occurs that has been mentioned previously."
Capitol .xiv.	"Chapter XIV."
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	"On the restoration of fractures of the bone of the ankle."
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	"The bone of the ankle is often broken and declares itself by becoming displaced at the joint in front and being pushed upwards."
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	"And the restoration is done in such a way that a bandage is applied above the fracture and another below it. The patient should be lying on their stomach with their face down."
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	"And the minister should extend all the bandages to his party according to the quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone."
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	"If the fracture is at the root of the thigh bone, then draw the thread tightly to its edge near the knee joint, so that the tension comes out from there, and let another thread remain on the break."
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	"If the fracture is at the knee joint, then draw the thread tightly to the knee, and let the tension come out from there."
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	"And then the doctor presses both bones together at the two ends so that they reduce it back to its natural shape and the bone is joined together by good union. Then you must apply a plaster and strapping if there is no inflammation of the member."
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	"But if there is an abscess, then leave it alone for several days until the abscess has softened, and then return to your treatment."
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	"The strapping should be done like this: you must wrap a hard bandage over the fracture two or three times and remove any excess; then wrap the limb so that it reaches to the ankle and root of the thigh."
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	"And insert a long needle between the thigh and the bandage near the knee joint, bringing the ends of the thread from above on both sides, then wrap it around the limb."
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	"And then press a pad over the thigh at that fracture point, and attach a splint to the outer surface of the bandage."
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	"And then fill in the spaces between the limb and the thigh with soft cloths so that the strapping remains firm."
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	"And then begin with a tight strapping of the middle over the fracture point using three or four wraps, and as you move away from the fracture point, make your strapping looser and softer."
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	"And then extend both ends of the thread to the sides until they reach the heel of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splint on the other side so that the limb does not move from its position."
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	"And then leave the strapping on for several days without causing any injury to the limb or abscesses or inflammation or swelling resembling those described earlier. If anything happens, remove the strapping immediately and correct it as soon as possible, according to what we have said many times."
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone sticks out from its proper place, you must reduce it back into position as much as possible. If this cannot be done, then apply a splint and remove it once healing has occurred."
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	"And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with splints other than those that have been mentioned in the treatise and in the arm."
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	"But nevertheless, in restoring the limb in this manner there should be no limpiness caused by shortening. And if it is restored alone, without the other leg being applied, then necessarily that limb will remain lame."
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	"And know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a little more or less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions."
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter Fifteen"
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	"On the reduction of fractures of the collarbone."
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	"You should know that fracture of the kneecap can occur suddenly, but it often happens due to direct impact."
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	"And if there is fracture, it is only a split or crack in its parts, and this is an illness or small injury, and overall it has been felt as such."
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	"And the repair of it is easy, so that what has been broken in its parts should be united again with these sutures that have been added and joined together as much as possible for equanimity and ease of formation."
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	"And therefore pause with plaster and pausing over that round surface, if you need to do so; and stretch over it with this binding accordingly."
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	"And also consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures, thus like cauterization and similar applications as much as possible so that it pauses on all accidents with whatever is convenient for its healing."
Capitol .xvi.	"Chapter XVI"
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	"On the repair of fracture of the knee-cap."
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	"You should know that in the kneecap there are two bones, of which one is thick and is called by the name of the kneecap; and the other is thin, and is called patella."
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	"And it happens with some species of fracture that it occurs to the two bones of the arm, and therefore its repair is made in the same way as the repair of the arm is made, and the operation for it is one."
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	"And if both bones are broken at once, the kneecap becomes completely fragmented."
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	"If it is broken, the bone becomes twisted at its ends."
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	"And if it is crushed but not displaced, then those are cases which are not serious."
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	"And especially apply extension, traction and splinting of the bones according to that method."
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	"But consider this, if the fracture of the thigh bone is not accompanied by many complications, then the extension should be lighter and gentler, according to your strength."
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	"And when operating on the thigh bone, after you have straightened the bones and completed your operation, then you will take pieces of wood from a tree, which is placed near those causes that are placed in usual positions, and these are made equally from branches of palm; choose those that are light, not too heavy or large, and their length should be equal to the length of the thigh bone, from the knee to the hip."
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	"And then wrap each piece of wood in two layers according to its length, and place one on the upper thigh at one end and the other on the other end, and they should be placed from ten inches below the hip joint downwards."
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	"And then tie the two splints in three places at both extremities and at the middle point, because with this structure the thigh bone is prevented from bending to the right or left side, and it stands for good position."
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	"And now you will administer a splint of wood according to the length of the thigh bone, and place it on it so that it may preserve its position."
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	"And especially this should be done in fracture cases, and when such an injury occurs properly."
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"And then examine the thigh bone every day and study it carefully to see if there is any inflammation or swelling or other similar causes. And whenever such cause occurs, you should apply that which is necessary according to the condition for its healing."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle bone and bones of the foot.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Not the ankle bone alone suffers fracture all the time; but some bones of the foot suffer fracture occasionally; and those of the foot seldom suffer fracture, and do not suffer it unless they are out of their usual position.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot suffer fracture and those bones are sometimes elevated above one another among themselves, then the patient places his foot on the ground prepared thus, as going.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And near upon this he places one foot upon that which is elevated by those bones; and near upon it presses them down and squeezes them round about in the places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And near upon this he applies plaster and stops up above; and places on the front of the foot a small table with two flat heads.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And near upon this he stretches that limb downwards with the foot; because thou hast enveloped it with cloths and other things of which thou standest in need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed thou shalt then unbind it; for thou wilt find the bones squeezed together, either broken or disjointed; and the operation on these is as follows.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some of them are broken, then restore these; and squeeze them together thus with glue and sew as thou hast been taught in the restoration of those of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And near upon this place the splint along the length of the toe and let it be thus made somewhat wider at the end; and near upon this place on the foot that table which hath been recommended to thee, and stretch that with a downward strain.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if that which is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then place over each toe a splint according to its quantity wrapped in lion's skin; and stretch the table on the lower part of the foot and let it stand upon one of the flat heads at the front of the foot so that it may have good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is necessary for thee that thou dost not forget to consider all those causes which are mentioned to thee in the other fractures of accidents that have been spoken of; and apply thyself to each accident with what is appropriate.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the thigh bone of a woman, of the bone of the hip joint and of the penis.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone of a woman is broken, then make that cease in this manner, and near upon this incline it somewhat at the joint of the two legs behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And near upon this the midwife shall bind it with soft cloth and let it be made firm in the thigh thus as an egg; and near upon this let the woman lie on her back and elevate little by little one buttock; for all this is done until that is before the joint of the thigh thus as an egg, and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And near upon this apply poultices to the buttock; and when she wishes to urinate remove the bandage with ease and let her urinate; and reduce it again and return it according to the manner in which thou hast first placed it on; and then return to the first poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do thus for seven days or thereabouts, for that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if thou wilt, take once a sheep's bladder and stretch it over the breach of that one with a reed cane; and put all the bladder into the thigh bone and then blow into the reed with breath until the bladder be inflated within the thigh bone, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And near upon this let it be bound up with soft cloth and rest thus for some days according to that which hath been recommended until it be healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the hip joint of a man or woman is broken, then administer to the restoration and reduction of it that which hath been recommended in the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is right is not concealed in these fractures near to the body and easily done, especially to him to whom this my book is some study and use; for that fracture signifieth to thee in the greater dispositions a straight way rightly in the restoration and the strapping of it, and therefore thou shalt understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the penis of a man when it is broken, take a goose feather and put the penis into that; and near upon this apply over it wrapping of cloth and let it be wrapped up, and then let it lie for three days or thereabouts, and it shall be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	"For the healing of bone fractures when they are inflamed."
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	"It is convenient for that person who has suffered a fracture with inflammation, and especially if the bone is large like those of the thigh or arm, or similar. Therefore, you should immediately flebotomize that person if conditions for bloodletting are suitable as mentioned above."
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	"If the inflammation flows with blood, then you should cover it immediately and powder it with this mixture:..."
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	"And thus begins to restore the fracture on that same day, without delay, unless there is an abscess."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	"But if an abscess occurs, you should leave the restoration for 9 days until it has healed. And do not approach it on the third day or fourth day altogether, because bad accidents may occur."
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	"But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin and exposed, you should carefully reduce it and align it with your hands using gentle force without excessive tension."
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	"But if the reduction is not well prepared and equaling it with your hands alone causes excessive tension, then you should use this instrument to reduce it: it is made of iron, seven or eight digits long and its width according to the amount of inflammation. And so it is necessary for the physician to have three or four of these instruments ready at hand for all kinds of fractures."
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	"And once it is reduced and properly aligned, apply a small amount of pressure so that it is not doubled during the operation."
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	"And if there are sharp edges at the ends of the bone fragments, you should carefully remove them with the forceps and reduce the size of the fragments as much as possible."
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And this is how it looks:"
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	"It is called in Greek 'labre volentz atelarem', meaning it is a rare case."
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	"For what reason must the extremity of his foot be elevated above the prominence of the bone?"
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	"And press him in a way that makes the bone return to its original position, and keep it there with some pressure."
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	"And then try to align the extremities of the fracture between them. If the extremity of the broken bone is thin and does not fit well with the instrument, you should insert the extremity of that bone into the tool so that it has enough power."
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	"But if you cannot reduce the bone with what has been recommended, then cut it using one of the instruments mentioned earlier, or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you."
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	"And also rasp that which remains on the bone from sharp edges and small chips."
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	"And when the bone has been reduced and during the reduction the patient feels intense pain on moving, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position. Therefore do this if you want to greatly benefit the patient."
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	"When you have completed your treatment of the bone, then immerse it in black soap and water, especially if it is summer, and do not pour any grease or oil over it for fear that putrefaction and corruption may occur."
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	"And also apply splints at the time of completion of the bone treatment and leave the wound exposed until you insert them with forceps and use bandages according to the quantity of the wound."
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	"And be very careful that you do not strain the wound with the fracture, for many times fools have done this and caused harm to their patients with death or rotting flesh or other mischief. This is unhealthy."
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	"And if your traction is light, soft, different from the usual traction used for fractures."
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	"And if the wound is large or a bad wound and you fear that one of those unfortunate accidents may occur which have been mentioned earlier, and there is pain in the area, then it is not necessary to apply splints. Instead, make a dressing with hard cloths instead of splints and press it on."
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	"And when the wound begins to form scab about one or two days after applying the dressing, then remove it and apply poultices, which are used according to our custom for healing wounds, such as 'tetrafarmacum' and similar ones."
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	"And it is fitting for you to cleanse the wound and examine it every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that putrefaction flows easily from it towards its openings."
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	"If many days have passed and the wound is not consolidated nor separated from the scab, then you should know that it is because of the small vessels. Therefore, explore the wound with a probe."
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	"And those vessels that are separated and removed or extracted should be left alone. Those that cannot be separated and cause pain in the member should be pursued and incised according to what you consider possible."
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	"If pus or ichor occurs in the wound, it is called 'stymia', or some other kind of corruption and putrefaction. Then you should apply one of those with which you consider appropriate for its cure, according to what has been described earlier in its chapter."
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	"And about this, in which it is fitting that I speak briefly and you weigh your patience: when the bone is crushed, do not presume to extract it or remove it because many times death has occurred for this reason. Leave it there until putrefaction occurs, for after twenty or thirty days it will fall out on its own. Then treat the wound if you see fit, and if not, leave it."
Capitol .xx.	"Chapter XX."
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	"Of the treatment of swelling that occurs at the site of any fracture."
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	"Very often this swelling occurs at the site of fracture healing, especially near joints, and it distorts the shape of the limb and hinders its natural operation."
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	"Therefore, if the swelling is recent, apply to it medicines that have astringent properties such as aloe, resin, myrrh, and similar ones. Take some or all of them and mix them with wine that has been thickened, or with albumen of egg, or with vinegar, and apply this mixture to the swelling on linen cloth, binding it tightly in place."
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	"And leave the dressing on for several days without removing it. Then remove it and apply another one until the swelling has disappeared. Or press a thin sheet of heated lead onto it, because lead has the property of reducing all swellings in the limbs."
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if the swelling has become hard and stiff and requires removal with caution, then incise it along its dominant seam and remove the excess or excise it with a rasp until it is removed. Then treat it until it is healed."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter XXI."
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	"Of the restoration of fracture when it has healed but the limb remains thin and weak, not following its natural course."
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	"When a fracture of the bone has healed, but the limb remains thin and weak, this occurs for many reasons: either because of too much solution of the liga
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	"The treatment for this is to give the patient good food to make his blood thicker, so that the blood is multiplied in him. And apply baths, and massage and laughter upon it."
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	"And also apply plaster onto the limb so that the plaster attracts much nourishment to it, or continue massaging it with warm water until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape."
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter XXII."
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	"When broken bones are restored crookedly, forbid their operation."
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	"When a limb previously restored becomes crooked or prominent during the healing process due to a break and swelling of the bone, it may appear deformed but nonetheless the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation; therefore do not accept the opinion of anyone who considers that limb newly broken."
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	"However, many foolish doctors and restorers have done this in our land; and this operation is greatly to be condemned and causes great fear, the sign of which is deadly."
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	"However, if lameness and swelling are recent, then they should be fomented with hot water in which softening herbs have been cooked, such as marshmallow root and rose hips, mallows, and similar ones; and a poultice should be made with a mollifying plaster like dallaquilon well-made; or the juice of marshmallow root should be pressed out and mixed with groats of wheat or oil of cinnamon and applied as a poultice; or fresh figs should be pressed and trampled with pigeon dung, and similar to those medicines called amulets for consolidation."
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	"And sometimes it is dissolved with frequent gentle friction which should be done in the most humid parts, and movement of the member should be administered at all times."
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	"However, if the deformity is already established and strong and turned into bone, and there is a need for treatment with an iron instrument, then it is necessary to cut the excess bone above and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and remove the superfluous swelling of that member with subtle incissors, and facilitate movement in that limb with diligence and care."
Capitol .xxiii.	"Chapter XXII."
De sermo en dislocacio.	"Of speech in dislocation."
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints in its place, so that it is prevented from moving, and the figure of the member is disfigured, causing great pain and injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to promptly reduce it so that it may be reduced quickly, because if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and very difficult to reduce.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	Moreover, during this inflammation period, it should not be moved or stretched because many times it can cause convulsions and intense pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	However, if this happens, then it is necessary that you have recourse to the cauterization of the patient and let him rest until the inflammation subsides; and then the member should be wrapped in hot water and oil, and thus reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members should be treated with what will bring them back to their original position.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation as it was previously explained in fracture, from the upper part of the body down to the lower parts.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the jawbone.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So if both jaws are dislocated and not reduced, the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are displaced from their places by slight movement and become softened slightly; or they are completely dislocated, allowing saliva to flow freely until they are softened at the joint before they can be returned to their places nor close the mouth, and the tongue is wrapped in his handkerchief.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But if the dislocation is slight, then often it returns to its place by itself with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and complicated, then reduction must be administered gently, without delay at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And let the assistant hold the patient's head, and insert his fingers of one hand into the depression of the dislocation of the jawbone within the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or let him insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, and let the other fingers be outside the cheeks to balance them; and command the patient to close his jaws and make them still in each part; and the doctor balances the jawbone and presses it until it returns to its proper place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at once, then evaporation with hot water and oil should be administered, until easy reduction of both can be made without delaying reduction at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then when they have returned and are balanced, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then apply poultices of cloth with cerote, and let it be made of wax and olive oil; and let it be bound with facility with soft linen.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be placed between two pillows, so that he does not move it to the right or left; and do not force him to open his mouth for any cause until after the pains are alleviated and the jaws are healed. Then let him eat soft food, until when he wishes to chew something.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let this be administered with ease, and do not labor over the opening of the mouth during eating and drinking and speaking until the jawbone is healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then often it happens that fevers and continuous sweats occur, and strong laxatives are given to the patient's belly, and strong purgatives made of hellebore.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you do this, then know that it is harmful; for many times the patient dies in ten days to whom this happens.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The shoulder blade is not displaced within due to its continuity with the chest; sometimes it may be displaced at the outset, which is evident by touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	To restore it, have the patient lie on their back and extend their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then press the spot with your palm firmly, for it will return to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then apply a plaster and dusting powder, and bind that area tightly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	However, if the end of that which attaches to it is not displaced on any day, then it should be reduced and immobilized according to what we have said and according to your skill.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a plaster, dusting powder, and bandage, and instruct the patient to adhere to calmness and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this same treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when it becomes separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of muscle dislocation
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that muscles are not displaced except in three ways, one of which is when they are displaced from their attachment to the tendinous insertion.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second way is when they are displaced from their midbelly, which happens rarely; and they are not displaced at attachments behind by the shoulder blade or in front by nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Muscles are most frequently displaced and exited at their tendinous insertions near the tibiae, especially in those individuals with less flesh where displacement occurs more easily. However, in those with abundant flesh, muscles exit with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	Sometimes it happens to certain men that through a blow or fall, the muscle becomes bruised and swollen with blood, causing the muscle to become displaced.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, you should immediately address this condition while it is still recent, and then proceed with its treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	Muscle displacement is recognized when it occurs at its tendinous insertion near the tibia. Thus, you can distinguish between a displaced muscle and an intact one by observing the obvious differences between them. You will find concavity at the head of the muscle with the tibia near the touch of the head of the muscle like a horse's hoof. The patient cannot bring their hand to their ear nor move that limb in any way.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is displaced from the foot or its middle part, you will immediately find a prominent touch and not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	From this displacement, easy reduction can be made when it is recent and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	"The reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand above the parts; and then places their thumbs on either side of the patient's titillic; and raises the joint with strength to its proper place, and the minister raises the patient's hand, and extends that one upwards; and then keeps that from returning lightly."
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	"If this does not return as described above, and if the dislocation first occurred many days ago, then it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in hot water; and they should also be given an ointment that softens and lubricates like this: take equal parts of rosehips, fenugreek, and poppy seeds in water, mix well, and administer."
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	"And then the patient should be propped up on their back and kept still around the titillic area until the joint is between levitation and structure; and then the doctor places their heel on the sphere, lifts the head of the muscle with force, and pulls the patient's arm so that it does not move from its place; another assistant should also hold the patient's head to prevent movement."
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	"And if you wish to reduce it in this manner: take a man who is taller than the patient and place him on the same side of the patient. Then insert his elbow into the titillic area of the patient's arm and elevate the titillic upwards while keeping the patient suspended in air; another assistant should pull the patient's arm downwards towards their own belly."
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	"But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that another cause be suspended along with them, otherwise they will fall and the dislocation will return quickly."
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And it can also be reduced in this manner: place on the ground a long stake with a rounded head like a pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and place the patient leaning against it. Then cover the top of the stake with soft cloths, have the patient stand along the length of the stake with their arm extended towards the other side; and extend their body towards the other side with force, for the joint will return to its place quickly."
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	"And if reduction is difficult due to all the causes mentioned above, then use this cure: take a stake that is two braccia in length, four fingers in width, and whose thickness should be reduced at the titillic according to this shape:"
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	"And then place soft cloths on the rounded head of the stake to prevent injury to the patient."
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	"And then place the stake against the titillic of the patient, extend their arm or forearm along the stake towards the other side, and tie the stake onto the assistants' arms and hand using cloths."
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	"And then place the arm on a step of stairs according to its width, extend the hand towards the other side, and suspend the rest of the body on the other side, for the joint will enter quickly."
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	"And once the joint has entered according to each method that is possible for you, then place a pad of wool felt over the titillic. Then apply a plaster made from powdered brick dust mixed with eggs and albumen of egg over the entire muscle as it is wrapped upwards. Next, bind the titillic tightly with a suitable bandage; wind the lint around the plaster, fasten the patient's hand to their neck, and leave it in place for seven days without removing the hand."
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	"And care should be taken that the patient's diet is light during this time to facilitate recovery, for it will be easier to heal."
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	"And then gradually increase the patient's diet after seven or eight days and allow them some exercise. And once it has strengthened and is no longer tender, then it can be considered healed."
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	"But if the joint has been dislocated many times due to humidity that occurs there or for other reasons, then it is necessary to administer cautery with three trails according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery."
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	"But if even after all that is done the joint does not heal within seven days and remains loose even when the bandage and plaster are reapplied several times, and the patient cannot raise their arm above their head, then know that the nerves at the head of the muscle have either been severed, stretched or softened. And know that the joint will never return to its proper place."
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	"For the dislocation of the shoulder joint that occurs near the pit and breast or behind the shoulders, reduction is performed with force and extension using the hands until it returns."
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And then apply another bandage and treat it until it heals."
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	"And if heaviness or slowness occurs in the limb during recovery, then have the patient take many baths until that heaviness is relieved and the limb returns to its original condition."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII."
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	"On the treatment of dislocation of the hip."
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	"Know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns to its place with difficulty. And it can be dislocated in any direction, but most commonly towards the front or back. You will know if the hip has been dislocated because there will be a difference in length when standing or lying down according to how it was dislocated. When you reduce the dislocated hip with the sacrum, this will be clearly apparent to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the thigh, nor touch the muscle itself."
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	"And therefore, take care to reduce the dislocation promptly before an abscess forms because if an abscess does form it will be difficult to reduce and the limb may not heal completely; particularly when it is displaced backwards as this is the worst type of dislocation in terms of pain and often leads to death."
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	"And the reduction of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is performed by extending the patient's hand with two hands and expanding their arm. The physician places their hands on the hip and behind it, and pushes the joint back into place using their elbows or the edge of his palm until it returns to its proper position."
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	"But if the dislocation is towards the front, then reduce it by bending the hand with your own hand until you strike the hip bone with the edge of your palm."
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	"And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and considerable force."
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	"And it is necessary for two assistants to extend the limb and hold it in that position so that it does not move backwards during extension."
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	"And then wrap the entire limb from front to back with a long folded cloth or bandage."
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	"And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should grease it with some oil to facilitate lubrication of the joint. Then push the joint forcefully back into place until it returns."
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	"And then apply a plaster with styptic and expectorant properties made from egg albumen over the reduced joint. Bind it tightly with a descending bandage and hang the arm in a sling for several days."
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	"And then after some time has passed, if the joint has healed properly in its place, then you may remove the bandage and leave it alone."
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	"But if you find that the joint is not strong enough, then repeat the plaster and bandage application, leaving it on for several more days until it has healed properly. Then remove it."
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If it happens that the patient feels heavy during the reduction of the joint, and their condition is in movement, then administer humidification with baths and gentle friction, along with compression until they feel relieved. Or place a warm compress on the joint if it's a matter of fatty tissue; then bind it up, leaving that on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then remove the compress and place the patient in a bath; once they're out, gently rub the joint with warm friction, and repeat the application of warmth if necessary, up to three times.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	During this process, continue bathing until relieved.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place a wet and warm cowhide fold on the joint edge, and press it onto them; do this several times until that becomes moistened and reduced in its condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	**On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Shoulder Joint**
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	"Sometimes the hand is dislocated; its relocation is easy, unlike other joints, but it is necessary to act quickly in relocating it at the time of dislocation before the place becomes inflamed or an inflammation occurs."
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"The relocation of the hand's dislocation involves placing the patient's hand on a table and extending it by the servant. The doctor then places their hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and pushes until it returns to its proper position."
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	"But if the palm is already facing towards the stomach of the hand, then during extension and reduction, the patient should place the back of their hand on a table; and if the dislocation is previous to the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be intrinsecely upon the table, so that the doctor's hand can cover that prominence of the joint."
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	"And therefore if it returns quickly, good. But if not, then press the hand with strength until the inflammation subsides and leave him; and do not insist upon this, for if not, neither suffering nor power can be done over the reduction of it after several days have passed."
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	"But however the joint returns according to its tortuosity; and do not notify the patient of any cause, but say that the hand is mollified and cannot strengthen itself. Then you should know that the nerves are crushed or torn, and then it is not necessary except that it be strengthened with cautery near the site of it, and afterwards confer some cause to him."
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	"So when the dislocation has returned, then place upon it that pressure which we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for 7 days. And also near to it be untied and let it rest, and the hand of it be exercised."
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	"But if the motion of the joint is stayed and any gravity occurs in it, then apply to it cold water with friction several times until it is alleviated."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX."
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	"Of the treatment of dislocation of these."
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes these are dislocated from all parts.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when some of these fingers are dislocated towards the palm or belly of the hand, then stretch the finger and reduce the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And hold the head of the finger firm in place, suspending it from the side towards which it has been displaced, and leave it like that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend it and extend it until it is straight within its day
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, bind it according to this narrative, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and bind it at night. And do this for several days until it is straight
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	Do likewise if it is dislocated towards the belly of the hand, and bind it at that joint and perform your first operation with this until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Do similarly in this way when it is dislocated at other joints
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the spine.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When there occurs dislocation of any of the spine or neck vertebrae and it is a complete dislocation where some of the vertebrae have gone out of their places, then in that case there is no cure, for death usually follows.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the evacuation of the bowels occurs involuntarily without being able to retain it. And often some members become paralyzed such as one leg or both legs, or both arms, or one of them; and sometimes a vertebra has gone out of its place, for many times they have gone out and many times they have been moved back into their places in four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore it is already dislocated to the posterior parts and is called sciatica.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the treatment of it is that if sciatica occurs in childhood, then there is no cure for it nor is there any hope of complete recovery.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in cases which occur due to falling or trauma or something similar to that, the Ancients have already described various methods of treatment at length, from which one can derive great benefit; but I will abbreviate some of those because of my proximity to the intention of my exposition, with which I have briefly explained and formed this book using diverse instruments with which I will show and explain it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that there is neither cause nor cure for sciatica which occurs from the anterior part of the thigh, and similarly for that which occurs on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And only those are cured whose sciatica occurs properly in the back according to what I have mentioned.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should lie on their face near a wall and stretch out their legs while being careful not to injure the thigh.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight stick should be placed upright, fixed in the ground at the end of the foot near the head of the patient, and another stick should be placed under their heels at the other end.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And one minister should hold the first stick firmly without letting it slip into a hollow, and another minister should hold the second according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap a cloth around the head of the patient and tie it firmly. And extend one end of the bandage to the stick which is above their head, and tie it there. And then stretch another bandage across their hips on both sides of them, and down towards their legs. And then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick that is near their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then each minister should extend the bandage to the point of the stick and ensure that neither of the two sticks nor the bandages are dislocated from their places where they were fixed, but nevertheless not tied as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the physician should place his palms on the vertebrae with firmness until it returns to its place, or he can place one table there and adjust his feet on top of the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return by this method, then take a plank of which the width or length is about three cubits, and cut out a space in the wall near where the patient lies into which the end of the plank can be inserted.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the middle of the plank on top of the vertebrae, and the physician should place his feet on the other end, and press down firmly until the vertebra is reduced and returns to its proper position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, then turn the vertebra using your hand; and it is that you should lie on the ground near the head of the patient with two sticks behind them, each stick being one cubit long, and place another two sticks behind the head of the patient in the same manner. And let there be a space of one palm between each stick, and already made in each stick is a hole through which the cord should pass, and let each stick be firmly fixed in the ground so that it is not dislodged.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there also be a round stick inserted into the hole through which the cord should pass, and let this stick be turned in the two holes of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at one end of it there is a hole in which the stick is formed, with its length being one palm and that which is turned. And in the other two sticks there are similar ones to this.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the bandages that you have stretched over the thigh of the patient on the stick which is above their head, and the bandages that you have stretched over their hips on the stick which is near their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then let there be a minister at each hole who will turn the stick with his hand, and the physician should press down on the vertebra as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is how the turning goes:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	"And now that the spine has returned, and the area is covered, it is necessary to place a hot poultice with egg whites and lint; then place a tablecloth of suitable size over the poultice, which should be three fingers wide or approximately that size, and its length should be equal to the width of the swelling; and place your hand on the spine."
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	"And now it is necessary to bandage it with the material we have mentioned, until the sick person's appetite returns and they are healed."
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	"And if there is still some swelling at the end of healing, it is necessary to apply moistening and cleansing medicines with application through a long-term plaster, as recommended earlier; and now we will apply lead foil on that area."
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	"And sometimes swelling occurs at the end of the spine of the back due to dislocation of that bone; and this is the bone which already threatens death, so it should not be treated with this medicine, for strong lead will cause its sudden death."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Chapter XXXI."
De curacio de anca dislocada.	"On the treatment of a dislocated hip."
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not involve only dislocation, but also occur in those where there is little movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The ankle joint can be dislocated in four ways: it can dislocate inwardly, outwardly, anteriorly, or posteriorly.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	It is more commonly dislocated inward and less commonly dislocated anteriorly or posteriorly.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	"Symptom of dislocation in the inner parts is this: when you press the healthy thigh against the sick one, it feels longer and its outline more prominent than that of the healthy one; the patient cannot bend their leg. You should then search for the sign of an old bruise or hematoma, because the head of the matter has reached here."
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	"The sign that dislocation has occurred externally is that its complications are opposite to this one."
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	"The sign of dislocation that has occurred anteriorly is that the thigh expands according to its shape, but it cannot bend without pain. If pressed further, it cannot go beyond this point; urine retention and bruising are present, and walking is difficult."
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	"The sign of dislocation that has occurred posteriorly is that the thigh does not expand and cannot bend forward as far as the knee can bend backward. The thigh is shorter than the other one, the knee is softened, and the head of the condition is located there."
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	"But the reduction of cases of this dislocation is as follows: first, consider whether the dislocation is old and ancient. If it is, then do not attempt to reduce it yourself, but leave it as it is. However, if it is not in that condition, then reduction should be performed according to its nature."
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	"But in the case of a recent dislocation that belongs to one of the four types of dislocation, you should strive to bring back the joint and extend it both internally and externally. Move the leg right and left, because with this alone the condition will return and no further treatment is needed."
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	"But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong bandage and extend the thigh of the leg as far back as possible, or with its muscles, or by using a loop that is tied over the upper part of the thigh. And another assistant should extend their hand over the knee joint so that they can place their fingers on the inner side of it. Then stretch tightly with a bandage made of linen placed over the ridge of the bone, and hold one end of the bandage while another assistant holds the other."
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	"And let the extension be from the thigh to the knee joint or from the inner side of the thigh to the outer side at the hip joint, or from the back of the thigh to the front of the shinbone."
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	"And let all these extensions be done at once, while the patient is lying on their back with their hips raised off the ground and their legs hanging down."
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	"And this type of extension is common to all four types [of dislocation]."
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	"And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary for each type to consider its own proper treatment."
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	"In the proper reduction of this dislocation, when it has occurred internally, the patient should be made to lie on their side facing away from the dislocated hip. Then place bandages over the ridge of the bone in the area between the head of the bone and the inner side of the thigh. And then extend the bandage upward from the front of the hip joint to as high as the outer part of the iliac crest."
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	"And then another strong assistant should grasp the leg and press on the large part of the dislocated hip joint and extend it strongly outward, because this will bring it back into its proper place."
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	"And this is one of the easiest treatments by which this member can be reduced, compared to the other types [of dislocation]."
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	"But if it is dislocated on top of you and does not obey this type of reduction, then you must tie both of the patient's feet together with a strong, light linen bandage over their ankles and calves."
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	"And let the length of each bandage be about four spans, and let the dislocated leg be extended more than the other by about two spans."
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	"And then suspend the patient over the head of the bed, with their hands on their hips, and let the length from the floor be about two cubits."
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And then command a strong youth to press down on the head of the bone and another youth to pull down on the leg with great force, because this will quickly return the joint to its proper place."
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	"But in the proper reduction of this dislocation when it occurs externally, let the patient lie on their back as we have recommended for the case of obesity. And let the bandage be tightened over the thigh of the dislocated leg and over its foot."
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	"And then two poles should be placed, one under the foot of the leg and the other under the head. And another pole fitted with a padded cushion should be placed in the middle, wrapped in wet cloths so that the patient is not injured by the pole being between their legs, for fear that the extension towards the outside may be drawn too strongly."
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	"And then each assistant should extend his respective side and the physician with one hand shall guide the reduction according to the art [of medicine]."
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	"So if it yields upon traction, that is good. But if not, then apply the reduction diligently and thus as we have said in obesity by guiding it with one hand."
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	"But let the patient lie quietly on their side facing away from the dislocation."
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	"But when the dislocation is at the front of the thigh, then the leg should be extended slightly. And according to this method, let the physician place his right palm on the inner side of the dislocated thigh, and then grasp it with his other hand and extend it towards the outside as far as the shinbone."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	"But when the dislocation is at the back of the thigh, then it should not be extended towards the outside, but rather elevated off the ground. And let a hard support be placed underneath, just as in the case of an ankle fracture when dislocated externally, according to what we have said about the method for such fractures; and this should be done with the patient lying on their face and the bandages extended according to our instructions."
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	"And pressure should be applied using a board over the spot where the joint is felt."
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	"So when the reduction is completed as it should be, you will know that the dislocation has been reduced because you can extend both legs of the patient, and when you release them and the patient extends their leg without pain, then you will know that the member has been properly relocated. Then apply two splints and bind them firmly with a bandage so that the ankle is not displaced at any of its parts. And keep the patient at rest for three or four days."
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	"And then untie the bandages and splints, and compare the length of one leg with the other."
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	"Then if you find those things in truth, then know that the dislocation is healed, and at that point let the patient walk."
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	"But if you observe any signs of inflammation, then return and splint it again, extend it according to your original traction method, and let the patient rest for three more days."
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	"And then remove the splints and allow the patient to gradually begin walking, little by little over several days until they are fully recovered."
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle is dislocated in three ways: externally, internally, and posteriorly, but not anteriorly.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation in this patient is that when you command them to apply their knee with the cushion, you will know that it is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The restoration of all the movements in this patient is that you should place the patient on their right side, so that they can extend their knee if possible; then bring your left hand to their face and place their foot between your thighs; then bring your palms together with force behind their thigh, and another servant should help pull their leg back into its correct position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of recovery in this patient is that their knee adheres to the cushion with effortless elevation
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then plaster that on and apply the bandage to hold the knee in place for three or four days, then remove it.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not allow the patient to walk around for a few days until they are healed and comfortable
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if you cannot reduce the dislocation yourself, then apply strong traction using the methods described in the previous narrative on treating hip dislocations.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of ankle dislocation
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The talus sometimes gets displaced by a slight movement, and sometimes it becomes fully dislocated, either by displacement inward or outward.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of ankle dislocation is that the talus appears swollen at the part where it has been dislocated
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment for ankle subluxation is easy reduction, by extending the foot with ease and then inverting it until it returns to its normal position
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But when treating a fully displaced ankle dislocation, the following steps should be taken:
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	"You should then grasp the foot with your right hand from its highest point, and with your left hand on its lower side near the ankle joint."
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	"Then throw the leg over your right arm and hold it there with both hands while extending your left hand. Push the heel of the foot upwards with your right hand, placing the sole of the foot on a cushion without moving."
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	"And do this twice as we have mentioned."
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	"And next, press the sole of the foot onto the third bedpost, and you are at the ankle."
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	"If you cannot return to this manner in one or two attempts, and if the foot remains swollen, then repeat the operation again, because that one returns."
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	"But if you are prohibited from performing the reduction as mentioned above, then have the patient lie on their side on the ground. Take a sturdy stone and place it firmly between their thighs, and make sure they are covered with cloth so that the patient does not slip."
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	"And then the minister of the knee holds their things, and another minister extends the leg with its skin or bandages on the ankle lying on top of the foot's heel. And each minister extends their side against extension, ensuring that the stone is held tightly between the patient's thighs so that the body does not slip towards both sides during this extension."
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	"And then the doctor will reduce the dislocation with their hands, and another minister should hold the healthy leg on both sides to prevent any further movement during reduction."
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	"And then, once the dislocation is reduced and declared sound by you, then apply plaster and strengthen it with bandages. And then bind the foot with bandages to the thigh."
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	"And be careful and guard yourself from the nerves that are behind the ankle bone, because if a bandage is applied too tightly on them it may cause injury."
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	"And then leave him like this for two or three days. And if the bandage becomes loose, tighten it again."
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	"And then remove the splint on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days."
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	"But if he is forced to walk before that time, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be dislodged and become corrupted again, which could prevent proper healing."
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	"And if an abscess forms due to the cauterization, then you must administer treatment as outlined in our previous narration regarding other locations for cure and embrocation until it is healed."
Capitol .xxxiiii.	"Chapter XXXIV."
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	"On the treatment of dislocation of said feet."
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	"It is necessary that he who has been dislocated be stretched with little extension without working; and that which is not difficult, let it be easier beforehand."
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	"But if the dislocation is in some of the bones of the foot, then you should make the patient place his foot on the ground or on a table, and let him be standing thus as if walking."
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	"And approaching, you stand on the affected foot, and pause his foot on whatever prominence there may be of the joints, and then press it with your foot with strength until it returns, so that you see it stretched out and does not appear in its prominence."
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	"And approach pausing the sole of the foot on a table that takes all the foot, and then stretch it with appropriate and firm strapping for three days; and afterward unbind him and make him rest from walking for several days until he is strengthened and recovery is assured."
Capitol .xxxv.	"Chapter XXXV."
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	"Of the kinds of dislocation that are made with plague or fracture or with each one together."
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When some cause of that happens, and you strive in its treatment and restoration, many times death occurs.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Therefore, it is not necessary to presume in its treatment, but rather that one who is skilled in the art, long experienced, merciful and compassionate, cautious, not hasty nor presumptuous; and that he begins by using medicines that remove blood clots alone, leaving the patient's fate to divine judgment, hoping for healing from harm, alleviation of illness, and showing some sign of hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Then strive to reduce it at the onset of the cause before an abscess forms.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the member returns as desired, then administer treatment that will remove the abscess and heal the wound using appropriate drying agents.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation with fracture occurs and the ends of the bone are separated, then strive to reduce them using what has been said previously regarding simple dislocations in those locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Guard and avoid, according to your ability, what is within the paths of fear as prescribed by my instruction; for that is better for you to owe to your Creator, more enduring for your glory, and healthier for your true body in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-Bukasis perfectly, may God bless him.
Amen.	Amen.
