Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	"Thus begins the words of Albucasis."
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	"Oh, sons, since I have completed for you this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, to fulfill its end and because of its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I complete it for you with this treatise, which deals with surgery by hand."
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery by hand has become completely private in our region and time, so that few people know about this science, and its traces are obscured; there would remain of it only some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed hands and been lost due to error and confusion, such that their intentions are closed off and its strength is diminished.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should revive this with an orderly arrangement of this treatise according to the ways of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and that I should include representations of the forms of cautery instruments and other tools used in the work, both as additions to the explanation and preparation for its use, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why there is not a good craftsman with his hand in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and its practitioner must be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Galen knew well so that he might know the arrangement of the limbs and their forms, conjunctions, separations, knowledge of bones, nerves, tendons, their numbers, arrangement, pulse veins and tranquil ones, and the locations of their outlets.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore says Hippocrates that with a small work, but more in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said about that in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will certainly fall into error, causing many deaths, as I have seen too often, because some are formed in this science but depart from it without knowledge or experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor incision an escrofulous boil on the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out, causing the woman to die suddenly.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from the bladder of a man who was in that condition, and the stone was large; he came to him and removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, causing that man to die on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I already knew that it would be impossible to remove it, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the illness, I knew beforehand that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who received a salary of one ducat from our land for surgery, and he undertook to treat a blacksmith who had a fracture in his hip; with great ignorance, the doctor prepared himself, removed the fracture above the wound with pillows and splints with strong tension, not allowing any space for breathing.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he bound it according to his desires, and applied ligatures, and then released them after some days, commanding that the bandages be loosened. And so it was until the hip and thigh became gangrenous, resulting in loss of limb.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and I prepared myself to untie the ligatures, and thus peace and ease were obtained, and his pains diminished.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But nevertheless the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so that I could not prevent it, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient was in danger of losing his life.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous boil, and it became ulcerated after several days, causing the illness to worsen for the patient.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason is that the cancerous boil is caused by black bile, therefore it should not be burned with iron of any kind, but rather cauterized on the member that suffers from it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two parts: one part is the operation associated with health, and the other part is the work in which there is danger in the most severe dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already mentioned this in all parts of this book where there is discussion about operations involving error and fear. Therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that foolish people do not find an opportunity to speak ill of you and bring dishonor upon you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Therefore, take up your arms with diligence and protection from God, and approach illnesses with confidence and steadfastness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Therefore, use the best way through the grace of God to preserve health and achieve successful outcomes, leave difficult illnesses with terrible prognosis alone, show your weapons against that which makes you afraid, so that your faith and trust in yourself and your name may not abandon you. For it is more pleasing to your glory, both here on earth and hereafter, in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	For as I have already said in some of my treatises:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Don't treat incurable illnesses, lest you become known as a bad doctor."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already divided this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	Chapter 1, arranged within these sections: on weights, forms of instruments and irons for cautery, and what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	Chapter 2, concerning cautery and perforation, cupping vessels, plasters, and the extraction of arrows and similar items, arranged according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	Chapter 3, concerning reduction and dislocation, and the treatment of torticollis and similar conditions; arranged according to weights and forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery with fire and with acute medicine, and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With this begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary for me to speak about the qualities of those who are benefited by this cautery and those harmed by it, and in what condition cautery should be prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discussion on the qualities of those benefited by cautery and harmed by it is long and verbose, subtle in science, and secretly hidden. Many wise men have spoken about it, but they disagree among themselves, and it suffices for me to mention a little of their sermons due to lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery is beneficial for every universal condition, whether it has matter or not, except for two conditions, which are conditions of the cauda without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	"The tail-like and dry complexion with matter out of harmony; for some said that cautery is beneficial to this one, but others said the opposite, that cautery is not convenient in an illness which is due to quality and dryness, because nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it would be inconvenient for a dry and hot disease like this to be treated with something hot and dry."
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	"Yet he who said the opposite argues that cautery brings benefit to all hot and dry diseases found in human bodies, for when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complexion of fire, it finds them similar."
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	"And I say that this has been experienced by me many times in practice."
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	"But it is not necessary to come back to this subject which has already been extensively discussed in the chapter on cautery, and which has been well known for a long time. Everyone knows the diversity of human temperaments and the dispositions of illnesses that occur in them, as well as their causes and accidents, and the duration of those conditions."
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	"But in other complexions, there is less concern, and especially in hot and humid illnesses, since all physicians are agreed about these matters and do not disagree on the use of cautery in treating them."
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	"And know, my son, that the secret of treating by cautery with fire and its benefits lies in cautery being a medicine that burns. For fire is simple, and its action only reaches the member being cauterized, and it does not harm any other adjacent member unless with little damage."
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"But the action of a burning medicine reaches that which is nearby in the members, and often it brings illness to those members which are difficult to heal, and also often it removes them."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	"But fire, because of its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this except to purge excesses. And we have known this for a long time through experiment and the length of service in studying the art, regarding the truth of causes; therefore I am excused from speaking at length on this subject. If it were not forbidden to mention this secret in my book at this point, I would reveal it to you with philosophical demonstration, which would sharpen your understanding."
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	"And know, my son, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cautery, and they consider the best time to be in spring."
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	"And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage caused by time's accidents is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn out by cautery. And even more so if cautery is performed for pains or necessary purposes, such as those that cannot tolerate delay because of fear of worse malice coming about, which is greater than little harm entering through time."
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	"And know this not in your hearts, my son, for only the common people and foolish physicians estimate this, namely that the illness which is healed by cautery has a relapse at all times, and they consider it to be a consequence of that."
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	"And the cause is not at all as they suppose, for cautery is nothing but a medicine that alters complexion and dries out the humors which are the cause of pains."
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	"But indeed, cautery exceeds medicine in its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lordship."
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	"But it is possible that the illness will return at some time, according to the complexion of the sick person and the location of the illness, and the virtue of cautery, and what is prepared in the body from the aggregation of excesses therein, and what has been acquired by it through food and similar causes; nevertheless, the illness in which cautery is administered will be subtle, in a member with few superfluities and humors, as for example cautery of teeth for pain and similar ones, it is possible that that pain will not return, but this happens rarely."
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	"And moreover, the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is quite true, for they believe that there is no cure that profits by medicine nor by any other cause before cautery."
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	"And the cause is contrary to this; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine means only when the methods of cure are administered in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help, then cautery is administered at the end of the cause, and it profits there."
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	"And from here on it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which common people and most foolish physicians understand."
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	"And they said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	"And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, which is not absolutely true, for I have already proven and demonstrated that this is not so except in some bodies without others, and cautery with it is good and better than with iron as they said; nevertheless, when you perform cautery with fire with gold, it is not clear to you, for it depends on the quantity you want because of the heat of the gold, and prepares to receive friction; and if you adjust it over ignition, the gold will melt in the fire, and some sheets may fall into the fire so that the artist may catch them by chance."
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	"And for this reason cautery with iron is done more gently and more precisely to the uprightness of operation."
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	"And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and those of the head within the weights, so that later you may ask for what you want from it."
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	"On cauterizing pain in the head due to coldness and humidity."
Le capitol primier.	"The first chapter."
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	"This cautery counteracts humidity and coldness from the common accident which these two causes are due to, namely an abundance of nasal flux called catarrh flowing from the head into the parts of the eyes and ears, and an abundance of sleep, and pain in teeth and in the throat, and generally all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, gout, and apoplexy, etc. in those illnesses."
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	"The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the sick person to be evacuated with laxative medicine purging the head for three or four nights, according to what you require from the virtue of the illness and the age and habit of the patient."
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	"And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then perform the cautery between your hands over a cushioned bench, and have him place his hands on his chest."
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	"And then place the palm of your hand close to the bridge of his nose between his eyebrows."
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But nevertheless, when your little finger has reached the middle spot, mark that spot with ink, and then light the olive oil cautery of which this is the form:"
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	"And then place it on the spot marked with ink in such a way that it descends gradually while your hand is constrained little by little, and you turn it."
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	"And then raise your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see any of the bone already exposed on the head, like the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand, and if it is not yet hot enough with that iron, use another one until you see what I have said to you."
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	"And next, take some salt and dissolve it on that spot, leaving it there for three days."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	"And then pause over the wound's edge and leave it there until the burn scar is destroyed."
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	"And next, cleanse the wound with Tetrafarmacon cream until it heals."
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	"They also said that when the plague is opened, it's better to tie the arm, for it is more beneficial and healing."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	"And some of them said that the sinew should be cauterized up to the bone, and the cautery should be kept there until some part of the bone's spirit is absorbed."
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	"And next, scrape off what has adhered to the bone, and then it should be healed."
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	"And others said that when the cautery reaches its end, it should be pressed forcefully onto the bone until the bone cracks, and this is the form of a small cauterization:"
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	"And they believe that from that spot the fumes of the head expire."
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	"And the opened plague should be kept for a long time, and next it should be healed until it is consolidated."
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	"But I have not seen this kind of cautery used on the head at all, except in some cases due to fear; and therefore, it seems better for health's sake to me to leave it alone, when there is an opening. For the head is weakened by a solution of continuity from such things, as we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the patient is naturally frail."
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	"And the first kind of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion. And from that hole and with that procedure, it is healthier."
Capitol segon.	"Chapter Two:"
Del cauteri del cap.	"On cauterizing the head."
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	"When there is chronic and long-lasting pain in the entire head and this is due to prolonged illness, and various treatments are used such as ointments, poultices, plasters, and bandages, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not relieve the pain for any of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is naturally strong in its creation; if it is not frail or very thin-skinned, then cauterize again with another cautery a little further away from the previous one."
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	"And next, cauterize that over the horn of his head with a cautery until the cord is severed."
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	"Cut the cord and expose the bone to the amount we have mentioned, and cauterize it with a cautery at the last part of the head where it is called 'the vein', which is the location where a cupping glass is placed."
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	"And be gentle in this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient suffers great pain from this beyond all other head cauteries."
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	"And I tell you this cautery in its place, for it is necessary to use the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occupit are cauterized more subtly than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized. And this is its form."
Capitol ters.	"Chapter Three:"
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	"On cauterizing for non-antiquated migraine."
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	"When sudden pain occurs in the part of the head or a severe headache is felt within it, let it be evacuated with medicines that clarify the head. And if the other treatment, which I have described earlier for these illnesses, does not help, then cauterization should be performed in one of two ways: either cauterization with an acutely burning medicine, or with iron."
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	"The better cautery with a burning medicine is this: take a bunch of mallow, dry it, and cut off both its heads."
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	"And next, incise the location of the pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it is at the same level as the cord and is hidden."
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	"And next, press down on it with steady pressure using a tight bandage and leave it there for the space of three hours. And next, remove the bandage and pull out the mallow, leaving the wound open for two or three days. And next, compress the sunken area around the edge so that the wound becomes hard."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And next, dress it with a salve until it is healed."
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	"And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines that I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines."
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"The better cauterization with iron is done in this way: heat a cautery of this shape:"
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	"And it is called 'closed nails', for the head of it is like the shape of a nail with some curvature, and there is a small prominence in the middle."
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	"And next, place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand steady so that the heat does not adhere to the arc of the cautery, and slowly turn the hot iron little by little with speed."
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	"And if the quantity of it that adheres to the heat of the cord is as much as its majority, then lift your hand up so that the artery nearby does not adhere, lest there be a flow of blood."
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And next, moisten the wound with salt water and place it on the location, leaving it there for three days. And next, compress the wound with a bandage around the edge, and dress it with a salve until it is healed."
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	"And if you wish, cauterize the extreme part of the temporal bone with a cautery according to this method, and be careful not to incise the artery in this migraine specifically."
Capitol quart.	"Chapter Four:"
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	"On cauterizing for antiquated migraine."
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	"When you treat migraine with what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have said in the sections on illnesses, but the treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to heat a cautery for cutting bone until it becomes white. And next, press down on the location of the pain with a line of the length of which the majority is indicated or guessed at. And keep your hand there for one moment and press down firmly until you incise the artery and enter into the bone."
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	"But it is necessary for you to be careful not to damage the continuity of the mandible, which is moved during mastication. And that the nerve is not adhered to or that the muscles that move it are not spasmed."
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	"And if it is about the caution and carefulness of the flow of blood from the artery that is opened up, for there is fear in its opening, especially for one who does not know what they are doing or is not studious and experienced. And leave the operation to one who begins."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	"And I bring with remembrance the regimen of accidental bleeding from an artery according to its manner in its proper place in this book."
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	"And if you see this illness not responding to this cautery and that the patient's body can tolerate it, then cauterize them in the middle of the head as we have related, and dress the wound until it is healed."
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	"And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on constriction of an artery with a cautery having two points, for this is better cauterization and more conforming."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter Five:"
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	"On cauterizing ear pain."
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	"When there is pain in the ear due to friction and it is treated with laxative causes and other treatments that I have mentioned in the section, but the pain is not removed, then heat this cautery, which is called punctum and has this shape:"
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	"And bring the puncture to the ignition and guide it around the entire ear like a wheel turned, or in the circumference of each side if the pain is on one side."
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Slowly heat with the cautery of the root of the ear's hair little by little until you have sensitized the area with touch.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If the cautery causes pain in all the points around the ear, then stop and carefully examine the area to ensure it is healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On cauterizing the throat.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The type of sore throat that is treated with cautery is only that which arises from blood, as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery for types of sore throat caused by dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that type of torticollis with herbs and capperugs and gargarisms, but your treatment does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of both lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery for the opposite side of the affected area, because softening only occurs in the part that seems healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is that you cauterize there with the cautery in the right part of the ear tip above a little on the horn of the head, and on the temple another, whose length should be according to the length of the thumb, and pause your hand with cautery until its quantity burns enough of the thickness of the skin.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, which belongs to the barber-surgeon, whose form is as follows:
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is even more subtle than what you can see; and sometimes it happens that instead of too much roughness, it cuts through excessiveness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with whatever remedy is appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Concerning the cauterization of ancient apoplexy
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said, and your medication does not confer and the patient has no fever, then cauterize there with four cauteries: over all the horns of his head; and with cautery in the middle of his head, as we have said; and with cautery on the cheek.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of cautery is made according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And also cauterize over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more rearward; and then treat it with whatever remedy you see fit.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Concerning cautery for oblivion caused by a blow
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	If the patient has been given great jars at the beginning, and purifying pills to be served.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	"Then carefully shave the head of the patient and place on the crown the plaster described in the treatise of plasters."
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	"And apply it several times, for this is the manner of cauterization."
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	"Then do this according to that order which I have already stated."
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	"And if he is healed with these treatments; and if not, then make him three cauteries on the last part of his head, which should be descending from the highest part of the head towards the lowest part of the neck."
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	"And pause between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and immediately dress the wound with what has been prepared."
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	"But if you wish to add and the patient is tolerating it well, then make the cautery in the middle of the wound; but if you wish to increase the addition, then cauterize over the two horns."
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	"Dress that which has been healed immediately; and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the form given above."
Capitol .ix.	"Chapter ix."
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	"Of cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body."
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	"Therefore, if you proceed in the softening of the head with irises and with what has been said; and immediately shave the head of the patient, and immediately cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with cauteries over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over the last part of it, and with three cauteries over the cervical vertebrae."
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	"And if it is necessary in the softening of the body that is too great and the patients are tolerating it well and the disease is strong, then immediately cauterize that with four cauteries over the dorsal vertebrae, and descendingly with a cautery towards where the backbone ends, and raise the right hand."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	"And immediately dress that which has been healed, and let this be an olive-shaped cautery."
Capitol .x.	"Chapter x."
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	"Of cauterization of epilepsy."
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	"The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm."
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	"It is therefore necessary to cleanse the patient's brain at the beginning of the treatment, and with another method which we have mentioned earlier in this division, when the illness is severe and the exception of medicines."
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	"If it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer gargarisms and chewing mixtures to cleanse the throat, for several days beforehand, with proper diet."
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	"And properly shave the head of the patient, and cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the preceding manner, and another cautery on the occupit, and cauterize each temple separately."
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	"And if the illness is strong and tolerable, then cauterize it with the aforementioned cauteries, having previously performed paralysis and moistening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back."
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	"And let there be a cautery made of olive oil according to what is precedent."
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	"But if the illness is in childhood, then perform cauterization with subtle cauteries in this manner."
Capitol .xi.	"Chapter XI."
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	"Of Cauterization for Melancholy."
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	"When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with the aforementioned cauteries after performing paralysis."
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	"And if the cause of melancholy is an abundance that declines towards melancholy and the body of the patient is humid, then let him drink what cleanses the brain according to what has been mentioned in the division."
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	"And properly shave the head of the patient, and properly make a turtledove suitably prepared for him on his crown, and properly place it in the middle of the head."
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	"And let the patient be lying down, and let him be held down from every part."
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	"And properly apply a liniment; then it is fitting to bind with wool from sheep."
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	"And warm that on the fire for gentle warming by measure, which he suffers when it is placed on him."
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	"And then remove that from the middle of his head within the circle, and let him be covered so that he is not chilled."
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	"And do this with the patient once a week, with the other regimen being to rub him with the boiling water so that he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize it with small points according to his strength, but keep your hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is the special cautery which moistens the brain evenly."
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	"And then apply that poultice wrapped in bandages or in down of wool."
Capitol .xii.	"Chapter XII."
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	"Of Cauterization for Descending Water in the Womb."
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	"When it is declared to you that water has begun to descend into the womb by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and let the patient drink what cleanses his head, and guard him from all humidity."
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	"And make him sit in a warm bath for several days."
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	"And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of his head; and also cauterize him with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of descent of water into both wombs, or on one side if it is the beginning of the descent of water into one womb."
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	"Incise with a cautery all the veins and arteries which are near the neck, and let the cauteries be placed there at that distance in the latitude of the temples."
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	"And guard yourself from fluxes of blood when he is cauterized. And if you see any flux of blood, stop it with some medicine which is at your disposal."
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	"And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the ablation of those, and with care for fluxes of blood."
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	"And sometimes it is cauterized in the nape of the neck near two bones with two cauteries applied firmly."
Capitol .xiii.	"Chapter XIII."
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	"Regarding the cautery of old tears."
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	"When tears of the eyes are abundant and flow through veins and arteries that are visibly manifest on the face, it is verified that this is a superfluous fluid; therefore cauterize with a cautery as described at the beginning regarding how to make water boil in the eye, using cautery in the middle of the head and two cauteries on either side of the temples, and two cauteries on either side of the jawbones."
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	"And if you need an addition, cauterize also on both sides of the cheekbone at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery."
Capitol .xiiii.	"Chapter XIV."
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	"The cautery for removing bad odor from the nose."
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	"When you treat him with what we have said in the division and it does not help, then prepare and give him to drink decoctions for three nights; and after shaving his head, cauterize him with a hot cautery mixed with olive oil."
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	"And also cauterize him with a cautery made of cloves along with two cauteries placed above the eyebrows on either side of the hair, a little."
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	"But be careful that you do not burn him."
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	"And this is how the clove cautery is made:"
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter XV."
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Cauterization for softening of eyelid swelling.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid is softened due to illness or moisture, cauterize that eyelid with a cautery using this cautery made of moonlight iron; and this is how it is done:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you are cauterizing both eyebrows together, use two cauteries in total, spaced apart, and elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of eyebrow hair present.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too hard with the cautery, but rather according to how much of the third section of the eyelid is burned.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of cauterizing the eyelid when the hair becomes inflamed and pierces the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid become inflamed and pierce the eye, cauterize them in one of two ways: either with a cautery or with medicine that burns.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If cauterizing with fire, order the patient to pluck out their hairs like those which are plucked for purification, until they are extended and removed; and if any remain at their roots, then stretch the eyelids with a cloth so that they are not harmed until the hairs have grown out.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then, when the hairs have grown out and become elongated, place the patient's head on a high pillow, and then draw near to the eyelid of the eye with a tent, shaped like a Mercury's feather, whose beginning should be close to the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place cotton soaked in alum or in pigeon dung mucus on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cautery, of which this is the shape:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Approach the figure which you have marked, little by little, with many glances, until the surface of the skin, which appears like a myrtle leaf, is completely consumed.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	A sign of the healthiness of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye begin to contract and its hairs rise up from the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and appropriately pause on that spot with a border until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And properly dress it with ointment until it heals
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hairs return for some reason and the eyelid is softened again, then perform the cauterization on that spot once more just as you had done initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are on the eyelid itself, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural place and covered up so that the hairs do not fall into the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But if you use burning medicine for the cauterization, then command the patient to let the hairs grow out and be covered up, and appropriately make a bandage in the shape of a myrtle leaf from cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And also take some known soap and live colophony and knead them together with a little water, and quickly mix those ingredients well, and make this mixture with haste so that it does not become cooled; and spread this over the bandage which was made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on one or both eyes; and wrap the eye area with an egg white cloth, and have the patient lie down on their back.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place your finger on the medicine and press it gently without hurting until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for its bite is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when it is perceived that the burning sensation has begun, then remove the medicine and wipe it gently with your finger; but when the burning sensation stops, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. And then examine whether the eyelid is raised as it should be after being washed. If not, then put back on the medicine over the place where it had not adhered, until it becomes covered up completely, so that your operation is finished and the eye is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And also place over it a border until the inflammation of the adhesion is eliminated, and then treat it with ointment or another appropriate remedy until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, after your operation, to guard with vigilant care that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes inflamed within several days and some hairs start falling into the eye, then repeat the application of the medicine on that place where the eyelid is inflamed, just as you did at the beginning. And also cover it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	The hues of men are differentiated according to their magnitude and smallness, therefore your traction is made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the path of rectitude shall not be hidden from him who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lachrymal bone of the skull.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not succeed, then you should cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place their head on their knees, and have one of your assistants hold their head between their hands so that it is neither moved nor shaken by their own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then carefully apply a hot cautery to the bone or a moxa of pitch on the spot where the fistula is located.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the form of the cautery that we are describing is this:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The body that is hollow, such as in shape of a reed or a raven's feather, from one end at which the cautery was made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it may penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you want, then do so as if testing.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the hollow one is better for this task.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And appropriate pressure should be applied to the fistula if it's open, then dry and clean that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	But if it is not open, work on it until it opens and draw out the pus from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then pause on it with the cautery that has been properly ignited, and place your hand near there but a little way down towards the beginning of the nose, so that you do not burn your hand or cause unnecessary discomfort. Then immediately pause the cautery in the groove of the nostril and burn away any corruption there.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as necessary; and leave that area alone for three days, and afterwards apply pressure to that spot with a border and surrounding it with a drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if eleven days have passed and it is not healed, then apply a sharp, corrosive medicine to that area until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what is convenient in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another method of cauterizing a fistula that some previously described is: enter the location of the fistula and burn it and immediately pause on that fissure with a thin camel's hair brush of which this is the shape. Then pour into that the quantity of one inch of molten lead, and hold your hand near there with good retention, so that the molten lead does not get into the wound; and cover that area of the wound with egg albumen or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by wonderful healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with that which we have spoken of regarding cautery and cure, that is good. But if not, then it will be necessary to administer a trepanation of the nose and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose according to what comes in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cauterizing the split of the buttocks
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times splits occur in the labia majora, but especially in the labia minora of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore when you cure those splits with what we have said in the sections and it is not beneficial, then apply a small cautery knife according to this shape that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its concavity be according to the thinness of a needle.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Apply that iron carefully into those splits until the cautery reaches the bottom of the splits.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with cerottum until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cauterizing a fistula in the mouth
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess forms on the uvula or palate or around the roots of teeth and it bursts, and later becomes hardened, and pus comes out and a fistula is made, and if you cure that and it is not beneficial, then you should apply cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula. Then insert that burning iron into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand there until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the end of it do this once or twice; and then cure it with what we have said about curing until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And then if the healing is separated and healed, that is good. But if not, then it will be necessary to uncover the location and remove the decayed bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	"Burning of teeth and softening of ulcers."
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	"When ulcers are softened by moisture and teeth are made mute, and you treat them with medicines without conferring, then place the patient's head on your thigh, and quickly bring the cautery in this form: thus you will hold the forceps over the tooth and insert it therein the ignited cautery swiftly, but keep your hand somewhat withdrawn so that the patient may feel the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth."
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	"And then remove your hand, and repeat the cautery several times according to what you desire."
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	"And then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, then spit it out, because the mute tooth is fixed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter XXI."
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	"On the cauterization of tooth pain."
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	"When tooth pain is due to coldness or wormwood or when medicine does not help, then cauterize in that place in two ways: either with the border of a cow's horn, or with fire."
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	"Cauterizing with the border (of a cow's horn) means that you take the border of a cow's horn and heat it in the coals of fire, then take some cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the cautery, and quickly apply that heated border to the painful tooth until it is warmed."
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	"And repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth."
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	"And if you wish, immerse wool or cotton in the aforementioned border and place it on the painful tooth, then place hot iron on top until the heat reaches the cavity of the tooth."
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	"But nevertheless, the cautery with fire means that you wait for the coal of iron or of fire to be red-hot, and is done in such a way that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient."
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	"And then light the cautery of whatever shape you desire, and place it on the tooth while holding your hand close until the cautery is cooled down. And do this several times in one day or over a few days until the pain disappears."
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	"And it is necessary that after this cautery, the patient holds their mouth open on one side and keeps it closed for an hour, then spits it out. And this is the form of the cautery."
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	"And cauterize with whichever extreme you wish according to what is possible for you."
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	"And this is the form of the cautery:"
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter XXII."
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	"On cauterization of external piles."
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When external swellings are caused by phlegm and cold humors, and they are not obedient to digestion through medicines and you wish the digestion of those slightly, then you ignite the cautery with this shape, having two pointed extremities so that smoke may exit from one side of the cautery, and place that fire on that boil once, and if needed again, until it reaches the head of the boil.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the boil is small, then you apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it for three days, applying it on the surrounding skin until what was burned by the fire is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then dress that wound with ointments and bandages until it heals
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the needle or cautery to be used is as shown.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterizing quinsy of the throat and of strangury.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	"When humidity affects the chest, especially if it is accompanied by coldness, then the patient should first be treated with purgative medicines, and also cauterize that area on the left side."
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	"And make sure not to touch the testicles with the cautery iron, nor burn the cord attached to them."
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	"Cauterize there also with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the last vertebra of it."
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	"And the cautery should be done thus, following the previous manner."
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	"And also treat that with what has been mentioned until it is healed."
Capitol .xxiiii.	"Chapter XXIV."
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	"Of the cautery treatment for lung disease and cough."
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	"When cough and lung disease are due to humid coldness, and the illness has no fever or spitting, and is an old disease, then cauterize with two cauteries on the furcula at the depressed places of the lungs and windpipe; and also cauterie one at the middle place of the breast between the two breasts; and let the cautery be done thus according to the preceding form."
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	"And if you wish, let your cautery be done with the cautery called puncture, whose form has been described in the section on ear pain."
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	"Let there be punctures made thus upon those places; and also treat that with what has been mentioned until it is healed."
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	"And if the cautery is having three branches, then you can make three cauteries according to this form:"
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter XXV."
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	"Of the cautery treatment for tickling which is the head of the humoral disorder."
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	"When the head of the humor is displaced due to slippery humidity and does not return at its usual time, you should reduce the displacement so that it returns to its usual course. And when it is displaced thus, as we have testified, then first reduce the displacement, and let the illness be reversed onto its two sides or onto the opposite side; and also raise the neck which is at the lower part of the tickling up to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the junction is displaced downward."
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:"
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	"And then cauterize the neck until it penetrates that side, and comes out on the other side. And here is the figure of cautery with four cauteries."
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"and so those delicate ones according to the quantity of the tentacle; this is its form:"
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	"And sometimes it fits thus, and therefore there are eight cauteries."
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	"And then pause upon the cautery for three days with salt; and let the illness adhere to tranquility, and the member not be moved for any time until it is consoled."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	"And if the displacement is toward the upper parts and it happens thus, then cauterize upon the muscle with a pointed cautery or with several punctiform cauteries, for the junction is confirmed and the humidity is broken up, and the illness is healed."
Capitol .xxvi.	"Chapter XXVI."
De cauterizacio del stomac.	"Of the cautery treatment of the stomach."
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	"When there is pain and much humidity in the stomach such that it increases greatly its size, and if you continue with the usual methods of treatment without improvement, then let the illness be reversed onto its two sides and extended its breasts and its ribs, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one on the left side of the pit of the stomach according to the length of a finger with a pointed cautery, and two on either side of the two lower parts of the cautery until you get the triangular figure; and elongate those that are not fitting so that they make purification."
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	"And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the neck."
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	"And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form with addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and this is one cautery according to the circular form thus:"
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	"And let the stomach be punctured according to that which frightens from this cautery: and you should strike upon the stomach with a tentacle according to the quantity that you wish, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that is previously described until it is healed."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII."
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	"Of the cautery treatment of the fatty liver."
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive flatulence such that it is thrown from its usual size by superfluous exit and if the illness is treated with what we have said without improvement, then let the illness be reversed onto its upper part, and strike with a tentacle three cauteries according to this form and this measure on the liver on the left side of the hypochondria where the decubitus of man lies."
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	"And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right hand."
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	"and do not press too much with the cautery."
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	"And if the quantity of that which adheres is equal to the thickness of the spearhead of the neck, and it is not fitting there; and if the illness stands on its feet; and if not standing, then let him sit down, who has already extended his thighs, and raise his arms."
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	"And this is the form of the cautery:"
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	"And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel cautery if you have subtlety and prudence in the art."
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	"And beware that you do not proceed too much in the cautery, and let the spearhead of the entire neck adhere so that all the body may adhere and enter into the vessels, for the neck is subtle here; know this."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII."
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Perforation of an abscess on the liver using a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	If you ever notice an abscess on the liver and want to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its capsule, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will become very ill and their pain will be acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is on the capsule of the liver, then the pain is intense and sometimes even baffles physicians in treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be turned onto their stomach. The location of the abscess should be felt with the fingertips and then, appropriately heated cautery resembling an arrowhead, the form of which was previously described, is applied to it.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until all the chain (of inflammation) is consumed, until it reaches the diaphragm, until there is nothing left to burn.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with the usual treatment for other abscesses until it heals.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	Only those who have studied medicine and are experienced in various illnesses should use this cautery method. But even they should approach this operation with caution.
Capitol .xxix.	Capítulo XXIX
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cauterization of pleurisy
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries for pleurisy were made in this manner: Take a long, dry stick from the juniper plant and make it into a probe as thick as your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse it in oil and heat it in the fire. Then cauterize with a cautery at the point where the continuity of the collarbone meets the neck; and with two small cauteries diagonally, one a little below the jaw on the left side; and with two cauteries declining between the fifth rib and the seventh rib, inclining a little towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest; and with another above the stomach; and with three cauteries on the back; and with one cautery between the two shoulders; and with two cauteries on both sides of the chest.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not hold the cautery with your hand, but let it be in plain view of the neck while working.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And the ancients said that some men use cauteries of iron similar to a ray, and they heated it in the fire and put it between the ribs until it reached the abscess and burned it out, as we have said regarding the liver abscess.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, for if it happens immediately at the location of the fistula where there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of cauterization of the uvula
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the uvula with what we have said about its cure and division and it does not improve, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are appropriate. The first way is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the uvula according to the figure of the liver cauteries, whose shape has been previously described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let each cautery be the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the manner of cauterization should be as we have described for liver cauteries.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not hold the cautery with your hand; and let the disease be evident on both sides of its location.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another method of cauterization is that you heat the cautery without two points, which causes we have described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the neck which is towards the uvula where the location of the disease is situated on the left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that when you elevate the neck it should follow the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then carefully insert the two points while hot into it, until they penetrate on the other side of the neck.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three points.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then treat the cautery because it has left behind much matter to throw out for too many days, for it is more beneficial than other causes that we have previously mentioned in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	"On cauterization of dropsy."
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	"No cautery is applied to dropsy except in certain instances specifically."
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	"When you treat dropsy with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in this section and your treatment does not take effect, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two between the shoulder blades of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach."
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	"The depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the skin."
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	"And remove the cautery promptly so that it does not scar for too long."
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	"And do not remove the patient from treatment immediately after the cautery with anything that might cause two intentions to be added together; instead, let it be hastened with the help of healing remedies."
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	"The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a key according to its preceding form; and that with which the back is cauterized should be like an olive according to its preceding form."
Capitol .xxxii.	"Chapter xxxii."
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	"On cauterization of feet and thighs."
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen from dropsy and filled with serous water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the heel near where the ear lobe meets the ring finger, lifting your hand up while cauterizing so as not to turn that; then lift your hand up again, but do not return too quickly for fear of causing a relapse.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Here is how the cautery should be performed: Place two cauteries on each thigh and make a cautery on each thigh with the cutting edge of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cauteries should be made along the length of the thigh, one below the hip joint and the other below the middle of the thigh; two cauteries on each thigh.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the ulcer remain uncovered for a long time to prevent any water from accumulating in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat him with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of a swollen belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the body's stomach is heated and humidified by excessive humors that weaken its strength, it is the digestive and retentive virtue residing in the stomach and intestines. This is treated with medical practices without conferring, sometimes causing patients to exhibit cauterization of virtue, thus cauterize them with a large cautery on their stomach as previously mentioned in gastric cauterization, using a circular cautery and four subtle needle-like cauteries around the navel, and another cautery on the large bladder or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if excessive humidity exists and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize them on the navel and intestines, placing two cauteries firmly on the stomach near the groin for a perfect cure without error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol XXXIV
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the Cautery Treatment of Hemorrhoids
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are large, hard hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupt humidities that are not cured by the methods mentioned earlier and do not confer with their treatment, then cauterize them using three cauteries on each side of the buttocks near the small triangular ones, and another cautery above the navel halfway down.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it appears that the stomach is cold and its food is not digested, and sometimes the face is bloated, then cauterize the person on the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; and apply another cautery to the liver, and yet another cautery to the spleen using a needle-like cautery, leaving it in place for some time until the interior is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol XXXV:
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterization of hemorrhoids followed by their excision.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you excise the piles, immediately apply the cautery that is attached to your hand
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then place the glowing ember of the cauterizing iron on that excised pile and seal its end before blood flows from the vein it was attached to.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if there are more piles, cauterize each one in turn as described above, and then treat them with this ointment until they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	But if you cauterize with a large cautery over too much area, it is more likely to cause harm.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Regarding the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally located in the skin
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the treatment recommended for it, and the patient becomes anxious about this, apply cautery to heal it.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when there is some fistula formed in nature and it is old, with corrupt matter and moisture inside it, first cleanse it carefully with a thin probe and then determine the depth of it using the aforementioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery which resembles a needle
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that heated cautery into this fistula, as deep as the probe entered it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Repeat this process with the cautery until all of those corrupt tissues are burned away, once or twice or three times according to your needs.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn any nerves or veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder or the intestine, then be especially careful in those areas. Do this only when the fistula is located in fatty tissue and you believe it is not penetrating deeply.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then dress the wound until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the opening is sealed and all the matter has been removed from it, but after some time it remains closed in this way, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter is not completely removed from it, then know that either the fistula is penetrating deeply or there is some corruption in front of its opening. There will be a reminder of this elsewhere in its section.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Regarding cautery for boils
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When boils cause pain on touch or become very swollen and the person's condition worsens because of this, then cauterize them over each boil with a hot needle cautery, as described in its section.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	Heat the cautery well and then apply it gently over each boil, so that three cauteries leave their marks there, and thus they will be more effectively burned.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Regarding cautery for the bladder
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is weakening and softening in the bladder due to friction and moisture, so that the person cannot retain urine, then cauterize it on its most painful side near the pubic hair area, using one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Let the length of each cautery be according to the number of fingers below the pubic hair. Cauterize it also on the most painful side lower down on the back, using one or two cauteries as needed.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be a pointed needle, as described earlier.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	"Regarding cauterization of the greater."
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	"If there is heat and moisture in the womb, and because of this conception is prohibited, and her menstrual periods are corrupted, and their onset is delayed, and there occurs pain during their discharge, then it is necessary that she be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel area, as we have described for the cautery of the bladder; and one cautery below the back or two cauteries, and let the cautery be sharp."
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	"Regarding cauterization for dislocation of the anus."
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	"When moist humors are emitted at the opening of the anus, and there are such causes for the displacement of its place, and a sign of it is that one thing appears prolonged over another when they are compared between them."
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	"And the location of the dislocation is found in the bottom of the gut."
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	"Therefore you should cauterize the illness at the opening of the anus with a circular cautery, since you will have marked out its circumference with your finger as it is revolved, and thus that the opening falls into the middle of the circle."
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	"And let the cautery be of the same shape as that previously described for cauterizing the stomach."
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	"And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then cauterize it with three cauteries using an olive-shaped cautery."
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And let the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the entire gut; and afterward carefully treat that area until it is healed."
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	"Regarding cauterization of the sciatic vein."
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	"When pain arises at the opening of the anus due to friction and moisture, the illness is cured by what we have said earlier, but if it becomes chronic, then you should relieve the illness from thick humors with pills made from fetid substances or artificial pills or resembling them; and afterward cauterize that area."
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	"And the manner of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire."
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	"Know according to two methods, of which one is that you should cauterize that area at the opening of the anus with three triangular cauteries in this shape; and do so with good depth."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	"And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of the finger, and if an olive-shaped or large cautery is used."
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	"But sometimes it may happen that the cautery is placed on the middle of the head of the anus so that there are four cauteries."
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	"And if you wish, cauterize with the circle whose shape is described in the cautery of dislocation of the anus, letting it be a continuous circle and burn the thickness of the entire gut."
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	"And this is the manner of cautery in sciatica when pain is adherent to the anus and does not extend into the hip."
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	"But if it extends into the hip, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the hip at the location where you feel the pain, and one cautery on the thigh a little above the right side."
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	"And if a knife-shaped cautery is used, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the gut."
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	"And if the illness extends such that the pain is felt near the said hip, then cauterize there where you feel it with a cautery having three points or four or more if necessary."
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	"And if the illness extends pain behind the hip, then cauterize there with a knife-shaped cautery."
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	"And be careful in all cauteries not to finish with the cautery so as to burn nerves or major arteries, and thus cause harm or contraction over the illness."
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	"And I have seen some of those who cauterize over the thigh and end up in cautery burn the flesh within such that the swelling reached the foot, and the foot was perforated and corrupted."
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	"And especially hot applications to the belly cause diarrhea, and especially this is fatal."
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	"And if pain is in two parts at once, then cauterize each one according to this manner."
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	"And some wise men said in cautery of the anus that this is its manner: it should resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is about a palm's length, and it should be slightly above its opening according to the thickness of a date bone or less."
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And within that circle there should be another third one; and the space between them should be equal to the thickness of a hazelnut shell. And those circles should have two openings, and their length should be a nut or two nuts, and make their margin of decently thick iron well-applied in the circles; this is its shape:"
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	"And especially it should be heated in the fire until it gets red-hot and emits sparks, and especially it should be placed on the part of the anus where the pain is located, with the patient lying on their side."
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	"And then cauterize there with three cauteries at once."
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And especially do not leave that for more than three days; do not plaster it with mud and do not leave the wound open for too many days; and cure it with ointment so that it heals."
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	"Albucasis says: 'O son, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the fear of its appearance and because few are found who regard it.'"
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	"But of those cauteries, he finds them useful who suffers from it, and he will find relief with this one."
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	"But cautery with adherent medications is that you make two circles having an armilla pierced in which put the end of the iron door-bolt, whose length should be equal to its thickness."
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	"And if the space between each one is equal to the thickness of a finger; and they are open below and above, and let them contain themselves between them according to this form:"
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	"And especially place it on the part of the anus where there is pain while the patient lies on their side, and compress your hand over the part of the anus; and take hot water from the fire and pour it between two circles, and keep that heat for about an hour until the pain stops biting and adhering to it — because this way one finds burning like fire — until the biting ceases."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	"And especially raise your hand with the instrument and cleanse all the hot water from around the anus with sweet water."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	"And especially leave it for three days and place mud on it until the blackness of the burn is removed, and let it be for a few days, and then it will become tender; this is its final treatment."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And especially cure it with ointment until it heals."
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	"And if the pain extends into the hip or thigh, do to it as is done with the anus in this way:"
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	"This is the manner of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medications."
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	"Take alkali and unslaked lime mixed in equal parts one, grind them together and place them in a new pot whose bottom is pierced with a small hole according to how much enters into it."
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	"And place another pot upside down on the bottom of the first pot, and pour onto it alkaline water mixed with sweet water up to one finger's width, and then compress it with your hand for good compression, and let the hot water from the first pot flow into the inverted pot through the hole in its bottom."
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	"Then gather all that water and pour it onto another live source or renewed alkali, for at this point it will have great acidity, which is administered in many medical operations and cauterizations of other members, for fire operation causes it."
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	"And similarly with some medications used to cauterize widely, such as teesizic and melancratic and soap in the same way that they are mixed."
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	"And Galen recounts of an ancient man the operation and cure by which sciatica vein pain is healed, and greatly praises him as being very skillful, saying that there is no need for any other treatment, since he heals it with just one visit, because the ointment in bath water and eyewash already knows his condition."
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	"And if green celery cannot be found, then fresh figs should be taken; and they should be finely chopped with a little rue and placed on the water where the pain is felt, or on the thing itself, or on the couch, and it should be bandaged."
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	"And it should be left for a period of three hours, or as much time as the patient feels necessary for the adherence to subside."
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	"And then that person should take a bath and afterwards, when his body is warm, he should lie down on the ground, for the pain ceases and he is healed."
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	"And know that it is not necessary to use cauterization with these medications unless there is an evacuation of the body."
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	"But already Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's foot, it heals very well; and this is the manner of cauterizing: wool should be taken and dipped in ancient oil, and placed between the heels and the balls of the feet."
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	"And also take dried goat's foot, inflame it with fire until it becomes charcoal; and then place it on the wool and let it lie there until it cools."
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	"And repeat this process until the sensation of pain reaches the water and then remove the heat source to relieve the pain."
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	"And this manner of cauterizing is called 'cautery of vacua'."
Capitol .xlii.	"Chapter XLII."
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	"Of the cauterization of pain in the teeth."
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	"Sometimes pain is felt in the back due to various causes, such as by compression or by shock or by excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, through the infiltration of moist and humid matter."
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	"And cauterization should only be performed in this one specific case which is caused by the effusion of hot matter."
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	"Therefore, after evacuation of the pain with pills of bdellium and similar ones, which should be made on the back where the pain is felt three lines wide according to its width, since each line contains ten cauteries or more, according to the amount that can be tolerated by the patient and the strength of the cautery."
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	"And cauterization should be performed with cauteries of point shape."
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	"If you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four using a round-point cautery in this way:"
Capitol .xliii.	"Chapter XLIII."
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	"Of cauterization at the beginning of a boil."
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	"Many times this illness occurs in young children, and a sign of the beginning of it in children is that it happens suddenly on their skin and increases and moves."
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	"And notice the last vertebra in the back and neck where the boil has already begun to rise above the others."
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	"Therefore when you see this and wish to prohibit it, immediately cauterize that spot with a circular-shaped cautery in this way:"
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	"That the cautery should take up the entire width of the vertebra evenly."
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	"And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a point-shaped cautery two or three lines deep."
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	"And let the points be close together between them."
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	"And then treat the spot until it is healed with what we have said."
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	"But be careful not to administer a cautery for a boil that has been caused by a spasm of nerves."
Capitol .xliv.	"Chapter XLIV."
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Cautery treatment for gout and joint pain
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by rough humors that are enclosed in each member of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, physicians usually call this gout properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, since gout caused by rough humors is treated with a curette and pains are not completely removed, then cautery is used to remove them.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is necessary to cauterize precisely that proper evacuation in the circuit of the ankle joint with hot irons.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of olive oil cautery:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make a point on the fascia of the foot, then do so with cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if pains extend to the ankles or other joints, and this happens often, then cauterize each affected spot with three or four cauteries altogether using olive oil cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need more cauteries than these cauteries are necessary, then cauterize and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, so that it is only around the circumference of the cord.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if pains extend to the other toe, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the big toe and it is called "suagra," then puncture in the circuit of the joints as they turn, puncturing these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if pains remain in those [toes], then puncture in the circuit of the joints on each knot and on the base of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if pains extend near here to the tendons or muscles, then cauterize all around the assistants (ligaments).
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the illness without proper regimen and receipt of medicines, for if good regimen is done and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery alone, it will be healed, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XL.V
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a fracture occurs in the thigh or hip bones breaking before reaching the anus to the genitals, and this begins to approach, then it is necessary that you command the patient to leave his food on his day and to use gentle laxatives so that the wound opening from his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then accompany the patient between your hands on his side and command him to hold his breath inside so that the anus or buttocks are forced out or appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return him with your hands and press on the fracture over the bone of the penis with such force that it resembles the majority of circles to the upper divided parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	"Until it becomes very hot."
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	"And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out."
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	"You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands."
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	"And then place the cauterizer on that mark with your right hand, and use it to cauterize the opening where the penis enters the abdominal wall; repeat this process until you have completely closed the opening."
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	"And carefully observe the sensation of the intestine during your cauterization, ensuring that you do not burn it, lest great harm come to the patient."
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	"You should know that if you do not catch the opening with the cautery, your operation has failed."
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	"And it is necessary that the cautery of children be thin according to their size and proportion."
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	"And then take care of the cauterized area for three days by applying a border of lint so that the burn scar may heal properly."
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then care for it with other remedies until it is healed."
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	"And the patient should rest on their back for forty days to ensure that the opening is sealed and the wound is healed."
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	"And it is necessary to control the patient's diet according to the duration of their treatment, so that their abdomen does not prolapse due to excessive exertion."
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	"And then, forty days after the operation, carefully administer a laxative and keep the patient for another forty days."
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	"And the patient should avoid heavy work, excessive eating and drinking, and violent coughing, because if they follow this regimen for complete healing, they will be healed."
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	"And I will also describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. If they do not heal on their own, cauterize them with a round cautery according to their size, and treat them as described above. And if they are not healed by this method, then..."
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	"And some earlier authorities have said that ruptures should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in the following manner:"
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	"And a line is drawn across the width of the rupture on either side, and another line above it. Then place your hand with a cautery spike on top, but use the lighter and better one first."
Capitol .xlvi.	"Chapter XLVI."
De cauterizacio de torcio.	"On cauterizing a hernia."
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	"When there is pain in certain members due to a tumor or percussion and the pain persists for a long time without being relieved by medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery."
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	"And the cautery should be applied according to the size and proportion of the member, its strength and weakness, the location of the tumor, and the intensity of the pain."
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	"Therefore, if it does not heal with the first cautery, then repeat the application of the cautery. For it is customary for those pains to be punctured in the member nearest to the one causing them, so that they should be cauterized until the patient is healed."
Capitol .xlvii.	"Chapter XLVII."
De cauterizacio de lepra.	"On cauterizing leprosy."
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	"Some types of leprosy are sometimes treated with cautery but without much benefit. And it is harmful if the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile."
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	"And therefore, when you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is commingled and whether it has been cured with what we have said in the division. And if not, then beware of applying the cautery over the entire body and all its members, for then cauterize it on the head as follows: one cautery in the middle of the head, one on either side near the hairline, two on the horns of the skull, and one behind on the nape or servants."
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	"And finally press with the cautery a little bit until it leaves an impression on the bone, and then remove the scabs, so that the expiration of thick fumes may be relieved. And cauterize on the chest as necessary."
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	"And if the leprosy has already spread over the entire body and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize it with those cauteries which we have mentioned for the head; and also cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on either cheekbone, and two cauteries on either shoulder blade, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the buttocks, and one on the buttocks themselves, and two on each ankle, and one on each shinbone, and two on each knee, and two on each thigh, and two on the tendons of the heel. And cauterize it over all the joints of the said limbs and feet, and over each heel of the feet, and over the fossa of the arms."
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	"And beware of the nerves that lie on the heel lest you burn them."
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	"Sometimes it is also cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the breastbone and another on the mouth of the stomach and yet another on the liver."
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	"And know that the closer you apply the cauteries, the greater will be the benefit and relief. And know that the disease does not feel pain from the cautery, as people do, because its body is already stunned."
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	"And it is necessary for the cauteries to be large or small according to the members and joints according to what is required by the species of instruments."
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And after cauterizing, apply a plaster made from bran with honey, and also use other treatments until it is healed."
Capitol .xlviii.	"Chapter XLVIII."
De cauterizacio de stupor.	"On cauterizing stupor."
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	"When some member is paralyzed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but does not heal, then you should cauterize that paralyzed member with cauteries according to its size."
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	"And let your cautery enter the thickness of the flesh a little bit."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with an ointment until it is healed."
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	"And sometimes some paralysis which affects the arms and legs, the vertebrae of the back, and near the origin of the nerves that move that member is cauterized, and the paralysis is removed."
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	"But let only one who knows well the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves through all the moving body presume to do this."
Capitol .xlix.	"Chapter XLIX."
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	"On cauterizing warts that are turning white."
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	"When warts are old and not improved by any medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize them with a pointed cautery a little bit according to the quantity of the thickness of the flesh until the whiteness and color of it are removed and its color is changed."
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply to it bran and lentil flour with rose oil and arnagosa leaves, and dove's blood or hen's blood, each one part, and all mixed together. And then let a cloth be moistened and placed on the location until it is healed."
Capitol .l.	"Chapter L."
De cauterizacio de cranc.	"On cauterizing cancer."
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	"When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference just as it is turned."
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	"And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it. But this does not seem good to me because I fear that it would become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen sometimes."
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	"It would be more appropriate to cauterize around him in a circle like we mentioned earlier, or with several cauteries."
Capitol .li.	"Chapter Two."
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	"On the cautery of haemorrhoids."
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	"When some haemorrhoids are delayed in maturation, this is due to their superfluity or the state of the patient's health - whether they are old and decrepit, lack blood, or it has been a long time. If you wish to hasten the maturation of haemorrhoids, cauterize around them using several small punctures; leave those alone which have not yet reached maturity."
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	"But if you wish to cause a perforation with the cautery, then heat the cautery whose form is as follows: and place it in the middle of the haemorrhoid until it pierces the skin."
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if you cauterize that area which is away from where the haemorrhoid was protruding, so that the flesh of the arm is alleviated; and then dress it until it heals."
Capitol .lii.	"Chapter Fifty-Two."
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	"On the cautery for gangrene."
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	"Gangrene is corruption that moves through the limb, consuming it just as dry wood is consumed by fire."
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	"Therefore, if you wish to cauterize gangrene where it suffers cautery with fire, then heat several small and large cautery needles according to what is suitable for that area affected by gangrene."
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	"And then cauterize it entirely until you have eliminated all corruption and there remains no cause of it."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	"And then leave it alone for three days, and afterward wash the cauterized areas with a cloth dipped in olive oil mixed with honey until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption is removed."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	"And then dress it with soft flesh-producing ointment."
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	"But if after three days you find that the flesh grows healthy where there was no corruption, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery on whatever remains in the corrupted areas."
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	"And gangrene is sometimes treated with sharp medicine, for that is half treatment instead of cautery."
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	"But cauterization with fire is the easiest way to bring relief."
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	"And I have already spoken about the treatment of it with sharp medicine in the previous section, and therefore take that when you begin treating it."
Capitol .liii.	"Chapter Fifty-Three."
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	"On cautery for closure [of wounds] and other similar conditions."
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times it happens that the patient's foot is called claw, and this is a cause of thickness, entering, which makes the foot swell; and there are two ways to cauterize in these cases, which is cauterizing with fire and cauterizing with cold water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Cauterizing with fire is done by heating the cautery until it resembles a vulture's feather, which should be made of iron according to the size that can contain the claw in its entirety, and it should have fine margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place that heated cautery on the claw, and carefully move your hand with the cautery around the edge of the claw until it reaches the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave it for three days until it begins to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a plaster made of wild mallow leaves crushed with salt, and leave the plaster on it for one night, because that will help to draw out the inflammation.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then dress the wound with regenerative ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it is not converted, and many times it happens on the surface of the body, especially in the breasts and thighs, then you should administer cauterization with cold water in those cases. And it is done by taking a quill made of iron or bronze or vulture's feather, and placing that on the claw; then fill the quill with a small amount of cold water, hold your hand steady, and press the edge of the quill into the root of the claw while the cold water enters the front of the claw's root. Wait for the pain to subside from the cold water for about an hour, then remove it, because the claw with its roots will be drawn out.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And so do this on those two until all of them are removed from your body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then dress the wounds where the roots of the claws have been removed with ointment that makes flesh grow.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 44
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cautery for tremors
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When someone has a tremor due to coldness in the nerves or fever caused by coldness, or for another similar reason, then you should cauterize them with four cauteries or five on the shoulders of the back, placing one cautery between each pair of vertebrae; and also cauterize the sole of their foot, and once on the stomach.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And if it is due to coldness, then the tremor will be calmed down and recovery from the cold illness will be hastened.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 45
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cautery for accidental wounds of the body
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body has been wounded accidentally and there are pustules with fissures that have formed from corrupted matter, then at first sight it should be cauterized on top of each fistula with a small cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which is heated in fire; or with long tongs for burning; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And afterwards it should be cauterized frequently at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and they are not to be believed, and the superfluity is disrupted doing these things, and they will heal from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But nevertheless it is necessary that this should first be done by evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 46
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	"Treatment of accidental blood flow by incision cauterization."
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	"When veins are wounded by an incision made during surgery, which then flows out or where there is an aperture, the wound must be caueterized with boiling water and afterwards healed."
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	"If it happens to someone like that, at once you should put your hand on the wound and press on it until those veins are stopped so that the blood flow stops."
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	"And similarly press on the cauterizing iron until the oil lamps are extinguished, both large and small in number, and blow on them so that they do not reignite."
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	"And take one of those iron rods, small or large according to the location and size of the wound where the artery is broken, quickly press it on that vein until you have stopped the bleeding, and cauterize it so that it is sealed and restricts the blood flow."
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	"And if blood is expelled from the wound of the artery when you remove the cautery and tighten it, then take another one carefully from those cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and continue doing so until the bleeding has stopped."
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	"And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, lest you bring harm upon yourself or another ill fate."
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	"And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop it in any other way except with a cautery as mentioned above, or by extraction if it cannot be extracted. For when it is extracted, the ends of the membrane are burned and the bleeding stops. Or it can be tied with thread or adhesive with strong tension, or medicinal substances whose property is to stop bleeding should be applied; and they should be pressed with a compress and binding."
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	"But he who administers proper restriction of the artery with thread or adhesive and tension with cloths or by placing causes for burning and similar things, does not commit a fault, but is deemed worthy."
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	"But if this is done by someone else and the physician is not present nor medicine, then open with gentle pressure of the index finger on the wound of that vein as mentioned above, and understand to make a great constriction within so that the blood may be stopped from the highest part of the wound, and do not remove the finger; and sprinkle cold water on the artery so that the blood may congeal and thicken; and see if cautery or medicine is necessary."
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second section.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incisions, punctures, evacuations and of phlebotomy and wounds and their like.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Al-Bukhaysi.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already mentioned in the first chapter all diseases in which cautery with fire is convenient and with medicinal substances that burn, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them with their forms. And we have ordered the chapters from the head to the foot.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter likewise so that it may be easier for whoever wants it; therefore I will discuss what he will ask about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, know that in this chapter there is nothing but what was discussed in the first chapter about cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because it is necessary that caution be great, for in the operations discussed in this chapter many evacuations are performed which are with blood through which life depends. Therefore, it is necessary to perform aspiration of the vein or incision over the aposteme or opening of an abscess or purification of the wound or extraction of arrows or incision of stones and their like with caution.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and many of them often result in death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I advise you to be careful about what you do not hesitate about, for sometimes you may treat people with many diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are some who become angry with their illness and it is easy for death to occur from that because of the severity of their disease, its duration, and fear of the disease which indicates death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among them is he who gives you his wealth and says, "Wait for my health," but his illness is dangerous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore do not consent to anyone who comes to you with this attitude. Let your caution be greater than greed and your desire for wealth. And do not presume any cause unless it is based on certain knowledge which confirms that, and through which praiseworthy success may occur.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your patients prognosis and indication of when health will be restored, for that is your helper in acquiring fame and remembrance, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, God breathes into you His understanding and does not take away from you guidance and protection, for that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter divided into chapters according to what has been mentioned in the chapter on cautery and cure from the head to the foot so that you may easily find what you ask about and for which you have need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the treatment of water contained in the head of children
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease often happens to children at birth and when the midwife squeezes the child's head during delivery.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs for unknown causes which are not understood.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have only seen this disease in children; and of all those whom I saw, death occurred to them. And for that reason it seems to me that this is a hopeless condition in such cases.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that the head of one child was full of water and his head continued to swell so much that it could not stop on its own because of the size of his head, and more than the humidity increased until he died.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either collected between the fontanelle and the bone or collected behind the bone above the cerebral hemispheres.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in that case if the humidity is between the fontanelle and the bone and the aposteme is small, then it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head in the latitudinal direction, and let the length of the incision be about two fingers so that the humidity may flow out. And this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"And if humidity has increased more and the boil has grown larger, then here are two incisions to be made in this manner:"
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	"And if humidity is left behind, a sign of this is that you can open the corners of the mouth widely and water comes out when you squeeze those inside with your hand, but it doesn't get swallowed."
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"Therefore, you should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:"
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	"and near the incision remove all humidity; and then strain the incisions with cloths and swabs; and on the fifth day pour wine and oil over it, and then loosen the bandage and cure the wound with plasters and dressings, and bind the head evenly; and let the sick person eat dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed."
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	"And there is another manner of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the boil and the collection of water, for sometimes it may be larger in the occiput, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore attend to the incision where the boil and the collection of water appear, and do then what seems best to you."
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	"And observe that you should not cut the artery, and endeavor that blood does not flow, nor let the patient suffer through that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity."
Capitol .ii.	"Chapter II."
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the cutting of the arteries that are near the ears, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When, after all treatments or medications applied to the eyes or face have proved ineffective and the condition worsens, the last resort in this case is the cutting of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then when you want to cut those arteries that the patient has raised their head, and near there rub firmly with coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and also tighten the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and the places above the places that are near the ears below, and they do not show except in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then carefully press on the artery with your finger and cut each one with a scalpel having two pointed blades entering into the bone, and this should be done across the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the scalpel between the artery and cut it through at the incisions made above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two fingers wide because when any vein is cut, blood will gush out with a pulsating exit, which flows forth in frequent spurts.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear clearly, then measure from the ear the amount of space equal to three fingers width and press down with your finger and cut through the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which causes the blood to flow abundantly is about one pound's worth, and some people get more or less of it, and all this depends on the amount that appears from the power of the patient and the fullness of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of the fracture on the bone, then cut that away so that no abscess may occur.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then stitch up the wound with feathers and cloth strips, and also treat it with ointment inside so that it may heal.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When some ancient migraine or sharp pain occurs due to dampness and heat in the temples, or if it is similar to ancient but violent ones, and it is treated with medicinal remedies without success, then we have tried in these illnesses extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of operation and extraction of these is that the patient shaves the hair from the temples where the arteries are located. And understand where the artery appears in the temple because it will be shown by its pulse, and it is hidden in few men due to the violence of the disease.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then wrap the patient's head with some cloth and rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery becomes manifest.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the scalpel which has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then cut through the skin with that easily until you reach the artery. Then tie it off and extract it from above towards the sides until you extract it completely from the skin and uncover those tunnels which are on both sides of it, entirely separated.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is small, then tie off one end of it with a needle and cut through it in such a way that its ends are extended and contracted to prevent any flow of blood, because if they are not cut through, blood will not flow out completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate three or four ounces of blood from it.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you must tie it off in two places with strong double thread made of cotton or long cords so that it does not rot before the wound heals and thus prevent any flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut through the excess tissue between the two threads, and do this at that time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize the cut ends of the artery with a caustic iron or scissors cautery so that they are sealed and prevent any oozing of blood. This will serve in place of stitching it up.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion, because cauterization helps to increase the heat and dryness which are helpful in this case. Therefore, it is better for treatment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary that after the extraction of the arteries, you should sprinkle the wound area with powdered frankincense properly and then treat it with drying medications to promote healing and ointments so that it heals quickly.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if during the operation there is any bleeding from the artery again, then you should stop that blood flow by compressing it with a clamp or cauterizing it with caustic iron, or pressing some cotton on the wound area with your hand until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present, then press your finger on the wound area until the bleeding stops. Then rinse the wound with cold water to cool it down and then dress it according to what is necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is easily overlooked in the extraction of an artery is that you should also cauterize the vein at the same time with this two-pronged cautery. After you have pierced both places with a tent, place each prong into them separately and ignite them one by one until they reach the bone and cut through the vein in two places so that what remains between its ends is elongated because it has not been completely consolidated by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the sharpness of both prongs be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if they are too sharp, it is better to have two prongs that are not very sharp because if they are too sharp, they may cut through the flesh with great speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since there is some thickness to them, the heat of the fire is retained in them and the flesh is cut through gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this procedure is better than any other and easily performed.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between the two prongs be equal to the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment of painful and acid tears from the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acid tears, it is the disease of those veins that are on top of the head and they do not respond to any medical treatment. Sometimes the face of the patient becomes reddened and they feel a sensation of ants crawling on their forehead as if they were being bitten by ants. The eyelids become thin, moistened with tears so much that the lashes stick together and the inner corners of the eyes are scarred by the acidity of the tears. The old remedies for this condition are useless and no help can be found in them.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	"It is necessary to order the patient to shave the hair that is on their forehead, and then incise the forehead with three equally spaced vertical lines according to its length."
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	"And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little below the movement of the muscles that are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side."
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	"And be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws."
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	"And if the space of each incision is equal to three fingers."
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	"And if you have a sponge or dry cloth dipped in water with which to wipe away the blood."
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	"And then insert the spatula of two sharp points between them, and this is the shape of its incision."
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	"That is to say, it starts from the temples up to the second incision."
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	"And excise with it all the skin that is between two incisions up to the pericranium which is on the bone, and then do the same thing with the middle incision up to the second incision."
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	"And then place this spatula inside and insert another instrument called a cutellar into the first incision again, which is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	"And press the sharp side of that against the flesh attached to the skin, and the other side onto the bone inside it, and use this tool to reach the middle fissure and cut all the vessels descending from the head to the heels."
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	"But make sure that the incision continues until it reaches the skin, and then do this in the middle fissure up to the other fissure."
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	"And when there is an equal amount of bleeding, press the places where the blood vessels are joined together with your fingers."
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And then press in each fissure with cotton wool soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that there is no formation of pus."
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	"And on the third day untie the ligature and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then treat this with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other remedies so that the wounds may heal."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter V"
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	"Of the treatment of wounds by cauterization and the vessels descending from the openings inside the head."
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	"When there are sharp and continuous veins, and the eyelids of the sick person are thin and small, and their sight has become weakened, and the eyelashes are ulcerated and their hair is falling out, and there is sharp and painful pain in the forehead with consequent swelling, know that these matters and cauterization come from tiny veins originating from inside."
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	"And the best treatment for this is: command the sick person to raise their forehead, and then make an incision in it at the middle point of the forehead, a little way across (beginning with the fissure of the left temple towards the right temple; and let the incision be made into the bone; and extend your hand out from the lacertus temporalis muscles which are attached to the cheek), until the bone is uncovered."
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	"Dry up all the blood with a sponge or with dry cloth, and then fill in between the two lips of the incision with cotton wool or with cloth."
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And then apply on top of it powders soaked in wine and oil to prevent the formation of pus."
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	"And when you remove this and see that the pustule has decreased, then it is necessary to scrape the bone where the flesh begins, and then treat it with a dry ointment which causes the flesh to be released, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make an ointment from these and apply it to these wounds on raw flesh."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter VI"
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	"The treatment for that which falls into the ears."
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	"All that falls into the ears is of four kinds: it may be mineral matter or something similar to stone, like iron and lead; or it may be plant-like, like chickpeas or broad beans; or it may be fluid like water or vinegar and things like them; or some kind of creature."
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	"If a stone or other cause like those that do not fit or grow in the ear falls into it and blocks the ear, then pour olive oil or sesame oil into it drop by drop until it runs out. Then administer the extraction of it, and make them sneeze conditionally, and plug their nose during the onset of sneezing."
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	"And also insert into the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear upwards in those parts where these causes are forgotten."
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And if it is not extracted, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called 'subtle syriatic hook', which has this form:"
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	"And if it is not extracted with the hook, then do so with a thin and slightly bent piece of wire."
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	"And if it is not extracted with that either, then make a tube of silver and insert the tip of the tube into the ear canal and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube enters."
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	"And then extract it with a strong suction using the small wind, as is often done with what we have described."
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	"But if it is not extracted in this way, then take a heated spoonful of salt or sometimes a prepared wick with which chickens are grasped by one foot, and place that on the end of the ear canal, and wrap cloth around it gently placed."
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	"And then insert that into the ear canal with ease, and remove the ear from humidity."
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	"And if it is not extracted with all the causes that we have described, then you should cut off that before an abscess or spasm occurs."
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	"And the way to cut it off is that you first sanctify the patient's left cephalic vein and extract blood according to the method of its virtue, then make that seethe between your palms and return the ear to its original position, and finish with a small incision in the skin of the ear near where the bone was pressed upon."
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And the incision should be crescent-shaped and reach to the ear bone. Once the bone is exposed, remove it if possible with appropriate instruments, then quickly suture the incision, and dress the wound until healed."
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	"And if the cause of pain in the ear is one of the hairs that has grown and swollen up, then administer the cure and extraction of it. But if you do not succeed with your attempt, then take a fine thin spatula according to this form:"
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	"And use that spatula to perform the excision of that hair which has fallen into the ear."
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	"And do not do this if you think that the hair has already become moistened by the vapor of the ear. Rather, take it out in pieces and then extract those pieces with tweezers or gentle forceps, or use the incision method mentioned above, for extraction is made easier this way."
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	"But if water enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze at the beginning and fill his ear with a little cotton wool, then cover that ear with another piece of cloth. If that does not work, then take thin, pointed sticks or rods according to the length of the finger, heat them in the fire a bit, and the patient should insert one of those into their ear canal and press on one side of that rod with one hand while striking it on the other side with another stick."
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	"So continue doing this until all the water is removed."
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	"And if the water cannot be removed in this way, then take some paper or gauze, insert one end of it into the ear and extend the other end over a flame until most of it is burned."
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	"And then take another piece of gauze and repeat this until all the water is removed, then remove that with a cannula as described above."
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	"But in the extraction of an insect entering that ear, if it is a small creature, proceed as described above. But if it is a large creature causing dizziness, then administer its extraction with tweezers and forceps, for this cause is lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear."
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	"But in the extraction of a worm engendered in the ear, when you treat it with what has been said in this division and in the treatise on distillations and your treatment does not succeed, then you should examine the ear in sunlight."
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then if you see any cause of the worms, extract them with gentle or fine forceps. But if you do not see any cause, then take a cannula made thus: narrow below and widening above, whose form is as follows:"
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	"And insert the narrow end of this cannula into the ear according to what the patient can endure. Then suck through it with great force and repeat this many times until all the worms are removed."
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	"But if you do not succeed with this attempt, then plug and close the opening of the cannula with wax as mentioned above. Then administer distillations which have already been proved in the ancient cure for worms, and you will find that in the treatise on distillations."
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And let your effusion be such that when you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, whose form is as follows:"
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	"And make it of silver or bronze, narrow below and having a small canal above and flat on top."
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	"And then let there be a hole in the concavity of the cannula where it is necessary to pour the oil through."
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	"And if you wish, take a reed and cover its end decently with cotton, then pour oil into the concavity of the instrument, or juice from some herb, or whatever medicinal substance you desire into the cannula — which is in the ear — then insert the reed covered with cotton on top and gently press it with your hand so that the oil may be expelled into the concavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside."
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	"And whatever is poured into the ear should already have been scaled over a gentle fire."
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	"And be sure that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too hot, for medicinals for the ear cannot endure this."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter VII."
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	"Of the treatment of stoppage of ears."
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	"Sometimes some children issue from the wombs of their mothers not yet perforated, and it has happened to some men that there is blockage in the entrance of the ear by mucus or flesh fallen into it; and this blockage sometimes occurs at the end of the canal of the ear which does not cause dizziness, and sometimes it occurs outside its parts."
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	"And that which happens at the entrance of it, which does not comprehend dizziness, is in the worst conditions for difficult cure."
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	"But if it causes dizziness, then you should place the patient's ear to the sun and look at that."
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if you notice swelling, open it gently with a sharp scalpel of this form:"
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	"And the end of it where you want less width, one side should be sharp and the other not; and the scalpel should have two flat sides so that it doesn't harm the ear."
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	"And if the swelling is due to skin in the ear or the cheek, then use small sharp scissors and cut carefully along the most visible line so that all the skin is removed."
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	"And if there is swelling on the front of the ear, then take a fine red-hot probe and heat it in fire a little, and apply it to the flesh of the ear."
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	"And if you feel swelling with what the illness finds easy to reach, for severity of hearing loss, relieve its pressure gently; and take care not to injure the nerves of the ear."
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And next, apply a bandage of linen around the ear according to its size that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or if the ear is already inflamed, then you must cauterize the inflammation and replace it with another wick which you will wrap in wax made with rose oil, until the inflammation is healed; and then treat it until it is cured."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	"But if there is a flow of blood, then immerse a linen cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation."
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of inflammation that affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Inflammation that affects the eyelids may sometimes be moist, and at other times dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should have either of these with you: honey or onion, and grind them into their juices, and then apply them to the places that are affected.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain comes with a flow of blood, then cauterize it with a fine silver needle.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is when incisions and wounds are seen to return only if some cause of their recurrence remains; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Here comes the next sentence:
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	"Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids."
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	"Often seen in the eyelids is some cause which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is called swelling."
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	"And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the lower and upper eyelid."
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	"The operation is to consider the hours if the swelling appears on the outside of the eyelid and extends throughout, and its cause is light."
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	"Therefore make an incision along the width, then carefully observe throughout its extent with ease, and then suspend it with a ligature and cut it off."
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	"But if you are unable to make the incision of it unless by penetrating the eyelid bit by bit, then this is not done for any cause."
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And if the wound is large, then you join it with sutures; and care for it until it is healed."
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	"And if it is small, you will not have any harm from that because the ointment of it restores it and heals it."
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	"And if the swelling is declining towards the inside of the eyelid, you should consider its surface inside, therefore raise the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a ligature except that you do not make an incision, and press it throughout its extent, and if the eyelid by means of an incision is lengthened, then this is not done for any cause."
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	"And especially with the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and care for the place with something that heals until it is healed."
Capitol .x.	"Chapter .x."
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	"On the treatment of inflammation on the eyelid above the wound."
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	"Inflammation is heat that is generated in the tissues of the eyelid above, and especially in children, it aggravates wounds and accidents occur to their sight, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears flow from them."
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	"And therefore you cause those to lie on their backs all the time and also sleep with them on their faces; and place moist compresses on their eyelids which are already covered by inflammation and imminent danger is apparent in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel pulsation there."
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	"And there is some manner of operation in that which the illness causes him to hold his head down with his chin on his chest and also to wrap a cloth around it and make for him a bandage according to the quantity that contains warmth of the whole part, and place that over that and press with your fingers throughout until pulsation has accumulated in the middle of the bandage, and then finish in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incidentally with an incision through the latitude, and let the incision not be greater than the incision made in trepanation."
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	"But if you cover the forehead so that you cut through the entire cord until you reach pulsation, for in many cases process occurs through a fistula according to the form of white heat."
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	"Then remove that with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers on the parts before and roll it between your right and left hands until it has disappeared."
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	"And be careful that you do not enter the incision with the spatula for fear of reaching the eye and damaging it."
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	"But if your pulsation does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then insert into the incision a little with facility until pulsation occurs, and then remove it as we have said; and then wrap cloths in vinegar and wine and place them on the place and strain those with powders."
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	"And some who throw salt and place it in the concavity of the incision for fear that something remains of that humidity."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then care for him until he is healed."
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	"But if an abscess occurs in the place after cauterization, cure it with cedar plasters until it is healed."
Capitol .xi.	"Chapter XI."
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	"Methods for examining the patient's condition."
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	"When the eyelids of patients are not separated by their natural lashes due to adhesions, then it is necessary for us to examine them and determine methods for treating illnesses such as persistent tears, swelling of the eyelids, and tissue between them which cause harm to the patient's eyes. There are four treatments for this: either cautery with fire or acute medicine, as mentioned in the chapter on cautery; or it can be treated by incision and suturing; or by using tubes, as I will explain."
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	"And then you should hold the patient's head still with your left hand; carefully turn their eyelid upwards with your left hand. If it turns easily, that is good. But if not, insert a needle into the part of the eyelid where the lashes are sparse and further from the edge of the eyelid. Then make the needle penetrate the flesh above the eyelid, but close to the edge where the lashes grow. Then pull the thread upwards with the eyelid turned up and turn it back down."
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	"And then make an incision with scissors into the part of the eyelid inside and below the lashes, entering through the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one. Then remove the thread and press gently with small pieces of cotton or cloth on the eyelid to stop any bleeding. Finally, mark the eyelid with a stitch, making it resemble the shape of a myrtle leaf."
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	"But nonetheless, the shape of the stitch should be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, because this has already been diversified among people. For some patients require a large incision in the eyelid corresponding to the amount by which it is swollen."
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	"And then cut with scissors along the two lines you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal duct and entering into the smaller one."
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	"And if your incision is close to the natural lashes, it should be no wider than the thickness of a knife's edge."
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	"And then place a clamp on one of the two ends of the cord and carefully excise it all. Then adjust the two lips with wax or thin wool thread and wipe away any blood. If you wish to do so, make the excess threads adhere together with some adhesive substance on both sides of the eyebrow. Otherwise, do not bother."
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	"And then leave the stitches in for three or four days and then remove them and care for it."
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	"And if you wish, leave the wound without stitching and care for it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid swells due to the sealing of the wound and the application of the ointment. But stitching is better."
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	"But nevertheless, if there is great concern about the illness, it should be done with care and good intentions, and not out of fear."
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	"And there is another way to stitch, which is to mark on the eyelid the shape of a myrtle leaf and then lift up the eyelid with three needles placed and gathered according to this shape:"
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"But if this is not possible, then hold the needles and do not let them go out of shape. Then take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure. Enter the other thread near the larger lacrimal duct and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct. Adjust these threads evenly between your fingers. Then raise your hand gradually, raising the entire cord on which you have marked according to what we have recommended."
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches and care for it until it is healed."
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	"But if an abscess forms at your incision or cut, lance it with cauterization and apply lint soaked in honey."
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	"And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyelid become turned inwards. In this case you should use what we have said about incision, but stitching is better for each one."
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	"To stitch with needles, do it like this:"
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	"And it is that you turn the eyelid and cut along the figure that is inside as I have described. Then artificially make two needles or two thin awls, of which the length should be according to the length of the eyelid and the width should be less than the width of the incision."
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	"And you have already cut at both ends where you will have the threads."
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	"Then carefully apply each one to the excess skin on top of the eyelid and tighten the needles at both ends with great force. Leave them like this for a few days, because the cord will die due to the tightening and will shrink and fall in as you put it."
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	"But if it is delayed, then break it with tweezers and care for the wound until it heals."
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	"So when it is healed, the eyelid is lifted up and the hairs will not prick."
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	"And these are the two needles that you should make like this:"
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	"And have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less."
Capitol .xii.	"Chapter XII"
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	"Of raising prickly hairs on the eyebrow with a needle when the hair is hard."
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	"When the hairs on the eyebrows are not natural, hard and rough, then it is necessary to take a subtle needle and tie onto it a thin thread of cedar and lion's hair. Then carefully adjust both ends of it."
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	"And let the length of the threads be about a palm in length."
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	"And then take another subtle thread and tie it onto the first one shortly afterwards. Then knot both ends if you wish to."
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	"And then hold your patient's head in place on the table and position yourself near the sun so that your work is clearly seen because it is a subtle and delicate operation."
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	"And then insert the needle into the root of the hard hair that needs to be removed and make it penetrate quickly through the eyelid until you pull it out above the natural hair."
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	"And then remove the hair from there and insert it into a vessel containing quicklime. Let one, two or three hairs be inserted at once and not more than that."
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	"And then remove your hand from the container when the hair has been completely cleaned with quicklime. Then insert it back into the eyelid among the natural hairs."
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	"But if the hair is dragged through quicklime but is not removed, then drag the quicklime onto the threads that you have tied with it, until the hair becomes completely clean."
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	"And then leave it alone for the view of the eyebrow because you will then remove the quicklime and the thread. Then gently rub each one and close the eyelid and leave the stitches in place for two or three days until the hair adheres to its proper place and grows with good flesh."
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	"And if the hair is too short, then adjust one of the natural hairs and lift it up with that or let it grow for some space and then lift it up."
Capitol .xiii.	"Chapter XIII"
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	"Of treating chalazion, which appears on the eyelid above."
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	"When chalazion appears on the eyebrow, it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upwards or to the right or left side due to poor healing of wounds or incisions or burns. It is called leporina and this chalazion can be natural or accidental, occurring due to poor healing of wounds or incisions or burns or by resemblance to their unhealthy appearance."
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	"The manner of operating on it is to cut into that hardened area and separate its lips and insert a wick made of linen cloth between them. Then tie them up so they heal."
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	"And it is not necessary that you use a cure for him from causes that dry and constrain; for if you do this, it will return to his condition worse than it was at any time."
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	"And use that of causes which soften, like fenugreek, and mix it with the water in which chickpeas have been boiled and strained, or with a decoction of liquorice, which should be softened with some oil, and immerse the cloth in that, and cure with it."
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	"And the treasure of your cure is that you persist with all zeal without being consolidated according to the form that was at the beginning."
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	"And this operation which we have called is nothing but a certain correction of the condition that does not return the form of the locus to what it was beforehand."
Capitol .xiiii.	"And this is chapter fourteen."
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	"On the cure for echacrati that occurs in the left eyelid."
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	"This alxacrati which is found in the left eyelid, which is truly called alxacrati; and it is of two types: some are natural, others are accidental."
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	"But accidental ones occur due to blows, cuts, burns, or other similar causes."
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	"And the way of performing this operation is that you take a needle with which you make a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and pass it from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh."
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	"And then stretch the flesh at its parts with the needle and sew it up with the needle, and cut with a wide-bladed scalpel."
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	"And then if the figure of the eyelid returns to its proper shape, that is good; but if not, take a needle and place it in the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make two incisions on the side of the left eyelid."
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	"And let the two ends of the incisions be at two angles of the incision that you have made, so that when they come together, the figure is formed."
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	"And this figure is Greek letter lambda (λ)."
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	"And then cut the flesh that much which is on the side of the sharp end of the left eye, so that it cuts the eyelid."
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	"And then bring together the separated parts and sew them up with a thread of wool; and then dress it with what we have said about moisturizing medicines and compresses until it heals."
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	"And if an alxacrati occurs due to a split or stitches or burning, it is necessary that you make a flat cut with a scalpel over the skin of the eyelid as has been preceded."
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	"And then separate with a compress between two lips according to what we have said."
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	"In summary of the sermon on the treatment of alxacrati when it is above or below, the operation that occurs according to how it has been prepared varies according to its form, and it appears in various different shapes."
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	"And the skillful artist always prepares everything in every possible way that it is possible to him so that he makes the figure return to its natural shape or near it, and that illness according to what suits it of the operation and instruments in the greatest dispositions."
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter XV"
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	"Of adhesions of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea."
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this condition occurs in many men, such that the eyelid is solidified upwards with the albumen of the eye, and is prohibited from its usual movement and natural functions, then you should insert the tip of a needle underneath the eyelid, elevating it upward or extending it with a hook.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, not too sharp to avoid causing discomfort to the patient during the operation. Be careful that the spatula does not injure the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Make your incision in such a way that it easily cuts through the adhesion, so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all of the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then you should put salt water in the eye, with which you wash it; or else dissolve and distill in its place.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the eye using forceps, and apply a compress of lanolin-infused egg albumin to the eye. On the third day, use consolidation agents so that it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Capítulo XVI
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Chapter XVI
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	"You should know that nail is produced in two manners: either nervously, and it resembles hard skin; or non-nervously, resembling congealed white humidity, which when iron touches it, forcefully takes hold of it, it is cut off, and the nail does not grow into it."
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	"And both species begin only from the larger lacrimal duct that gradually covers the eye and prohibits light and its movement."
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	"The manner of working in the incision is that the patient places their head in the position indicated by you, and at the same time opens their eyelids with your hand, and collects the nail with forceps with little duplication and extends it towards its upper edges."
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	"And at the same time takes a needle and inserts it into that nail, about the width of a horse's or ox's hair, or cow, or similar, or strong thread, and duplicates the tip of the needle little by little and places it in the middle of the nail, and penetrates the nail with the needle, and ties the nail with thread; and extends it towards its upper edges, and removes with the thread the side of the nail that covers the pupil."
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	"And thus you follow that with the thread until the end of it."
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	"Ideally, you should then make an incision near the root of the lacrimal with a subtle spatula or small forceps, removing the natural flesh of the lacrimal to prevent continuous tear flow due to incision."
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"Sometimes the nail extends onto the skin or flesh, as we have mentioned, and in such cases it should be cut away using a lion's claw-shaped spatula, of which this is the form:"
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	"And ensure that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause its rupture, nor pierce the pupil."
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"After making the incision, place a small amount of salt or powdered cinnabar into it and leave it overnight. Then rinse with water until healed."
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	"And if the nail is not nerve-rich and you cannot insert the needle or it does not adhere to the skin, then often this type of nail can be treated with medicines, and thus healed as described in the division."
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish to incise it, then open the wound of the ulcer and take a subtle lion's claw-shaped spatula with sharp edges in this form:"
am subtilitat.	"with subtlety."
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	"If sometimes it becomes rarefied and condensed and sticks to the wound, then distill from your urine into the wound using cinnabar powder or mercury or salt crystals, and cover the wound overnight."
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	"And repeat the operation over it until all that is of it has been removed, so that only healthy tissue remains in the wound. For if you leave it as is, and initially treat the aposteme within so that it heals."
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	"And repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed."
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	"The prominence of the lacrimal caruncle, if seen in the wound causing great harm, should be suspended with a thread. Then cut it from there with one stroke, and do not extend the incision too much lest you cut into the tear ducts."
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	"And then distill mercury cinnabar powder into the lacrimal caruncle until it heals."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	"Of incision of a pimple and of what is born from attached skin in the wound."
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	"Sometimes in the wounds of some eyes, rough skin is born which covers the pupil or approaches the edge of the eyelids and squeezes them together. Then it binds the eyelids tightly at their edges and becomes like a ballustrade bead."
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	"The operation for this condition is that the patient holds his head upright while you open the wounds of it and collect all that rough skin with suitable threads or with tweezers. Then gradually cut into it until everything has been finished without damaging any part of the wound."
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	"And your incision should be made with the same spatula that we recommended for nail incisions, or with little forceps suitable for such tasks according to what seems appropriate in this chapter."
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"Then when your incision is completed and all that rough skin has been removed, then fill the wound with salt crystals or distill onto it rough powder like corrosive medicines. Then cover the wound from without using egg white until it is certain that no inflammation will occur."
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	"And if any cause of a pimple remains and is swollen with hot cautery, and you fear inflammation, then leave the wound alone and treat that inflammation with whatever it yields to. Then repeat the operation on it until it heals, and do likewise for attached skin which happens in this type of wound."
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	"But be sure to leave all care of the wound free for nature or accident to operate on it with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand that operation."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter XVIII."
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	"Of collection of pus in the wound."
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	"Pus is rough and tough and stands over the wound preventing its operation. It delays the healing of the wound for many days."
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	"Therefore, at the beginning you must consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and whether it has no other condition than pus. Then you should collect that pus."
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	"And tell the patient to hold his head upright while you suspend those veins with one or two threads according to your discretion. And that thread should be of subtle doubled silk like this:"
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	"or like two threads gradually coming together in a single body like this:"
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	"And then those veins should be tied with subtle forceps using subtlety and wipe away the blood little by little until you see that those veins are removed from the wound and turned back."
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	"And be sure not to damage the wound with the edges of the spatula. And if your operation is in the middle before the sun, then be very careful in your operation so that you cut only those veins."
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	"And when you have completed this, then distill into the wound fresh or rough wine so that with its sharpness it will corrode what has been removed from the pus."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"But if you cannot collect everything in that hour, then plaster it all with whatever yields to its pain. Then leave it alone for a few days until the pain is relieved and there is no danger of inflammation."
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	"And then repeat this according to whatever manner you think fit until it heals."
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	"And these are the forms of forceps:"
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter XIX."
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	"Of reduction of deviation of the nose."
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	"When you treat deviation of the nose with cautery or sharp burning medicine according to what is described here and it does not heal, then do not try to reduce it any further. Rather, when it becomes ripe, incise over the inflammation and extract all the moisture that is in it and its pus until the bone is revealed."
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then when the bone is revealed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of this shape:"
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	"And it is called sharp head, and should be made of iron. And the head should be round like this: so that you can grasp it with your fingers. And it should be made punctate by liming or filing punctures subtly like this:"
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	"And place that on the corrupted part of the bone. Then turn it between your fingers and press your hand little by little until you know that all corruption has been scraped away."
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	"And after this is done several times, then restore the part with drying and astringent causes."
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	"Therefore, if that part is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it and the body of the wound has separated from the healthy part and it remains for forty days without being renewed or inflamed and without any accident happening to it, then you know that it is healed."
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	"But if not, then do not try to reduce it any further. Rather, reduce the deviation of the nose back into its original shape in this manner: And when you have exposed the second bone with iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is revealed, then take a chisel of this shape:"
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	"The end of it should be triangular in iron. And its shaft should be primly thinned until near the end like this:"
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	"And then place that on the bone, near the lacrimal bone. And extend your hand a little way from the wound. Then turn your hand with the chisel until it penetrates all the bone. And the patient should feel as if air were coming out of there when you move his hand."
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	"Therefore, then restore that part with astringent and drying medicines as described here."
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore when flesh is cut and the area hardens, then the matter which flowed outwards returns to its place, therefore this is easier for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the bone.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the swelling has reached its fullness and no harm or decrease occurs in the appearance, then you should leave the patient alone, and then follow him, and then place cupping glasses on his neck without scarification and suck well; and then apply a liniment on the swelling which is made from gum acacia, aloe, sesame, and scammony, and then press the poultice on the swelling with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method of making the powders is that you take cloths from the lion's mouth, and each cloth should be folded in four layers; and make them from those powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one on top of the other according to the quantity that he needs
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then press on them with a hard cloth with strong pressure; and repeat the cupping glasses with sucking without scarification; and then remove the cupping glasses and let him rest during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if meanwhile the bandage becomes softened, it should be made tight again
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the bandage during the day and night as we have said
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the swelling has already been reduced, that is good; but if not, then you should repeat the poultice with the powders and pressure and cupping glasses until he is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	**On the Incision of the Prominence of the Tunic Uvea.**
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When disruption occurs in the tunica uvea, and it is prominent, proceed to expose it outside the eyelids like a grain of wheat. The face takes on the shape of a man due to this, and if you wish to incise it, then the operation involves inserting the needle into the groove of the uvea at its lower end first, then insert another needle on the side of the lacrimal duct with a double thread. Cause the latter needle to penetrate and leave the former according to its position; then incise the location of the double thread, lifting it along with the uvea around the needle, and tighten that.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and pause while leaving a wick of lanolin-infused wool in place, allowing the thread to remain with the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then care for the wick in such a way that promotes healing and ensures that the wound is fully healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	"Sometimes gather all parts with a cloth circle fitted over the prominent area, then carefully pierce it with a thin spatula that reaches the bone's front, causing the whitish moisture to run off and allowing the bone to descend immediately."
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	"And therefore strengthen what has been healed."
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter XXII."
De curacio de alconati.	"On treating hemorrhoids."
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	"This condition called 'alconati' is nothing but blood that collects in the veins like descending water and is not the other."
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	"To treat it, make the patient sit on an upright chair and take their head in your hands on both sides. When you see blood flowing towards its outlet, stop it at once so that it does not descend further, cover the light, and observe the cause of the illness as described."
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	"And if it does not flow downwards, know that it is urine."
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	"But if the discharge of blood is not properly prepared, then seat the patient between your thighs and take a thin spatula and insert it into the skin surrounding the anus near the junction of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea. Push gently until the blood flows out."
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	"Then, once it is expelled, immediately apply to the area a solution of honey and water, or a decoction of fenugreek and honey."
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with other appropriate remedies until it is healed."
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter XXII."
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	"On the treatment of descending water from the anus."
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	"We have already discussed the types of urine and their divisions in our previous discourse on the subject, so now let us discuss what is appropriate according to health."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	"Now you must firmly press your hands upon the patient's solar plexus."
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then pause your right hand on the eyelid of his left eye if the water is in the left eye; otherwise use your left hand if it's in the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take a piece of cotton wool if the eye is left; otherwise use your left hand if it's right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the cotton wool near the corner of the eye towards the inner canthus and press gently while turning your hand in that direction.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then enter into the eye with the cotton wool, ensuring it has reached the back of the tear duct.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Make sure the cotton wool is inserted as far as possible into the tear duct, which is approximately the distance from the pupil to the end of the dark part of the eye. You will see this clearly due to the transparency of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then place the cotton wool inside the tear duct where the water is located. Then pull it down gently once or twice and check if the water drains out immediately. If so, then the eye infection is likely resolved and the cotton wool can be removed from the eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then wait a short while. If the water has drained out, then remove that cotton wool gently ensuring it is not dragged along the eye surface.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And if the water does not drain out, then gently remove the cotton wool and turn your hand slowly away from the eye. Then dissolve a small amount of salt in some water and use it to rinse the inside of the eye. Finally, apply a cotton pad soaked in rosewater oil or chamomile tea to the outer corner of the eye as a compress.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May we be among those who will pause and rest with this composition at the end of time.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the cotton wool does not enter into the eye due to its hardness - as is the case with some men whose eyes are quite dry - then you should use the spatula called an "albiret" which has this shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Then pierce the conjunctiva with it and do not insert your hand further into the tear duct. If you cannot reach the cotton wool, make a small opening to create a path for it.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then gently insert the cotton wool as explained earlier.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	Finally, complete your work by preparing the patient for sleep as follows: have them lie down on their back in a dark room and ensure they remain completely still.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause for the duration of the eclipse so that its nature is clear and do not move your head to the right or left during this time.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let it remain in place according to its position until the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then remove it from that dark room on the seventh day and expose the eye to light gradually. Let them see some objects slowly and then return the eye to its original position.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And make sure to do this during the time of healing or shortly after applying the compress.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	However, be careful not to do this too suddenly as water may flow forcefully and cause discomfort.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess forms, then you must remove the eye patch on the seventh day and treat it with something that will cause the abscess to burst.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then uncover the eye and expose it to light gradually for a few days while keeping the patient in a dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually move them out of that dark room and help them adjust to seeing again by exposing them to things one at a time.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	Know that in surgery, the student of sight is not exempt from performing operations themselves, and therefore you should be brave about performing these procedures.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	We have heard that some of those who are skilled in the art have said that it is beneficial to apply heat to the eye with a hot iron needle which has been pierced and used to suck out water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But we have not seen this method practiced in our land nor is it written about in the books of the ancient authors. Therefore, it may be a new invention.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the methods of applying compresses to treat eyes, which can be helpful for those who are unfamiliar with them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they should be made of either wax or iron and have their ends rounded off with this subtlety: the tip should be pointed like this ✄
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the Treatment of a Flesh-colored Growth in the Nose
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When diverse flesh-colored growths appear in the nose, resembling either a scorpion with many feet or a polyp, this condition is called "polypus" because it resembles that sea creature.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And the flesh of these growths is cancerous, painful and dark in color. The lion-colored flesh is not dark in color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in the case of these growths that are lion-colored but not fraudulent or cancerous, you should grasp them between your thumb and index finger and press them towards the sun, then squeeze the nostrils together and pierce those growths with a needle.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then remove it from the outside and cut through what you have grasped with a sharp, fine spatula until you know that all of the growth has been removed. If any remains for some reason and it is possible to perform an excision, then do so using one of the fine instruments easily and without leaving any behind.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it becomes inflamed with blood or an abscess forms, then pause until the inflammation or abscess has healed. If it is one of the malignant kinds, then cut and cauterize it so that all of the blood and cavities are closed up.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then apply a plaster made of pitch and water or wine to the nose after the excision.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose becomes wet and moisture flows into the throat, then you know that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is still flesh growing on the projecting bones of the nostrils where no excision has been made.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, if there is any thickness to the growth, then insert a file into it and press down on it with many presses, pausing between each press for the duration of one's finger or less. Then remove the file from the nostril with forceps or some other appropriate instrument.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, let the patient sneeze forcefully so that the odor is expelled from the nasal canals and falls onto his garments. Many times children at school do this kind of thing intentionally, which makes it easier for those who wish to perform this action.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause with both ends of the file in place, one end outside the nose and the other inside it. Then apply a ligature made of linen around the presses that are on the file and do this until you know that the flesh has grown onto the presses of the file.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the file and pause in the nose for a few days to allow the blood to clot. Then apply a plaster made of pitch for three days or more until all that remains of the flesh has rotted away.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And finally, at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose with a lead cannula for a few days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you prefer a dry treatment, use that one instead.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument used for purging the head with which oils and medications are distilled into the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it of silver or brass, shaped like a small open lamp, round like a small basin, and the mouth likewise.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	"You may desire to make a closed cannula like this one, its tip being made for purging and flat, open; which you should have ready at the end of your operation, with it you shall catch in him any liquid or water that you want from his secretions."
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	"And this purging cap is precious: take from the other side castor oil, white balm, ginger, turmeric and pepper long, cumin, ephedra, and spices one once. Mix them with beets and celery juice, make pills out of them, dissolve one pill in warm water, and give it to the patient lying down towards their nostrils."
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter XXV."
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	"Their noses are located at the extremities of the face."
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times it happens at the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and inflamed during those days when much care is taken with its regard.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And therefore you should insert that at the beginning of the appearance of this, and erase everything.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Moreover pause over the place where cautery or burning medicine is to be applied which is in place of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its incision is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider whether it is hard, dark, of a deep color and has little sensation. If so, do not touch it with iron, for it is a hard tumor; for many times this tumor, which you have incised into it, becomes great mischief over that person on whom it had been.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the tumor is of warm touch and not of dark color, then incision may be possible everywhere. Therefore evacuate the badness and incise it without fear, and cure the place with that which dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity has been dissolved by plague or ulceration.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilage, you should confer little on this operation unless among skilled hands.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when it happens to someone for one of these causes, you should consider whether it is fresh plague with its blood. Then join the two lips of the ulcer with suture and properly cure it until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	"If the lips of the wound are already separated and each is healthy, then you should excise each edge that appears within so that blood does not come out."
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"Then approximate and suture the two lips together, strengthening those that are weak. Over these sprinkle dragon's blood powder and dress them with a piece of diaphoretic plaster or another consolidating plaster, leaving it for two or three days. Then remove it and change the plaster until the flesh is completely healed."
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	"But the manner of suture is that you approximate the wound edges using needles as we have described for abdominal suturing, or using catgut as you see fit."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII."
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	"Of the extraction of those causes that come between the lips in wounds."
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	"Often, especially in the wounds between the lips of some men, there appear hard pustules resembling kernels of ears, some small and others large."
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	"Therefore, you should excise those hardenings from either side of the lips and folds, and then perform an abscess cure using a cautery until the blood is restricted. Then wash the location with vinegar and treat it with an astringent so that it heals."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII."
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	"Of incision of adherent flesh in the gums."
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	"Often, a piece of flesh adheres to the gum, which the ancients called albulus. Therefore, you should suspend that with forceps or hold it with your fingers and incise it in its entirety. Then allow the wound to heal freely without letting blood."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	"And then apply a cautery or some other styptic powder or cicatrizing powder to the location."
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	"If that flesh returns, then cut it again secondarily, and cauterize it, for now the cautery will return it."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX."
De razo de dentz am ferr.	"The reason of toothache with iron."
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	"If on the surface of the teeth, both front and back, and between the gums, there are rough scales, pale, sometimes blackened, with yellow or greenish pus that flows out to the gum due to corruption, then the teeth are loose."
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	"And then you should do this: remove the diseased teeth between your jaws and pull out their roots from the sockets, and scrape those teeth on which those scales appear, and cause it to resemble fine sand within them without causing any damage, and that is how the blackness and yellowness and other impurities are removed."
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	"So if that is not what you want, then you should repeat the reasoning on those until it comes to the final statement that you desire."
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	"And know that teeth require various kinds of files and shapes according to how your operation is prepared."
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	"And therefore, the file with which you scrape a tooth on its front surface is different from the file with which you scrape between teeth according to other shapes, and these forms of files should be prepared by you, which you will see shortly:"
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
D’eradicacio de dentz.	"Tooth Extraction."
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	"Ignore the pain of his tooth with all effort and strive for complete eradication of it, for there is no reason why its view should be hindered when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance that is excluded in the eradication of it."
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	"When the patient is about to have that tooth extracted, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and makes them think it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one but the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted. For we have seen this happen during operations by barbers."
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	"Therefore you must be certain which is the painful tooth and know it well, then you should scrape around the tooth with a scalpel in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the gum of all parts, and immediately afterwards remove it with your fingers or with fine forceps little by little until that is accomplished."
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	"Then use strong forceps with good speech or sturdy structure, and hold the patient's head firmly between your thumbs so that it does not move, and then extract the tooth in a straight manner so that you do not break it nor cause greater pain to the patient."
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	"And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it on both sides of the tooth with ease and effort to remove it as was done at the beginning."
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	"But if the tooth is decayed or corroded, then you must fill that decay with wax and strengthen it with the end of a fine needle so that it does not break at the time of your constriction on it with forceps."
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	"And you must work carefully with the scalpel around all parts of the gum and guard against your strength so that you do not break it or cause it to split apart, and return upon the patient for greater pain than the first pain."
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	"And beware that you do not do what many ignorant barbers do in their haste and recklessness in extraction without administering what we have recommended; for often they cause great illnesses upon men which are harder to treat than the tooth itself, and the roots remain removed entirely or some of them, or they extract the tooth with some bone of the jaw as we have often witnessed."
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	"And therefore when extracting the tooth it is necessary to wash the mouth with hot wine or vinegar mixed with salt."
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	"And if there are fluxes of blood from this, as often happens, then take some quantity of sage and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that does not suffice, cauterize."
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	"The form of the forceps and fine tweezers with which the tooth is first removed should be of long extremities, short handle, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them."
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	"And let them be like tongs with thick handles inside, so that when you stretch them with those forceps they are not bent outwards."
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	"And let them be made of Indian steel, straight-edged and with teeth on the extremities which interlock with each other and stretch for strong descent. And sometimes they are shaped like the beak of a bird called 'ciconia', that is to say, wide, and have great constriction."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Chapter XXVI."
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	"On the extraction of teeth and the removal of bones of the jaw that are locked."
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When it is necessary to extract a tooth that is firmly rooted and there remains some cause, then you should place your hand on the area gently for one or two days until the area becomes softened; and then insert some sort of cloths or compresses whose ends are assembled like the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, in the shape of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them should be made like this with lime or file.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not succeed with this extraction using these forceps or compresses, then you should scrape the root and remove all of the flesh and insert the instrument that is called an atali, which is a small lever whose shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should be short with a thick end and not bent so that it does not get stuck.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	And if with this the root is removed, that's good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes are these: the shape of the first instrument is triangular with some thickness at its end:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The second instrument's shape should be triangular and have a very fine tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And with this instrument you will have two handles, of which one is shaped approximately as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	"And with other instruments which are used for shaving teeth, because aid is done with this instrument which resembles an oyster shell, and this is its shape:"
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	"Of the triangular-shaped tip that is curved or short, let it be some thickness, not sharp-pointed so as not to prick."
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	"And you should know that dental tools are like and similar to other instruments."
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	"Yet the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself matrices according to what this operation signifies regarding diverse diseases; for there are diseases about which the ancients did not give nor assign proper instruments due to their diverse forms."
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	"Yet if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are broken or pierced, then let it be carefully treated with that which is suitable from among the instruments and forceps mentioned earlier regarding the extraction of dental roots, and aid can be given through this gesture:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	"And let it be gradually reduced somewhat, and let it be bound or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or slip until the bone is completely healed; and then restore the place with suitable medicines."
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"Yet if there is a small perforation in the bone, then scrape that of that perforation and its darkness away, and cure it until it is healed."
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent beyond their natural course, especially in women and more so in venerable old women, therefore you should consider: if the tooth is not adjacent to another tooth and cannot be straightened or moved with a ligature, then extract it. But if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which is shaped like a pig's snout and made of Indian steel with a very sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be such that you cut through the tooth in three days due to its hardness, and that it does not harm any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is an erupting prominent tooth, then file it down with an Indian steel file of this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be entirely of Indian steel and well sharpened; and let it have many small pointed ends like the file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be filed down little by little over many days with ease, so that no other teeth are harmed or damaged.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And finally smooth it off with a file and scrape it with a sharp razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth with one side chipped and scraping the tongue, then you should file down that edge until its sharpness is blunted and smoothed out, and flattened so that the tongue does not hurt nor speech be impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver foil.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When damage occurs to teeth due to concussion and removal by percussion or falling, and the illness cannot bear food, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then let those that are strong be restored with gold foil rather than silver, for silver becomes green and soon wears away, whereas gold does not change over time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the foil be made in such subtlety and thinness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth. The method of restoration is as follows: take the foil and take twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and then twist it in two places with tweezers between the damaged ones or one if there are few, until the tissue reaches the healthy side of the other tooth.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then continue pressing the foil into the beginning of the damaged part with your hand and ease and skill until it is no longer damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your pressure be such that you press the foil against the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors, and gather them together at each place with tweezers, and turn them inwards and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then leave it like this until it is firm as rock.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it becomes loose or broken, press it again with other foil in the same manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as shown in these tied examples:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that a tooth or two are knocked back into their places by falling into them, and they have been restored as we have recommended, but still remain damaged.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	This is not done except by skilled and wise craftsmen.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Sometimes it happens that the bones of cattle are used for this purpose, and they are made in the shape of teeth and placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and they are pressed as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the frenulum that comes on the tongue and impedes speech
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This frenulum which attaches to the bottom of the tongue sometimes occurs naturally in some people or appears accidentally due to scar tissue that has already hardened.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation in this case is that the mouth of the patient be opened wide with the head held back, and then the tongue is lifted up and the frenulum is incised along its length until the tongue is released from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is some hardness or firmness in that place due to scar tissue from an injury, then apply some oil and incise it along its length until you have completely cut through the frenulum and the firmness has been released.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	But be careful not to make a deep cut in the skin of the front of the tongue, otherwise you may inadvertently injure an artery and cause bleeding.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then rinse the area of the incision with warm water or vinegar or hot water, and then apply a clean linen cloth to the bottom of the tongue. Then have the patient hold it there for several nights so that it does not become attached again in the future.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol to the area. But if the bleeding continues, then cauterize it with a silver cautery that is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Extraction of a ranula from under the tongue
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, swellings resembling small tumors form underneath the tongue and prevent it from functioning properly.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation involves opening the patient's mouth widely and examining the swelling under the tongue
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you find it of dark or black color, hard, without the patient feeling pain, then do not touch that area as it is cancerous
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it appears white and wet, then insert a needle into it and cut through that thin saliva with scissors, cutting all the way through. If blood starts to flow during your operation, stop for a moment until the bleeding subsides, which is called cauterization
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have completely finished it, washing the area with vinegar and salt water, and treat it with the other appropriate cure until it is healed
Capitol .xxxvi.	CHAPTER XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of swellings from both ears and those that appear on the scrotum, as well as other swellings.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When there is an inflammation in the groin, it are glands that gather together at times. These may occur externally and are called "two ears". If you treat them with what we said in the division (i.e., the previous treatment) but they do not heal, then consider if the boil is hard, dark-colored, and insensitive to touch; if so, do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red in color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood. Instead, allow it to ripen on its own, and once it has matured, you will either remove it or it will burst open on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white in color, round, and its root is thin, then that one should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is this: before your operation, consider if the boil has already rested and is completely calm or if it has diminished somewhat. Then make an incision in front of the sun, with the head of it towards you and open its mouth, and have the servant hold the patient's tongue from behind using a noble instrument whose shape is like this:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	"Let it be made of silver or of brass, and let it be thin as a razor."
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	"Therefore when you press upon that with your tongue and it reveals the ulcer, immediately grab it with forceps at its base, then take a needle and insert it there, pulling it outward as far as possible."
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And after removing some of the clothing, you must proceed to cut into it with this tool which has this form:"
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	"It is similar to forceps, but its outer ends are curved so that the tips of each are facing towards the other and very sharp, made of tempered iron."
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	"But if this tool is not available to you, then cut it with a spatula whose shape is like this: sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	"And after cutting one opening, cut another according to this same method of incision, and then wash the wound out with plenty of water."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is bleeding, wash with water from a decoction of oak bark or myrtle leaves, which are similar to those causes that stop bleeding, until the bleeding stops, and then dress it until it heals."
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	"And sometimes, in the groin area or other parts of the body, there appear other tumors besides those two which I have mentioned for incision."
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	"And once I treated a woman who had an abscess that was born in her groin area, which tended towards a dark color and was insensitive. The wound had already closed over, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, eating and drinking were prohibited to her, and she would have died within two days if not for my care."
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	"And the abscess had grown so much that it had pushed out through two holes on either side of her genitals."
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	"I then approached him surgically and placed myself in one of his openings, and drew out that which was there, a large portion having been expelled. Immediately afterwards I inserted it into another opening nearby, and immediately afterward I opened his mouth and pressed down on his tongue. Then I placed the opening back onto that aposteme."
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	"And you cut off a large part of him, from which only a little blood flowed."
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	"Then the woman recovered from that illness. She began to drink water immediately and also took food. And I continued to incise that aposteme many times over a long period of time. And it healed little by little in its place, and the incision remained open as it prolonged itself."
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	"Then I went away and cauterized the wound of him. And thereafter, nothing more happened. And I wandered around and did not know what God had done for that reason regarding me."
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	"Of Incising a Swelling When It is Apostematous"
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	"If cataracts come to the swelling and it becomes apostematous and elongated, then it is called perpendicular. And if it is thick and round at its beginning, then it is called bubble."
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	"But when it is cured with what we have said in the division and its cure does not confirm itself, and especially many times when an aposteme that has been cauterized already remains and becomes subtle, then it is necessary for you to incise that which is gathered round; and if it is at that length, and it is sanguineous, of dark color or black, and there is no sensation in it, then it is necessary for you to hesitate about the incision of it, because there is fear concerning the illness."
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	"And when you find it according to the manner that I have told you of its whiteness and length, then make sure of the illness and press the tongue of it with an instrument which processes its shape, and hold the onion in the new one, and pull that downwards and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two molluscs."
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	"And it is necessary that you do not incise it except what is appropriate to the natural term without addition, because if you incise more of it, you will diminish its speech."
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And moreover concerning the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two molluscs, and cure it within so that it may be healed."
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But if the illness is frightened by the incision of it, then it is necessary for you to use cautery in its cauterization without fear, and the manner of cautery on it is not except with hot water, and this is what you should do: hold the head of the illness in its right side, and moreover press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and moreover take some of the water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and apply it with that live cause, and pause it neither thick nor subtle, and from there fill the concavity of the instrument whose form this is:"
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	"So that the extremity of it may be concave where the medicine is paused just like the concavity of a spoon of ray, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the valve, and let the illness lean on its left side so that no saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one falls through the internal medicine, because in this way none of it will fall into its throat and it will escape."
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	"And moreover put your hand on the medicine, and press it on the uvula for half an hour until you see that it is darkened and sedated by the biting of the medicine."
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	"And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cotton into a cannula of above until the cotton adheres to that cannula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want concerning the cautery of the grape, and moreover leave that because it will dry up and fall after about three or four days."
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	"And if you need to repeat the medicine, then repeat it. And moreover concerning cautery, wash around the grape with cotton dipped in borax, and cleanse that which is around it of the medicine, and be washed with hot water, and be cared for afterwards with embrocation, and finally with fomentations until it may be healed."
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	"And this kind of cure was kept safe because incision was very long ago due to fear."
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	"Sometimes the uvula is cured with something that is more subtle than cautery and incision because it is cured with sublimation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, saffron Arabic, chamomile, brotus, and similar herbs of those kinds, and prepare all those causes or some of them in a bowl, and immerse them in sour wine, and boil it; and the bowl should be well covered with dough properly prepared, and there should be a hole made in the middle of the bowl on which an instrument concave of silver is placed according to this manner: it should be made of silver or brass."
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	"And immerse the extremity into the mouth of the illness until the vapor may reach the uvula on the palate until the uvula is moistened."
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	"And moreover repeat this many times until it is dry. And take care that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the formation of abscesses because it would fit too tightly against the abscess and you should not do this but rather declare the cauterization of its abscess."
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	"But if this instrument is not present to you, then take a reed and make a cap of wool at its extremity so that the mouth of the illness may be covered because the cap of wool prevents the vapor from burning the mouth."
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	"And this cure is good for health."
Capitol .xxxviii.	"Chapter XXXVI."
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extraction of splinters and of that which adheres in the throat and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times a splinter of wood or bone or some other cause may adhere in the throat."
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must extract that which is apparent of those things, on which the sight falls because you press the tongue with an instrument before the sun, so that it may be declared to you what is in the throat."
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	"And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the ill person vomit before the food is digested in the stomach because the cause adhering to the throat will be extracted by vomiting; or if the ill person swallows a piece of soap or of radish or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge dried well and tie it tightly with string, and moreover make the ill person swallow that because when it reaches the place where its splinters are located, then they will be extracted."
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	"And moreover take an eel and tie it with string well, and let it be dried afterwards and cautiously extracted; or take a rod and cautiously insert it and cautiously withdraw it."
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	"But if they are not extracted with those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:"
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	"And let it be thicker than a small ray, and at the extremity of it there should be concavity which you insert into its throat with ease."
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	"And make him raise his head upwards, and take care that the touch of his os of the throat does not happen because it would cause pain to him or with that which peels off the bone or splinter, or what that physician touches with his hand."
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	"But however the ill person himself should insert it better because of his knowledge of the place where the cause is adhering and peeling off in order to extract it downwards and draw out his hand with the instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is prepared beforehand so that it may be extracted."
Capitol .xxxix.	Capital thirty-nine
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On removing an appendage attached to the caecum
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When applying medicinal leeches according to what we have mentioned in the division of cures with medications and they do not improve, consider the time of day when examining the patient's abdomen, because you have prepared the tongue of the instrument which has been recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore if you apply the leech, remove it with gentle pressure or with subtle gestures appropriately
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you are unable to remove it in this way, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's abdomen, and properly place a red-hot iron wire within the concavity of the cannula, repeating this until the leech is dead and removed from the abdomen. Abstain from giving water to the patient all day long.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And take a vessel full of water and heat it up, and place the mouth of the patient in that vessel and wash out their mouth with it. And do not let any of that water flow back into the vessel or else rinse your hand once again in the water after an hour has passed, because the leech immediately feels the water coming
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if this is forgotten, then fumigate the patient with incense or asafoetida using the instrument which we have recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and it will be done quickly.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of operating in the fumigation of that part is to take an earthen pot containing hot coals and cover it with a lid which has a hole in its middle, placing the end of the instrument in this hole. Then begin the fumigation with incense or asafoetida using the instrument. Have the patient place their mouth over the end of the cannula and hold their mouth tightly shut so that no smoke escapes until you are sure that the smoke has reached the leech, because the leech will immediately fall off.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall off, then repeat the fumigation many times and have the patient refrain from drinking water. They should eat salted foods and also drink wine, and this regimen must not be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And here is the shape of the instrument with which the leech is removed from the pharynx when it is seen; it resembles forceps like this: but it has some curvature in it
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	and which is placed in the pharynx. The end of it resembles the bill of an ibis, and it is slightly hooked at its tip, so that when it grasps something, it will not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In this chapter is the sum of our discourse on the opening of abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	"Abscesses are many kinds of growths, having many appearances, according to how they appear in memory, each described in this book."
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	"And their perforations and sections differ from one another in two ways: the first is that they are all specific to abscesses themselves; and the second is due to their humidity."
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	"And the second way is according to the locations in which they occur, because an abscess occurring on the head is different from one occurring on the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy location differs from one at a joint; each having its own treatment through surgery."
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	"More about abscesses: some should not be punctured, but rather waited until their ripeness or completion."
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	"Other abscesses that should be drained when they are hard and not yet ripe according to their completion include those near joints. Because an abscess near a joint prolongs its being into the surrounding area and often corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb. Or it is near a main member, and if you delay its puncture until it is fully ripened, it may harm the main member. Or it is near the anus, so puncture only one that has not yet broken through to prevent prolapse of its contents into the intestines and the creation of a fistula."
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	"It is important that you know the right time to drain an abscess, which is when it has ripened."
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	"And know that an abscess has ripened when there is a decrease in pain and the cessation of fever, along with a decrease in heat and pulsation, a point at which the head of the abscess becomes more distinct, and other signs."
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	"And it is necessary that you know how to drain an abscess in its central part, avoiding the edges of the abscess and any pus that may have formed during healing."
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	"And always drain an abscess through the length of the flesh or skin if it is in the areas of the thigh or buttocks and near tendons, nerves, arteries, and other locations where there is reflection. Use drainage according to that particular member for reflected areas."
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	"But when the abscess is in fatty tissue, it is better to delay drainage until digestion is complete as we have said. Otherwise, the opening will be prolonged, filled with much pus, and its lips may become hardened and its depth increased."
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	"But some abscesses should be drained according to the width of the flesh or skin as necessary, or according to what that particular member requires."
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	"And you should make a small incision for smaller abscesses, and a larger one with many sections according to the size of larger abscesses."
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	"And there are other abscesses in which the incision should be curved and made when the opening is in its final stage, just like those found in the groin and inguinal region."
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	"And of those that are incised with three angles, and of those that are incised like the figure of a mitre leaf, as in the case of hip joint abscesses."
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	"And there are others where a round or crescent-shaped incision is made, similar to those."
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	"But for those abscesses that do not behave like the usual ones, you should perform a superficial or horizontal incision only."
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	"And when an abscess is large and has collected much pus, you should drain it but not try to remove all the pus at once. Remove a portion first, then pack the abscess cavity with gauze on the following day, removing more pus each time until it is completely drained."
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	"And especially if the patient is a frail person, woman in labor, child, or elderly person in decline. For in many cases, vital spirits are exhausted by the discharge of pus, and the patient may die during surgery."
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	"So be careful with this chapter and when you perform an incision on these abscesses, clean the edges and consider whether the wound is narrow or flat. If it is narrow, use catgut sutures; if it is large and the incisions are extensive, pause between each pull until they close together."
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if a portion of the wall or curved part of an abscess is removed during drainage, you should close it with silk thread or catgut sutures as when sewing a wound without moisture. Strengthen it on the third day and then proceed to treat it according to what is necessary for wounds until healed."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	"But if bleeding occurs during your operation, you should apply a compress of cold water and vinegar on which you have placed a linen cloth, pressing it firmly on the bleeding site for several times."
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	"But if bleeding persists, you should apply dressings and treatment as well as powders recommended in many places throughout this book."
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	"But if it is wintertime and the abscess is in an area with many nerves, you should apply powders made of wine and hot oil, pressing them on the location."
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is summer and the location is fatty, you should apply powders made with cold water and oil or wine and oil, rubbing them in until the third day as we have said. Then open the abscess, clean it, and treat it according to what is appropriate for that particular case until healed."
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	"And this is what is generally necessary for the treatment of abscesses, but according to the method of distinction, I have already explained in previous chapters how each type of abscess should be treated individually."
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of Incising Abscesses that Appear on the Neck
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of the head, small abscesses appear and these are of the type known as knots containing tunics that are formed there. These types are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	"And of these are painted, those that contain moisture similar to lime."
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	"And of those which contain moisture resembling dust, and similar to them; and of those which are stony, hard."
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	"And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, for their extraction does not cause any injury to the bowel."
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	"And the operation in section of those is that you express them with an instrument shaped like this," [diagram], "which is called 'entromes', until you see that it contains."
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	"If what it contains is moisture, then cut it with a section along its length through a superficial section in this shape:"
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	"And begin at the section of line B towards line G. Then, when the moisture is evacuated, you remove that which contains that moisture and do not leave it with any cause of death, for if there remains any cause it will return to life."
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	"And immediately immerse it in Egyptian pitch if available, and if not, in water and salt. Fill it with that and leave it for another day, for with this you will corrode everything which remains of that skin."
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	"And again apply that ointment to the wound with Egyptian pitch a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there remains no cause of that skin; then dress the wound with ointment until it is healed."
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	"And if an aposteme contains fatty nodes, then cut it in this shape:"
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	"With a section having the form of a cross, and cut it once between its two lips and scrape it from top to bottom, and apply your strength in extracting the tunic which contains it."
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	"But if you are not successful with this method, then do what I told you first."
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	"And similarly do with the lapidated aposteme with its section and cure according to what we have told you; and the section on the lapidated aposteme is easier because it contains little blood and moisture."
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	"And sometimes there are some of these apostemes which are on the head in some men who are completely dry; and this is because once I cut an aposteme on the head of an old woman and it appeared like deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if someone were struck with that they would become ill."
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	"But in other accidental apostemes on the head which are not like this, such as those that come to the heads of children and arise from the roots of the ears, but their section should be a superficial section."
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	"And pause the perforation of those from below because it is low down there, for fear that it may harm the body's health at its lowest parts."
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	"And then dress them with what is appropriate for their cure."
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofulas which occur on the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, armpits, and anus; sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are often caused by the blockage of the pores between them. All scrofula from these is within its own skin, and so it is with the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have explained.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are many: some are hard and stony, others contain moisture, and still others are malignant and do not yield to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that which you find to be of good disposition upon examination, whose color is closest to that of flesh and which extends throughout the entire part without being adherent to the nerves of the neck nor to the veins nor to the skin, it should be incised with a dry superficial cut from above downwards across the body between lines G and B. Then spread apart the lips of the wound with forceps or many forceps if necessary, as we have said for abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And take care that neither vein nor nerve be incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	"Even if the wound does not seem to be deep enough for your hand to fit into it without hurting the patient, or if it is not necessary to incise further; however, if you happen to cut a vein or artery and prevent its flow, then apply a plaster of vitriol powder or other powders that stop bleeding, squeeze the wound, remove what rests, and let the wound heal naturally until inflammation subsides."
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	"When blood is absorbed."
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	"And then return to your operation once you have completed it."
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	"And accordingly, ask if any cause of the other small sores is broken; then incise those and clean them."
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	"But if it is in the region of a large vein, do not incise that sore from its root."
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	"Press with a folded cloth soaked in hot water and let it rest until it falls by itself without causing harm."
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	"And then fill the wound with cotton wool which you have already softened in Egyptian ointment, and dress it accordingly."
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	"And if you incise the entire sore, then be sure to approximate both lips of the wound and dress it immediately so that there is no remaining surplus."
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	"But if you find that there is surplus due to the size of the sore, then you must incise its root and extract it, administer sutures, and do whatever is prescribed."
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And regarding those sores that contain moisture, perforate them with a superficial perforation here where the head of the sore appears and let it drain whatever pus there may be under the skin, as we have said."
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	"And then administer perforation; dress with ointment and similar materials to burn away what remains of the corruption."
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	"And when you see that the wound is clean, then dress it with ointment made from hare's fat until it heals."
Capitol .xliii.	**Chapter XLIII.**
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	**Of the Incision of the Point of the Accidental Abscess in the Throat.**
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	"The ancients called this section 'in epilepsy,' and we have not seen anyone in our land who has had it done."
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	"And this is the inscription of their speech."
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	"But in men with epilepsy, care should be taken to avoid extracting the epilhot, because this would not bring about a cure as all the veins and major vessels of the patient are here."
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	"But in those who have scars from cauterization on the mouth or ear or two ears, when the illness is not in the canal, care should be taken to avoid the section of epilhot so as to flee the damage which is done by forceps."
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	"So therefore when we wish this, let us incise the epilhot from three circles of the circles of the epilhot, or four with a small section for the latitut in that which is between two circles in quantity, so that the section be in the bone, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for sectioning because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood from its son are removed."
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	"And if the physician is afraid, then let him extend the ear canal with one hand and properly incise the canal until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if he sees any cause."
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	"And then incise the epilhot according to what we have recommended, and this is indicated about the section of the canal by that membrane which is of its issue with that which is of its discordance and by the absence of voice."
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	"Then leave the wound open for some time."
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	"So when the hour has passed in which perforation is feared, then attach two lips of the ear canal wound, and let that alone be the cartilage."
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	"And then administer medications that cause flesh to grow so that it may be healed."
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	"And Albucasis says that the sum of this speech which we have recommended is no other than this: that some of these abscesses have already closed the ear canal of the patient and the illness has come within to death, and the air of it has been cut off, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe on the location of the wound for some respiration, and thus be saved from death."
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And therefore I command you to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed. And the malice is for three days. And therefore I command you to close the wound after that time, and heal it until it be healed."
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	"And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a certain woman took a knife and inserted it into her ear canal and incised one part of the auditory meatus, and I was called to heal her. And I found her like one dead in mourning, and I discovered the wound and wiped away the blood which had issued from it."
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	"So I was convinced that she had not incised any vein or artery, and the wind issued from the wound, and I healed it until it be healed."
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	"And do not chide that woman if she did not raise her voice, and soon after some days return to the improvement of her disposition."
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	"And now you say that there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis."
Capitol .xliv.	"Chapter XLIV"
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	"Of incision upon an abscess which occurs externally on the ear canal, and is called a herniation of the ear."
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	"This abscess called herniation of the ear is a large abscess according to the color of the flesh, and it is common in women."
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	"And it occurs in two ways, for either it is natural or accidental."
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	"And in the natural one there is no means of curing it."
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	"And the accidental one occurs in two ways, of which one is similar to fat knots, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by a knot of an artery, and in that there is danger."
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	"And it should not be presumed upon with iron except in that which is small."
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	"Then press upon it and examine it with the finger, and if you find it similar to fat knots, and not suspended on any of the veins, then incise it like nodes, and extract that which contains it from the skin and bursa. And otherwise, then carefully inspect its entire being, and then cure the location with whatever is necessary for healing until it be healed."
Capitol .xlv.	"Chapter XLIV"
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	"Of incision of kinds of knots."
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	"There are many kinds of nodes, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division."
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	"And it is necessary that you explain thus the difference between a knot and an extrudate when there is doubt."
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	"Therefore I say that with an extrudate there is heat and fever and severe pain until the ebullition of the superfeta is sedated. And it is complete putrefaction which then ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat."
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	"But with a knot there is neither heat nor fever nor pain. And it contains a cicada lion which is in its proper sac."
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	"And it is according to the color of the flesh. And its beginning is like a flea and it becomes like an empty bag, whether large or small. And they are of two kinds: either fat and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division."
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	"Therefore, when you arrive at the healing of a knot, it is necessary to examine that and investigate it at its beginning with an instrument called an intromes, according to what will come later in the chapter which is next."
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	"And this is the method of investigating abscesses and all kinds of knots: take this instrument and insert it into the moist place which you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the channel."
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	"And then lastly close your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess. And then extract the intromes and consider what is issued in its track."
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	"If it is a forgotten moisture of whatever color, then incise it with a superficial section according to what I have said in the other abscesses."
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	"But if there is no moisture issued from the track of the intromes, then you know that it is fat."
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	"And dry it with a section having the shape of a cross in this manner:"
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	"Thus as I have shown you. And suspend it with forceps and cut the channel from every side easily, keeping the skin or sac intact if possible. And then extract that which contains the knot."
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	"But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that which contains it intact. And often you will find such things there, and then extract it piece by piece until nothing remains of it."
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	"For if anything remains of it, a little or much, the knot returns according to its nature."
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And if you see that some small part remains of it, then complete the wound with a poultice of some caustic powders and strengthen the poultice. And pause upon that which sedates an abscess cauterization, and cure it with the other healing methods until it is healed."
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	"But if it is a large knot, then cut both lips of it and heal it with whatever is appropriate."
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	"But if a pulsatile vein is present on the contrary side, or non-pulsatile, then cover and dress the wound with threefold zigzag stitching which is called catgut and leave it alone for two days or three until the poultice has dried and the boiling of the blood has ceased. And then return to incising what remains of the knot."
Capitol .xlvi.	"Chapter XLVI"
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	"Of the shapes of the instruments necessary for sectioning and perforation."
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	"The forms of those instruments are three kinds: some are large, others medium-sized, and others small."
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	"The form of the large instrument is as follows:"
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	"The form of the medium-sized instrument is as follows:"
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	"The form of the small instrument is as follows:"
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	"Let them be made of iron, flat and pointed at the end appropriately, so that they may easily enter into the ulcers."
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	"And these are the forms of the experiences, and they are called albereds, and one of them is called a beroid."
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	"And there are three kinds: large, medium, and few."
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	"The form of the large experiment is as follows:"
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	"The form of the medium-sized experiment is as follows:"
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	"The form of the few experiments is as follows:"
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	"It is convenient that they be used for those ulcers, fistulae and buboes, so that among these are some of the bones and others of other causes."
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	"And there are made redonts, large and pointed, like large needles with which the sutures are sewn, and they are made of citrine or brass or iron or silver. And the best ones are those made of citrine."
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	"And the experiments of black feathers are made, which should be used to open those fistulae in whose concavity there are reflections, and they should be reflected back with their own weight upon those reflections."
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	"And there are three kinds: some of them are long, others medium, and still others short, depending on the quantity of the width of the fistula and its stenosis."
Forma del experient gran de plom:	"The form of the large lead experiment is as follows:"
Forma del experient migier de plom:	"The form of the medium-sized lead experiment is as follows:"
Forma del experient petit de plom:	"The form of the small lead experiment is as follows:"
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	"The forms of hooks are of many kinds, for some are simple, having only one curvature, and there are three kinds: large, few, and medium-sized."
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	"And among them there are hooked forceps, which come in three kinds."
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"Among those hooks there are some with two curvatures, which come in three kinds:"
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And among them there are some with three curvatures, which also come in three kinds."
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	"And all these are necessary in their place."
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	"The form of the large simple hook is as follows:"
Forma de unci simple migier:	"The form of the medium-sized simple hook is as follows:"
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	"The form of the small simple hook is as follows:"
Forma de unci orp gran:	"The form of the large hooked forceps is as follows:"
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	"The form of the medium-sized hooked forceps is as follows:"
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	"The form of the small hooked forceps is as follows:"
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	"The form of the large hook with two curvatures is as follows:"
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	"The form of the medium-sized hook with two curvatures is as follows:"
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	"The form of the small hook with two curvatures is as follows:"
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	"The form of the large hook with three curvatures is as follows:"
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	"The form of the medium-sized hook with three curvatures is as follows:"
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	"The form of the small hook with three curvatures is as follows:"
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	"And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the knots and pusules are cut and scraped, and they come in three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small."
Forma de scapel gran:	"The form of the large scalpel is as follows:"
Forma del scapel migier:	"The form of the medium-sized scalpel is as follows:"
Forma de scapel pauc:	"The form of the small scalpel is as follows:"
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	"The extremities of these with which the section is made are sharp and the others are not sharp, but this is not done in such a manner that there may be fear of cutting veins or nerves, and so that the disease may be cured and tranquility obtained by the cauterization that follows the scraping of the pusule."
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	"And these are the forms of spatulas, which come in three kinds: large, medium-sized and small, as you can see."
La forma de magda gran:	"The form of the large spatula is as follows:"
Forma de magda migier:	"The form of the medium-sized spatula is as follows:"
Forma de magda pauc:	"The form of the small spatula is as follows:"
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	"They are made of iron and resemble a rod with which aloe is made."
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	"And it has a pierced extremity with a hidden spatula and in that part there are openings both inside and outside, as you see."
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	"The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the aforementioned ones during the perforation of pusules and do not hurt the patient, come in three kinds: large, medium-sized and small."
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	"And these are the forms of them:"
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	"The forms of forceps used to remove blood flow, which come in three kinds: large, medium and small. The forms are as follows:"
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	"They are made of citrus iron, rounded with some length, and they are thin."
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	"And it is necessary that these kinds of forceps be large, medium-sized and small, so that by means of them blood flow can be removed quickly when needed, and also when first aid is administered."
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	"But do not use these forceps to remove blood from any part of the body, except for fatty areas, such as the armpits and groin, the inner arm, the breasts, the abdomen, the thighs, and similar moist fatty areas."
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	"And sometimes these instruments are made into small ones resembling fishhooks according to this form; with which blood is removed when it is done by phlebotomy or cutting of vein or artery."
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes they are made round like this:"
Capitol .xlvii.	"Chapter XLVI."
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	"The care of men's breasts which are like those of women."
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	"Some men's breasts become swollen at the onset of sleep and they are also large like those of women, and prominent."
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And whoever does this should make an incision through the crescent moon-shaped mark according to this pattern, from line B to line G, then remove all the thickness and fill it with a medicine-soaked bandage, then stitch together the two lips of the wound and heal it until it is healed."
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the breast droops downwards and is softened by its size like that of women, then it should be cut in two on both sides above, with two incisions resembling a crescent moon figure, each contained within the other at the end, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this pattern: line B and line G. And then remove the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, drain the pus, and apply what has been said about stitching and powders as necessary for healing until it is healed."
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if you do not make the incision that is necessary due to the discomfort of the illness and the flow of blood, then you should fill the wound with a cloth soaked in corrosive oil and let it corrode what needs to be corroded from its thickness, and then heal that wound until it is healed."
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of boils that come out on the thighs.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These boils that appear on the thighs are of the species called scrofula, hard ones which contain a kernel that is squeezed out.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent moon-shaped section according to this pattern: from line G to line B. And when all the unhealthy matter has been evacuated, then fill it with cotton wool and leave it alone until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then remove the cotton wool and heal it with an appropriate ointment for it until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the boil is of the species called knots and scrofula, then incise it just as we have said in the section about scrofula, but slightly deeper.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound is extended so much that it leaves a scar, then apply cautery according to what we have said earlier.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Cutting of boils that occur through injury or veins
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken and the blood vessels are closed above it, many times an abscess occurs. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or vein: for when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long and gathered in the chest; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel that there is a stridor (noise) in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein is round at the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And cutting into this abscess is an error, especially in those that are on the left side of the armpits, in the angles of the ribs, and near the neck and many other parts of the body. And if it is large, then its cure with iron should be avoided, but if it is on the outer edge or on the head, then it should be avoided as well.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But on that which is due to inflammation of the wall of the artery, cutting into it in the thigh makes a long incision. And then widen the incision with hooks and approximate the artery, and strip away the tunics around it so that it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And now carefully place that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the bowstring with doubled thread in two places, which causes you to have better sight for the extraction of two bowstrings which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And now carefully cut the space between two ligaments with a scalpel so that all the blood comes out and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And now apply treatment in which power is generated so that the ligaments fall; and also treat it with appropriate remedies until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, then you should hold with your hand that which is near the abscess with tweezers, and carefully insert the needle from the side where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and with that thread doubled you should extract it from the other side, and also ligate the abscess with good linen according to what I have told you in the linen of grapes of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread may be extracted, then insert the needle with its eye through all the abscess from the incision of the first needle, and stretch your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its middle part until it is completely dried out, and then cut off the excess of the thread, leaving only what is needed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then sprinkle powder on it which you have soaked in wine and oil, and apply treatment with compresses and remedies until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to torsion of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, so too do abscesses occur in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive exertion, and for similar reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it happens most often in the locations of the elbows or ankles, or in any place where joints are moved awkwardly.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, similar in color to the rest of the body, and it occurs in the larger joints without their movement when they are pressed with great force, causing pain like stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that appears on the front of the body, but rather on its side, and it moves to all parts and does not go before nor behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those that occur in joints need not be treated with iron because this would cause severe contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But those that appear on the head or forehead should have the thread removed with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then you can treat it with cupping glasses and cut it open with razors.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you should suspend it with a hook, excise it, and remove it; and then sew it up with stitches, treating it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 2
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the incision of an abscess that occurs due to cholelithiasis in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	There are many veins visible in the abdomens of those people and in other parts of their bodies which are called "fungual" due to their similarity to funguses, from which the razor is subtle but its head is large. And some have their lips turned inward, and these are small or greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one such case, in which there were two parts in his abdomen that resembled funguses, and there was no difference between them, with small razors.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I cut into them and removed from the one 18 ounces and from the other 6 ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	"And the operation on the incision of theirs is that you consider whether the patient is humid, and the color of their skin is white, humid, of subtle nature. Then you make the incision with a wide scalpel, and have cauteries in your presence in the fire, for many times it happens that much blood is expelled from the section of him/her; and if blood comes to you, cauterize that."
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	"And if the patient is pale and afraid, beware of making an incision with iron. But then take fresh lead filings, and place them on that skin, in the manner which we have said. And leave it for two days."
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	"And precisely adjust in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore do not cease pressing the lead until it is cut off and falls away by itself."
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	"But if that skin is of thick nature, then in the incision of it there is some cause for fear and trembling, especially in that which is in the belly."
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	"But it is possible for you to incise the middle of it, and precisely cauterize it so that it does not return."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	"And also care for it until the wound has healed."
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	"And beware that you do not presume to incise skin which is of dark color, insensitive, and carefully guarded, for that is affected by cancer."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	"And here comes the memory of cancer."
Capitol .lii.	"Chapter 52"
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	"On the treatment of prominence of the navel."
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	"Prominence of the navel is caused by several reasons: either through fissures in the skin which is above the belly, or through tissue or bowel protruding due to other ruptures; or through blood flowing from veins or arteries depending on what was previously mentioned; or through constricted wind in it."
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	"If the cause is a fissure of the skin and tissue swelling, then the color of the boil resembles that of the body; it has no pain, and appears in various places."
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	"And if it is due to bowel protrusion, then the location of that is with much greater variation than what we have described above. When you press on it with your fingers, it disappears and quickly returns. It produces a loud sound and has a large entrance for bath water which causes vigorous movement."
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	"But if it is due to moisture, then there is no pain and it does not disappear when you press on it with your hand; it is neither narrowed nor enlarged."
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	"And if it is due to blood, then the boil appears with these symptoms and has a declining black color."
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	"But if it is due to raw flesh, then the boil is heavy, thick, hard, and sinks according to its quantity."
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	"But if it is due to windiness, then touching it causes pain."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	"And the operation for this is that you should consider now whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or vein, or windiness. Therefore, you should refrain from treating it because there is fear and trepidation about this, as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about boils caused by arteries and veins."
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	"And if the prominence of the navel is due to bowel or tissue, then you should order the patient to lie on their back with their arms extended. Then, make a sign with your finger around the entire navel area and immediately command them to keep their hands behind their back while lying prone on their belly. Next, use a wide spatula in a circular motion around the navel where you have indicated with your finger. Then, extend the head of the boil upwards using a large probe. Finally, tie it tightly with strong thread or waxed linen using an appropriate tying method."
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	"And then grasp the middle of the boil and extend it upwards over the intestinal ligament. Insert your little finger into that opening and search for the bowel; if you find it and grab it with the ligament, then carefully pull it out and push the bowel back inside the abdomen."
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	"And if you have grabbed the tissue, then take hold of it with a probe and cut away any excess tissue from it."
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	"But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then encircle that spot and return to your operation. Then, take two needles and insert strong threads into them. Insert the needles into the area you have made around the boil in a cross-like manner, making sure they penetrate well. Then, stretch the boil in four directions over the needles."
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the stretched skin to fall back on its own. Or cut where it has become thinner and can be easily removed. Then, dress the wound with whatever is appropriate until it heals."
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	"And if the prominence of the navel is due to fat or moisture, then you should cut away the boil as we have described and remove the blood or moisture that you find there. Then, dress the wound with whatever is appropriate and allow it to heal."
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII
De curacio de cranc.	"On the treatment of cancer."
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	"As we have said, in the division of species of cancer and its manner of approach to cure with medicines, and that surgery is an escape from its cure lest it be ulcerated; we have spoken of cancer generated in the breast and caution in its cure."
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	"And they said that sometimes cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible, as with the cancer that is in the breasts or in the thigh, and their opinion was to remove all of it, especially when it is beginning small."
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	"But when cancer is old and severe, do not try to approach it because you will not be able to heal that ulcer nor have I seen another one, nor has anyone else."
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	"And the operation on cancer is what we have described: that you first relieve the patient and purge them of black bile sometimes, and then cut away that part if it shows clear swelling."
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	"And prepare the patient with preparation where the operation is located, and then prohibit certain foods that are harmful to them. And also cleanse all parts of the wound with good care so that there is no remaining cause of the return of cancer."
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	"And let blood flow freely, and do not bandage it lightly, and press the wound areas, and wipe away thick blood either with your hand or with an instrument that you have available among the instruments."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is heavy bleeding from an incision in a vein or artery, then cauterize that spot until the flow of blood has stopped, and then treat it with other treatment until it heals."
Capitol .liv.	"Chapter 54."
De curacio de ydropici.	"On the Treatment of Hydrops."
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	"We have already recommended, in the division, the types of hydrops of water and the signs of each type, along with their treatments using medicines."
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	"And that which is cured by iron alone is but the species of ulcers, and it is not approached with iron to the species of timpanists nor to the species of hippocephali, for this is mortal."
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	"And when you have treated this species of tympanitic dropsy with medicines and your treatment does not succeed, then consider whether the patient has already achieved mastery over this disease or if it is another type of dropsy such as that found in the throat or intestines. Be careful not to treat them with iron for there is fear involved here."
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	"But if the patient's condition is one of excessive virtue and in it there is no other disease besides dropsy alone, not infantile nor senile, then the manner of performing this operation is as follows: lift the patient between your thighs and have a servant press his abdomen with their hand, expelling water from below through the penis. Then take a sharp-bladed instrument..."
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	"...let it be two-sided and pointed at both ends like a spatula, but let there also be some shortening towards the middle, so that in performing this operation you do not penetrate too deeply into the bladder and thus harm it."
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	"And also consider if the dropsy is due to an obstruction of the bladder, for in that case you should make your incision three fingerbreadths away from the navel on the right side towards the pubic region."
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	"But if the dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel at a distance of three fingerbreadths."
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	"And if the dropsy is due to disease of the spleen, then your incision should be on the left side."
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	"And do not make your incision on the side where you want the disease to flow out, so that the superfluities do not flow there."
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	"And then perforate the entire canal with the instrument and insert it into the incision. Then elevate your hand with the spatula between the canal and the siphon, and excise that; if the quantity is about a fingernail or an ell."
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	"And then pierce the siphon within so that the spatula reaches the desired place, which is where the water is."
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form:"
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	"And it is similar to a cannula of thin silver; it is made of silver or brass or laton lion, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other. And the tip of it is cut like a feather, thus:"
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	"And at the upper end there is an opening, because when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately it will draw that towards itself, and thus evacuate as much water from the middle ear as necessary. For if you evacuate too much of that at once, it can cause sudden death due to the dissolution of its animal spirit, or it can cause a syncope that is near death."
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	"But evacuate according to the quantity of its strength, and also consider the dispositions of the disease, the virtue of the pulse, and the condition of the patient."
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	"And then remove the instrument and retain the water that causes it, for immediately it is retained by the canal which retains the hole that you are commanded to pierce in that manner."
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	"And then iterate the instrument on another day if the disease is tolerating it, and extract a small quantity of water. Do this for several days with caution, taking care that only a little water remains."
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	"But if you fear for the patient and have let out a large quantity of water, then cure him with embrocation in hot sand, fomentations with saltwater baths, and expose him to the sun for a long time. And cure him also with drying medicines until he is healed."
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	"And cauterize over the stomach, spleen and liver immediately after the extraction of the water, according to what has been said before."
Capitol .lv.	Chapter Lv.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children born with imperforate openings for urine.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	"Sometimes, some children are born from their mother's womb and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or is drawn tight or not in its place)."
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	"Therefore, it is necessary to cut immediately after birth with a sharp knife according to this method:"
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	"And first tie around the cord with a thin lead clamp and ligate it, then wait for three days or four."
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	"When they want to urinate, they should be moved away from the bed and return afterwards."
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	"And if you do not use lead, it is possible that urine will flow over the place and close this wound."
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	"But those whose cord is drawn tight should be treated with a lead clamp, as we have said, for many days until it becomes wider."
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	"However, those whose cord is not in its place are called 'leditz', the cause of which is that those who are born with the cord around the neck cannot urinate downwards until they lift the cord upwards by hand; this is not their natural condition because sperm cannot reach the mother rectally, and it is a serious illness."
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	"And the way to operate in this case is for the sick person to lie on his back, then extend the head of the penis with your left hand using strong traction, and incise the tip of the glans penis with a sharp knife like cutting a feather, taking care not to cut any part of it, so that the meatus appears like the head of the penis and the cord falls into its proper place as needed."
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	"And be careful in your operation for a flow of blood, because many times it happens this way; pause at the bleeding with what you have cut off and treat the wound until it is healed."
Capitol .lvi.	"Chapter .56"
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	"About the whitening that occurs on the foreskin of the penis, which is characterized by inflammation and blackness, along with adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis."
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	"Often seen in the penis and its fleshy prominence."
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	"And among them, one is malignant and another is non-malignant."
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	"Non-malignant: you should suspend with a thin hook and cut it out cleanly; then apply pressure on the wound using Egyptian gauze; and finally cure it with a fine ointment until healed."
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	"And if the whitening is malignant and of dark color, you should apply cautery around its opening and root."
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	"But if the whitening is on the foreskin of the non-circumcised penis, and one part of the whitening is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, you should remove the whitening that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; then you should treat the outside, because if you treat both together with the foreskin, it may become trapped."
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	"And similarly, occurrences happen in the groins and blackened foreskin with decay, therefore you should remove all that which has already darkened or is about to decay or has already decayed; then apply a line of this over it, made from honey mixed with ground barley flour, wormwood powder and sieved."
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	"And apply the other treatment until it is healed."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	"But if there is a flow of blood, then perform cautery with a Lunar knife according to this form:"
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	"because cauterizing with a lunar knife is done in two positions at once, both for the flow of blood and for the gangrene when it is corrupted."
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	"And if the head of the penis is eaten away and completely destroyed in one hour, then you should insert a lead cannula into the flesh of the foreskin so that the urine may pass through it."
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those who are uncircumcised, and over it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to gangrene or an abscess), you should use a blunt spatula until the adhesion is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all sides."
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	"And if it is difficult to separate them carefully, then you should cut with a spatula a little from the head of the penis and foreskin, because this is done in order that the foreskin, being subtle, may be pierced lightly through its thinness."
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	"And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis using a thread of fine silk, which has been boiled in water so that it may not adhere again."
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	"And then treat with styptic wine until it is consolidated."
Capitol .lvii.	"Chapter LXVIII."
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	"Of the cleansing of children and the treatment of what happens to them during circumcision."
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	"Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other gangrenes: but since it is of our operation and will, and its proper use is in children, it is necessary that we assign to it the better operation and easier way for preserving health."
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	"Therefore I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired it through experience, which is why I have found most artisans and barbers using circumcision and cleansing with a knife and with tweezers; and they use liniment with pitch and perform incision with the nail."
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	"And I have already proven all these methods and did not find better cleansing with forceps, with liniment made of pitch for cleansing done with the nail because many times it causes the cord to break from above, because the foreskin has two tunics and the inner one remains and it is often necessary to perform another incision with pain."
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	"And in cleansing done with alphecates, which is digital and used by barbers, the incision of the tip of the male member is not secure because it often enters the urethra."
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	"But in operation done with a nail, you often cut with iron and corrupt your operation."
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	"And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times it hangs in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, as I have seen."
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	"But as for the cleansing done with forceps and liniment made of pitch, I have found by experience that the goodness of these forceps is that they cut proportionally because the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; therefore, when you press your hand so proportionately with two sharp points, you will cut according to one comparison in a single time, and there is compression of the pitch made in such a way as to contain the foreskin completely without any error."
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	"And the first manner of operation is that you should have the child lie on his back if he is one of those who understands a little, so that you do not place the pitch on his penis unless you leave him like that for another day."
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	"And then make him laugh in any way possible so that he may receive his understanding."
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	"And then have him lie between your thighs in such a way that he is not frightened, and hide the forceps in your hand or behind your ear so that the child does not see them nor anyone else among the instruments."
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	"And then insert your hand into his penis and blow on the foreskin, pulling it until it covers the head of the penis, and then cleanse that with whatever dirt has gathered there."
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	"And then place the marked location with doubled pitch, and then bind it a little lower with the second liniment, and then press with your finger and remove the liniment from below with good retention, and cut between the two liniments."
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then raise the foreskin gently and expose the head of the penis; and then let the blood flow little by little, for it is better so; and then sprinkle powder on top and over the powder place a cloth in which cotton wool steeped in fresh rose oil has been spread out, and leave him like that overnight; and treat him with whatever cure is needed until he is healed."
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	"The shape of the forceps used for cleansing is as follows:"
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	"The outer edges of the forceps should not be cut and the inner ones should be sharp so that the edge of the blade is not exposed, and the length of the two points should be equal to the length of the two handles when opened."
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	"But the error in cleansing is that sometimes you remove the inner foreskin entirely or partially where it should be cut."
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	"Therefore, you must stretch it at your leisure with your nail in front of the swelling and cut according to equality."
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	"And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook and cut it."
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	"But if three days have passed and there remains what is inflamed below the penis, then you should leave it until the swelling has subsided, cut it with ease, and cut it according to your preparation."
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	"And be careful of the head of the penis, for nothing should harm it."
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	"And then treat him with whatever plaster will consolidate from the powders that we have recommended in the treatise on powders."
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	"If it is cut to measure and you obey the instructions above, nothing will happen to him."
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	"And let he who has this be healed as we have said."
Capitol .lviii.	I will not translate that sentence since it's a chapter number in English. The correct translation would be "Chapter LVII" or "Chapter Fifty-Seven".
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by blockage due to stone or concretion, or by poultice or flesh, and it seems like those mentioned above that we have described regarding the methods of treatment in this division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and retention occurs due to stone that has already entered the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their own hands.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And appropriately place weights on that one's back and stretch out their belly from the point above the buttocks downward, and the patient should strain as much as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, the neck of the bladder being constricted causes expulsion of the stone to the parts behind, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved even with what we have said and the cause of the illness is violent, then extraction must be performed using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and thin like a reed quill, about as long as half a palm, at whose end there should be a thin tube.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of performing evacuation of urine using this is as follows: Take a doubled feather and insert its tip into the tube of the syringe, tied securely with linen or cotton; if there is any superfluous flesh from the skin around it, remove it with forceps, then insert the linen or cotton into the tube with violence. Then attach the syringe to the wall and place it on the edge of a bowl filled with warm water.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient lie on their side, and insert the syringe into the bladder through the urethra using olive oil and warm water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the root of the penis; then bend the penis upward at the point where it joins the belly; then push the syringe inward through that; then push it further until it reaches the bladder and causes relief from the illness. But if this is not done according to this order, but rather as something twisted, then there may be harm.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then gradually expand the tube with linen or cotton, because urine follows the linen.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Approach carefully that one and perform cupping therapy with urine, using a cautery, do not cease until it is evacuated from the bladder and the ailment has improved.
Capitol .lix.	Here comes the next sentence to translate:
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	"Regarding the quality of cleansing the bladder using a funnel and similar instruments which are suitable for this purpose."
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"When an ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood is congested there, or it is obstructed by a stone, and you wish to drain water and medicines into it at that time, use an instrument called a funnel, which has this shape:"
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	"However, its outer end is not pointed, but rounded and closed."
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	"And it has three openings: two on one side, like this."
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	"At the beginning it is concave, into which you pour what is needed, and according to how much it can hold without adding anything, so that when some cause draws out moisture from it, it may be drawn in, and when it is expelled, with this it may be drawn in, just like a funnel with which naphtha is poured onto naval battles."
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	"So when you want to pour moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the funnel into the moisture and draw with it what is poured into the openings above, because the moisture will be drawn into the concavity of the funnel."
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	"And then insert the end of the funnel into the urethra as we have recommended in the chapter on circumcision; and promptly pour the moisture with whatever you pour, because that moisture will quickly reach the bladder, and relief from that affliction will come."
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	"This is the shape of the fine sieve with which the bladder is sieved, and it looks like this:"
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	"And let it be made of silver or brass, with its head resembling a small feather in shape, and let it have this appearance from the inside."
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	"And then take a bladder, and pour into it the moisture that you want to sieve into the bladder, and promptly tie that with two strong ligatures made of doubled thread, and heat that moisture over the fire."
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	"And then insert the end of the sieve into the urethra."
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Approximately translate this line: "Next, stretch your hand over the bladder with the humidity stretched downward within that patient so that that humidity has already reached the bladder."
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If there is no bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that circle completely around its roundness; and immediately insert your finger strongly into those tracks, so that they are turned over; and again add the circle in such a way that it is attached also later on, because you pause in that water which you want of the humidities, oils and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And now you put it into the instrument and do with that as you have done with the bladder, expressing with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LX
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already spoken in the division of the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and stones generated in the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about the stone in which one operates with hand, and section (incision).
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone properly generated in the bladder is that which remains in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And here we recount it with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore it is said that stone generated in the bladder mainly affects children. And among its symptoms are: urine that is emitted from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety and appears in its area; pain troubles the groin, and often penis, and sometimes is exacerbated; and with this condition there is often discharge from the anus.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it would be easier to cure children of that illness than those who have reached fourteen years old; and difficult to treat in older people.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	"Yet among the young it may be milder because it is between those [feet]."
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	"And from that which has a greater stone and easier cure; And if it is few, it is contrary to this one."
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	"Therefore, upon arriving at the cure of this one, it is necessary at the beginning of this that we cleanse the patient with a cloth which extracts all the dust which is in its bowels; For sometimes that fold hinders the exit of the stone during the investigation of it."
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	"And then seize the patient by their feet and suspend them head downwards so that the stone may descend to the neck of the bladder, or else it may jump from its place sometimes."
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	"And then make that person lie between your thighs, and let his feet be placed on things of yours, so that the bladder may be entirely inclined towards its parts."
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	"Then perform this and all of it forcefully."
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	"Then if you feel the stone in the space, immediately cut with a section above it."
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	"And if you don't know how to do it, then you should anoint with oil your little finger of the left hand if the patient is a child, or that same finger if the patient is young and complete, and insert that into their anus."
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	"And ask the stone where it resides."
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	"Then slowly guide that small stone into the neck of the bladder."
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	"And then press firmly with your finger and expel that stone outside through the opening where you made the section."
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	"Then command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the patient's thighs upwards with their right hand, and with their left hand to draw back the cord that is below the genitals, away from the location of the section."
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then carefully insert the spatula as follows:"
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	"And cut through it with water between the anus and genitals, not in the middle, toward the left side of the buttocks; and let the section be made over that stone, with your finger inside the anus, and let it be a transverse incision so that the opening outside may be wide and inside narrow according to how much of the stone can fit through, and no more, for otherwise you will compress your finger which is inside the anus, and the stone will remain stuck due to its difficulty."
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	"And know that some stones have angles or margins, making their expulsion difficult through this route."
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	"And of that water it appears similar to the glans penis, round and easily expelled."
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	"Therefore if it is one with angles or margins, adjust it in the opening."
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	"And if it is not thereby removed, then you must press upon it gently and decently with your finger, the tip of which should be like a chisel used to press against the stone, and do not let it slip away from you; or else insert therewith a subtle instrument with a curved tip."
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	"But if you cannot press upon it, then dilate the opening a little, and if you see blood flow, cut through that with a sharp instrument dipped in cauterizing vinegar."
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	"But if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning insert your hand into the mouth of the bladder and make an incision thereupon; and carefully insert a little further therein; and similarly proceed if there are many stones."
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	"And if the stone is very large, then beware that you make a large incision thereupon, for ignorance leads to one of two evils: either retention or an inflammation due to continuous dripping of urine, because the location is not entirely consolidated."
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	"But apply expulsion from within that which remains stuck thereupon, or else engage in the fracture of it with forceps within that may extract it piece by piece."
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	"Therefore once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointment made from aloes and dragon's blood, and cauterize it."
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	"And apply over that a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in olive oil mixed with warm water, so that the wound may heal without inflammation."
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	"And carefully place the patient on his side, and do not remove the bandages until the third day."
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	"And once that has been removed, wash the location with warm water and much oil, and carefully dress it with a fine ointment and an ointment made from diaphoretic drugs until it is healed."
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	"But if inflammation and corruption occur in the wound, which appears like congealed blood in the bladder, and through this urine is prohibited (and that is known by the exit of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for otherwise it will provoke the bladder to corruption and putrefaction."
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply ointments suitable for all kinds of inflammation, with whatever is appropriate for its cure until it is healed."
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	"And during the entire period of cure, you must remain awake with both eyes open and adjust the medications which have been placed upon the location."
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urethra, and stuck therein so that emission of urine is prohibited, then cure it with whatever I have mentioned earlier regarding sectioning, for many people have been accused of performing a section through this cure; and now I will explain to you how: take an iron sound, which has this shape:"
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	"of triangular shape with sharp points, attached to a stem."
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	"And then take flaxseed, and tie it around the urethra below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder."
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	"And then insert the iron sound into the urethra, perforating gently until the sound reaches that stone."
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	"Then rotate the sound with your hand against that stone little by little, and continue the perforation until you have pierced through it on the other side so that urine may flow freely."
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	"And then press your hand upon that which remains of the stone on its exit from the urethra, because it is fragmented and carried away with urine, and the patient is healed."
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	"But if this cure does not suit you for any reason which prevents it, then tie a flaxseed below the stone and another one above it."
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	"And then make an incision over the stone in that urethra between the two ligatures."
E aprop extratz aquela.	"And then remove that [stone]."
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	"And then untie the bandages and cleanse the congealed blood which has formed in the wound."
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	"And it is not necessary to leave the flaxseed below the stone unless to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other ligature above it only serves to keep the wound closed when the stone has been expelled."
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	"And for this reason, it is necessary when you remove the flaxseed above to elevate the cord upwards at its departure, or otherwise your finger will return empty and the wound will remain closed as we have said."
Capitol .lxi.	"Chapter LXI."
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	"Of extracting stones from women."
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stone in women's wombs rarely occurs.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a stone is found in any of these (organs), then the cure is difficult and forbidden by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that when the woman strongly desires to give birth
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second one is that you do not find a woman who is well versed in her own body, so she cannot describe how to examine herself when she is menstruating, or whether she is married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third one is that you do not find a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation of manual examination
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth one is that the place of the incision for stones in women's wombs is far from where the stone actually is, so it requires careful examination, and there is fear involved
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to do this, then you must take a woman midwife who knows her art well and is not easily frightened.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that (a woman midwife), then seek a physician who is wise and subtle, or present a woman matron well experienced in the state of women's bodies, or a woman who has been especially trained in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore have that one present, and command her to do everything that you will order her from the beginning of the examination until the end. For this is the reason why you should ask her: whether the woman is a virgin. If so, then she must put her finger in the woman's anus and try to feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore if she finds it, have her withdraw her finger, and then command her to make the incision where she has indicated.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if the woman is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and search for the stone, for she will place her left hand on the bladder and press firmly with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore if she finds it, then gradually move her away from the opening of the bladder towards its sides with the strength of your virtue until you reach the thing in question.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And carefully make the incision on that side of the opening of the vagina where you have stopped and found the stone, keeping your finger firmly pressed against the stone as you withdraw it from there.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And let the incision be small at first. Then carefully insert the hook into that incision and if you feel the stone, then adjust the size of the incision according to the amount which you know the stone will pass through there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that stones have many forms: some are small and large, some pointed and sharp, some long and round, and some with branches.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you will know how many types there are of it by what you have indicated about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see flow of blood, apply a wet bandage with vinegar to that place for about an hour until the bleeding stops. Then return to your operation so that the stone may be removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you have prepared for yourself all of the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see flow of blood and know that the bleeding is coming from the artery that has been incised, then pause and apply powder to that place and press it with pressure bandage. Do not repeat this; leave the stone there and do not try to extract it, for great harm will come to the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then dress the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore when the bleeding has ceased after several days and the place has healed, then return to your operation so that the stone may be removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision for a strangulated hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia occurs when there is an accumulation of moisture in the white cipher, which is located behind the genitals containing the testes.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes it occurs within the proper scrotum itself, which nature has prepared for the purpose of containing the testicles, whether one or both have descended; and this is the cord of the testicle between the white cipher we have mentioned, and nothing more than that.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The cause of this hernia is weakness in the testicles that causes their contents to protrude through it, and sometimes it occurs due to a sudden impact on the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This fluid has various colors, sometimes it is declining towards yellow or reddish, or brown, or black and earthy, or clear and watery.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	The signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water has occurred are as follows: if it is in the white cipher mentioned earlier, then the swelling appears elongated and somewhat inclined towards the length, like the figure of an egg, and the testicle becomes visible, because the fluid contains it on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the fluid is in the proper scrotum itself, then the swelling appears round and separate from the testicle, and for this reason it is estimated that it is another testicle.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the fluid is between the cord of the testicles and the white cipher, then both sides swell together.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	To determine the color of the fluid, you should examine the color of the fluid in the swelling through an incision made for this purpose. Based on what is expressed from within, you can judge what lies beneath it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this condition with surgery, we should command the patient to urinate if possible, and have him lie down on his back.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And let him be lying down on his back over a soft cushion placed slightly higher than the rest of the bed, and cover both sides with blankets.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then sit yourself on the left side of the patient and command the assistant to stand on his right side. The assistant should extend his arm across both sides of the patient's groin and abdomen towards the inguinal region.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a sharp, wide-bladed knife and cut through the center of the scrotum along its length close to the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Make the section straight and carefully so that it is exactly parallel to the line that divides the skin of the testicles, until you reach the white cipher enclosing the testicle.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Peel back the skin and observe carefully, taking care not to incise it. Excise that portion which hangs down with the testicle more gently and subtly explore with the excision according to how much is possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then make a wide perforation through the fluid-filled cipher, and remove all of the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps and extend the cipher at its edges. Do not touch the cord containing the testicles, and incise the cipher in whatever manner is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Cut through the entire cipher or in pieces, especially its deeper parts subtly and carefully, for if you do not thoroughly explore the incision, there is no certainty that the fluid will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the fluid proceeds from outside of its cord during your operation, then once you have completed the incision of the cipher, return it to its place. Then approximate and suture together the two lips of the scrotum with stitches, and care for it like other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the fluid corrupted by some other disease, then you should tie off and ligate the vessels that suspend it, excise it, and care for it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the fluid is gathered in two places separately, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore, incise one side as you did the other previously, and if it appears to be an operation for hernia, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then clean away the blood and enter into the incisions wool immersed in oil or rose oil. Then take another piece of wool immersed in wine and oil and spread it over both testicles and the abdomen. Then place doubled cloths and powder over them, and bind them together with a bandage following this pattern:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And take two cloths and fill them with wool carded in this manner. The ends of these cloths should be sewn together or moistened with wool to prevent slipping. They should then be secured with a bandage around the groin area, with one end extending from the buttocks towards the other, and the second end at the pubic region. Two additional straps should be placed on either side of the scrotum, and two more straps above the testicles, all adjustments should be made in the groin area of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a caustic iron instead of an incision with a knife. So you should take a sharp and thin cautery blade and incise the cord of the testicles with it. Then heat it according to our recommendation, until the white cipher containing the fluid is exposed. Then take the caustic iron in this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it resembles the Greek letter ' gamma '.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce the cipher with it and heat it until all moisture is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the cipher with forceps and scrape it off with forceps and burn it away with a heated cautery tip. Then incise that area as much as you can until all of it is eradicated, but be careful not to let the fire touch the fluid.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	Know that this operation is safer and less likely to cause bleeding than one done with an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter an abscess during the time of incision or cautery, or bleeding, then you should treat that complication according to what is appropriate for it, as has been discussed.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the disease is painful and does not wait for a second operation due to its horrible nature, then perform a perforation according to our recommendation. This should be done when you are certain, based on what has been said about the meanings, that the hernia in question is hydrocele.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you should make the disease recede over some raised swelling. Then perforate the abscess in its lowest part with a broad spatula and make the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And the aperture should be wide enough to drain all the fluid.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then close the opening with a dry bandage and tie it up tightly, so that any remaining fluid may be absorbed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then care for it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is difficulty in draining the fluid at that time, then you should perforate it again. This can happen because the surrounding fat tissue may obstruct the flow of fluid and prevent its drainage. In such cases, you should insert a trocar or other instrument into the wound to facilitate the removal of fluid, using the technique shown below:
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	Water returns and increases about six months after or around the time of those who have been affected by it. Once it has increased, it should be pierced according to that method, for thus the patient will pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	"Chapter .lxiii."
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of section on fleshy hernia and its cure
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the case of this type of hernia, there is great danger of loss when it comes to large hernias; therefore, I have seen many cases where it has been necessary to dismiss them and save the patient through this method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that case and the kinds of fistulas.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that fistulas are born in the body where the veins have been obstructed and this happens for many causes: either due to acute pain from excess fluid which has flowed into the veins, or due to injury.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the fistula is according to the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain; this is a serious fistula.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	Furthermore, a very large fistula is one that is lapidated (turned into stone), its color being dark and insensitive to touch.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it occurs due to the obstruction of arteries, and also from inflammation of those vessels such that one can already perceive the memory (i.e., signs) of it, or from inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which happens due to inflammation of arteries is recognized by the dispersion of the fistula when you press on it with your fingers, without needing to touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which occurs due to inflammation of veins does not disperse from it under any cause due to compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	"Now it is possible to make an incision on this kind of flesh and others; you should insert the needle into the groin of the testicles, then stretch the scrotum upwards, extract that white cylinder, free the suspenders of the vessels, tie them, and cut the suspender so that you deliver it from all parts of the scrotum."
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	"If the testicle is already attached to those tissues, then you should remove the testicle and make an incision there."
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	"If there is adhesion within some cause of the scrotum or between that and the vessels, then you should remove all that adhesion and make a round incision there."
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	"But if there is natural flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind it, then you should cut all of that flesh and remove the testicle as we have said."
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"Therefore, when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and also take care of it with another cure until it is healed."
Capitol .lxiv.	"Chapter LXIV."
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	"On the treatment of hernias that are caused by force."
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	"Aposteme surrounded by some enclosure like a bubble with softening of the testicles is called force, and it makes difficult movements and walking upon the sick part."
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	"And in the treatment of this ailment, fear comes before remembrance."
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	"However, we must speak about operation in that according to the first ones."
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	"And it is said that you should make an incision over an elevated cushion; and also peel the suspender of the testicles on both sides; and also tie the genitals with the aforementioned ties on both sides of the penis; and hold those other assisting instruments that you have, and extend them with a strong extension."
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	"And also cut with a sharp spatula through a transverse section on the right side of the vessels until the vessels are exposed."
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	"And also remove completely from both sides as we have told you in the extraction of herniae which are on the temples."
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	"And also put a needle with double thread into those parts where the force occurred, and tie it in the first place of the said places, and tie it again in the last one."
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	"And also cut those parts with a straight section according to the length of the body, and remove what has accumulated of fetid and corrupted humidity."
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	"And also treat the wound with the same treatment as other wounds where you want healing to be generated, because if one of the two genitals falls out, it is not bad for that."
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	"But if force occurs to all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be removed or that they be tied with the vessels because of which there will be a privation of all nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and that they be cauterized, or that they be tied so that there is no benefit from them."
Capitol .lxv.	"Chapter 65."
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	"Of the treatment of intestinal hernia."
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	"The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that happens in the groin extended over the abdomen, from the rings of the navel of the belly, so that some intestines descend through that rupture."
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	"And this rupture is either of the groin or of exception from it, and these two species occur for many causes: either by percussion, or by a sneeze, or by coughing, or by effort, or by elevation due to some heavy cause, or by similar things."
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	"And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the groin, is that it occurs gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly; and it is an abscess that forms within the scrotum because the groin squeezes the intestine."
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	"And the sign of it is when it is due to section of the groin, because at the beginning there occurs sudden violent pain; and it is an abscess that appears different from those near the spine, appearing close by, which is due to extrusion of the intestine, whose body is located outside the groin."
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	"And sometimes the intestine sticks out through the ring and this type of hernia is called an 'umbilical hernia'."
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	"And sometimes there is flatulence, and sometimes the intestine slides into the abdominal wall and gets caught there, which causes great retention of the disease; and sometimes it causes bad pain, especially when pressed upon."
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	"And in the treatment of these species of this illness with iron, there is fear that the skin may be burned in that place."
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	"And the manner of operating on this is that you order the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand to its place inside his curvature if he obeys its return; and then quickly cover it with your hands over its coil, elevating its edges."
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	"And then stretch the cord which secures the cord of the testes upwards, and cut through the entire cord of the testes; and then fix two clasps on both sides of the incision so that you can open it with those."
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	"And if the incision is made according to its quantity, as much as possible of that loop should be removed."
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	"And then strip away those fatty tissues which are next to the cord of the testes until the white hard scrotum is exposed on each side."
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	"Then you carefully insert your finger in that which is the testicle, inside the white scrotum, which is next to the loop of the cord; and behind it, between the second scrotum, and remove any adhesion that may be there."
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	"And then with your hand pull the cord of the testes upwards at its ends, and with this extend the white scrotum upwards with your left hand, elevating the testicle along with it; and command your assistant to extend the testicle further upwards while you dissolve any adhesion behind with hot water."
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	"And then carefully examine with your fingers that there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white hard scrotum."
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	"But if you find any cause of it, then quickly push that back into the abdomen on that side."
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	"And then you take a needle with a thick thread of fine threads, and insert it behind the last of the scrotum which is below the cord of the testes where the incision has been made; and then cut through those parts which project from the thread until there are four threads remaining; and then tie some of them together in the manner of a cross; and tie the scrotum with that thread, which we have said is next to the cord of the testes, with strong tying in two places."
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	"And then tie the ends of the threads and tie them strongly together so that none of the vessels which have been cut can cause any inflammation from this."
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	"And then make another tie close to the first one about four fingers away; and then with these two ties you leave behind that scrotum which is next to the cord of the testes as much as the length of your finger; and then cut through the remaining part around its circumference, leaving the testicle behind."
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	"And then make an incision on that side of the cord of the testes through which blood and pus can flow as we have recommended earlier."
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	"And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and apply the ligature which we have recommended (and sometimes cauterize the white scrotum near the incision of the blood vessel, for many times this happens); and leave the ligature so that it falls by itself."
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	"But if the wound closes late, then hot water should be poured over it and applied until it falls as we have said."
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the wound with other methods of treating wounds until it heals."
Capitol .lxvi.	**Chapter 66.**
De hernia ventosa.	**On Ventous Hernia.**
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, it has not been seen that anything has been done about its cure using iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first thing to do is as we have recommended in the hernia that is with an exit wound: You must open the vessels near the section over that soft spot; and dry it up in the middle part around the abscess with something that draws out that fluid, until the vessels fall back into place.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter lxvii
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the incision made in the groin.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the groins as we have said, and the area swells up.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not give any cause for the intestines to stick to the scrotum; and if they do, it is little; and returns on its own in all cases.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if this continues for a long time, an adjustable split is made in the scrotum so that the intestine can slip into the scrotum; and this happens because of the extension of the scrotum which is in the groin as we have said, which causes the scrotum to become stretched out and soften, and the area becomes inflamed and swollen.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of this is with a cautery, as was described earlier in the narrative.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: The patient lies on his back between the thighs of a woman, and then the area around the ruptured swollen abscesses is dried up with an incision made horizontally according to their size.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then pull the scrotum tight below the penis so that it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then take a piece of iron and place it over the prominent area of the scrotum, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then heat the two prominent areas on either side of the scrotum using the tip of the iron, and then sew them together with a suture.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the tip of the iron, and do not make any incisions in the scrotum itself, nor extend the wound or cause any other injury as you will know from the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat it with the same care as you would a wound, and if you have incised the veins, cleanse it and restore the wound so that it is healed; for the scrotum contracts and the prominence of the rupture does not remain.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	Cautery is better in this location because it promotes healing more quickly.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Concerning the softening of the spermatic cord
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Often times, the spermatic cord in some men becomes softened because the flesh between it is softened, and this is noticeable.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for someone who wants to treat this condition that they make the patient lie on their back and incise all of the softened spermatic cord over the natural one. Then they should approximate two lips with a suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	"And if you wish, begin by tying off the softened part of the cord with three or four knots and securing it firmly."
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	"Additionally, make incisions between the sutures; and take care to treat other wounds until they are healed and the pus has dried up."
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration is condemned in our law, but for certain reasons it has been mentioned to me that I recall this book; and its remembrance is necessary only for two ways: the first is so that you may have knowledge of castration when you are asked about it, and know how to cure those who suffer from it; and the second way is because we often have need of castration in other animals for our uses, as with horses, goats, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by cutting through the skin or by making an incision with division of the flesh.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by cutting through the skin, the procedure is as follows: we should hold the beast in cold water until its testicles are softened and relaxed, and then grasp them with your fingers so that they hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And carefully take hold of those parts with your hand so that they are well grasped and do not appear outside the touch of your fingers.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration performed by incision and division of the flesh, you should hold the beast and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And carefully grasp the spermatic cord, then make an incision on each side with a cut so that both sides are divided.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then carefully tie those parts with a ligature to prevent bleeding.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not apply any dressing over the wound, but rather use a fine stitch that is placed above the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of castration by cutting through the skin is better because it leaves no wound on the testicles so that the beast may desire copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the wound so that it heals quickly.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in males occurs in two ways:
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	"Sometimes urine flows from that vein which is in the chain of the testicles."
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	"In women, there is one kind: it is the cone of the woman above the penis which is like two small testicles in men, a little bit diminished at their exit from there like the male member and two testicles."
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	"And the cure is of three kinds: two for men and one kind for women."
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	"And it is necessary that you insert those adjusted fleshes within where that emission emerges, and then cure them with the same treatment as other plague wounds."
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	"And in the second kind of men from which urine flows that is in the chain of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter XXII."
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	"About prolapse and prominence of flesh due to causes of women."
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	"Prolapse is lightly adjusted above natural causes within which it is stretched out and made legs according to regulation; and sometimes it becomes magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads out like that in men, and sometimes it penetrates into the coitus."
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	"Therefore you should grasp the prolapse with your hand or with a hook and insert it."
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	"And do not lastingly in insertion, especially at the beginning of the vulva, lest blood flow."
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	"And then cure it with treatment for wounds until it is healed."
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But flesh that is born is flesh that grows in the horror of the mother until it fills that space, and sometimes prolapses outside according to the shape of a tail (and for this reason some people first called it “tail sickness”); therefore we should insert it like prolapse, and cure it until it is healed."
Capitol .lxxii.	"Chapter LXXII."
De curacio de alratica.	"About treating piles."
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	"Piles are when the anus of a woman is not perforated or has a small opening."
E es o natural o accidental.	"And it is either natural or accidental."
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	"Accidental piles are due to previous illness, and they are caused by flesh that has grown too much or by flesh that is thinly stretched or thickened."
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	"And they are found either in the front of the vulva or on its sides or above it or below it, and they hinder coitus and pregnancy and childbirth, and sometimes they hinder menstruation."
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	"And its diagnosis is made by examining the vulva; if the prolapse is evident, it can be proposed; but if not, then examine it closely with your fingers or with a speculum."
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	"But if prolapse is due to thin flesh and protrudes between the two lips of the vulva, then grasp it with your fingers and reposition it."
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	"And if it lies above the two labia majora and does not retreat when you press your fingers on both sides of it."
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	"And if the woman is lying on her back, let her open her thighs and then with force spread the two labia majora so that this thin flesh is broken and the prolapse is relieved."
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	"And then take some wool soaked in olive oil and place it on that area and leave it there for a day so that the skin does not stick together."
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	"But if the flesh is thick and dense, then insert it with a broad spatula or with a leaf of myrtle."
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	"But if prolapse is due to excessive flesh, then suspend that flesh with a hook and cut it."
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	"And use medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and mastic mixed with white lead."
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	"And then insert a wide lead cannula to prevent the prolapse from healing too lightly."
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	"Keep it like that for several days and apply hot water compresses."
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	"And then heal it with other consolidation treatments until it is healed."
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	"And sometimes flesh is born in the vulva itself, and then insert it according to this method."
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	"But if it is due to a hard tumor, do not cause any injury with iron in any way."
Capitol .lxxiii.	"Chapter LXXIII."
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	"About the treatment of hemorrhoids and prolapsed rectum and red swollen veins that occur in the anus of women."
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	"Hemorrhoids are a collection of many veins around the anus from which blood flows continuously. And when these hemorrhoids become old and hard, they are called piles."
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	"And I have already mentioned in the division of their types and signs those that deserve treatment and those that do not."
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	"So I say that hemorrhoids and piles that are in the front of the vulva and do not appear to the touch, in these cases there should be no treatment with iron."
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	"But those that are in the opening of the vulva and can be felt, these are the ones that deserve treatment."
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	"It is necessary that you place the woman in a hot bath and then extend her arms with forceps, or with rough cloth, and cut those with the scissors."
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	"And then sprinkle this powder over those cuts to stop the flow of blood from one of the wound's veins, such as with cassia or something similar."
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	"Then warm her feet for an hour, and then apply that water to the wound."
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	"And if the bleeding persists, later boil those cuts in a decoction of sumac and buckthorn husks and fig leaves and similar."
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	"Then take barley flour and combine it with honey and vinegar, make a plaster with that mixture, and apply it to the wound on her back."
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	"If blood is spilled, it's good. Otherwise, make the breasts adhere with two bandages, and scratch the nipples."
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of coriander, the juice of agrimony, and the juice of guaiacum with fivefold vinegar, and apply it to the wound. And then heal the wound with egg white when it is healed."
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	"But if you ask what is bitter to look at, cover that which appears to you of that which has been said in this writing."
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And heal it until it is healed."
Capitol .lxxiv.	Capital seventy-four
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On accidental perforation of a abscess in the abdomen.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Among the most common types of accidents happening in the abdomen are those like cancer and abscesses that lapidify, ulcerate, become adherent, erupt, form fistulas or wounds, and cause pain or swelling.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already spoken about these illnesses, their kinds, their signs, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary that I explain in this treatise about the cauterization of an abscess that appears in the abdomen when it comes from those that are healthy, and if you wish to know how the operation is performed with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, it is necessary for you to consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and swelling and fever, if the patient becomes reddened and if they feel heat on it; then do not cut it open until it has ripened enough that the severity of the symptoms ceases. Cure it with water that helps in maturation.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then it is necessary for you to cauterize the female over two cauldrons that have two openings; she should recline on her back with both buttocks and adjust her feet close to the fire, spread out her thighs, pause her arms beside her breasts, and tie each one with a wet cloth convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And next to the midwife on her right side she should administer the instrument with which the opening of the abdomen is made, the form of which will be shown in those causes that are appropriate.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument you place yourself behind the woman's abdomen, and that only the tip of the instrument enters the abdomen and touches the illness.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the tip of the abdomen, then it is necessary for you to put powders on the surface of the tip of the abdomen so that the entry of any instrument into the tip of the abdomen is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you place a thread that runs along the instrument on the left side and above, so that the person administering the instrument holds it and turns the thread until the opening of the abdomen has been made.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excavation appears and is touched by hand and it is bloody and moist, then it is necessary for you to dry that with a linen cloth using the head of the spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary for you to put in the wound a cloth submerged in rose oil or green oil that has some degree of astringency and apply pressure on the section at the tip of the abdomen.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And then close the abdomen with clean wool submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be cured for two days with an ointment that is convenient, until it has healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the wound and the cloth are washed with water and honey, and also with water in which rose of Jericho or long-rooted bistort has been boiled, and then it returns to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the cloth sticks to the wound when it is moistened, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, having care of it with what we have said in this division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat those women whose births are not proceeding normally in accordance with the natural form.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of a natural birth through signs of it. And if you see the woman pressing her thighs and desiring to smell the air, and then she is relieved by what comes out from above her in labor, and rushes towards the exit of the child, then you will know that this birth is according to the natural form, and that the first one comes out on its head, and the second one with its feet or hanging down from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary to compress the belly so that the child comes out gently, because when the first one comes out on its head, the second one will follow, and it should be cleaned of any excesses with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But if this birth is not according to the natural form and it is not desirable, because when the child comes out on its feet, its body comes out before its head and its feet, and its hand or foot or belly comes out first, and then its head comes out and it turns over onto its neck, having similar forms that are not desirable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, so that she guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing you the whole figure of these, and what sign is in them so that it may be known by this and it stands on this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the feet come out first due to a natural error, and that is violent on the woman and it is difficult for her to give birth, and you see its strength already weakened, then do this: have the women hold it and evaporate its conium with fenugreek cooked in hot water and moist oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then have the midwife insert her little spatula between its feet and gently separate them with it or cut that with her nail until what is in it of moisture has come out.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press on the woman's belly until the child comes out.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, then it is necessary that the woman be sprinkled with powder of mastic and powder of fenugreek with incense.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command the child to be compressed and do that by sprinkling it with incense and make it sneeze; and put a cloth in its mouth and nose for one hour, because the child will quickly forget its fright.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both hands of the child are forgotten at the beginning, then you should gently reduce them little by little with softness.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the insertion, then place the woman on a pillow and lift its feet up, and quickly knock the pillow on the ground, so that the woman is held back from falling due to the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not returned and the child is dead, then incise those and extract the remnant of the child or tie its body to its hand with cloth and extract it gently, because it will quickly forget.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the birth of the child on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the child comes out on its feet, then it is necessary that you push those up and then turn the child gently, and then touch its anus with your finger, and then take one of its feet and stretch it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it has come out inside the hips, then command it to press itself and make it sneeze with incense, because it will quickly forget if God wishes.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten with what we have mentioned, then gently return the child little by little until you place it according to the natural form, because it will now quickly forget with gentle birth.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is not forgotten with all that we have mentioned, then take powder of almonds and dissolved gum, and grind them well in the mortar, and then line the woman's anus and the lower part of her belly with that.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then have her sit in warm water until she obtains relief from the hips.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when sometimes its joints are swollen, then make it inhale steam of myrtle and gently rub that on it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When the patient undergoes fumigation for an hour, then cover them with a blanket, make them sneeze and exhale their mouth, remove that, and press lightly on the lower part of their belly, because the fart will be forgotten soon.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examination of the feces on its surface and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the feces comes out in this manner, then gradually insert your hands into it; and moreover the woman should be placed on her knees over her thighs, her weight hanging downwards, and those (her buttocks) resting on the bed, closing her buttocks.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gently press on their belly gradually, and also remove what is left from the weight of their buttocks between the ears until it is prepared for evacuation.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the feces is not forgotten, then take the weight of their buttocks and move it violently, and also press on what remains over the hypochondriac regions gradually until the feces reaches its exit.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your hands and gradually gather the feces, and command the woman to strain until the feces is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Examination of the feces laterally while holding one of her buttocks.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Let it be reduced by hand, but if you cannot do that, then raise the woman and make her squat.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if squatting is not possible, then make her lie on the bed, and strike her buttocks violently with your fist, and then administer liniments and remedies of mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if labor comes on, then make her sit on the chamberpot, and study about reducing the hand (the size of the fetus), and gather the feces according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and command her to strain until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Examination of the fetus while holding open the buttocks and noting that its fontanelle (soft spot on the head) is at the mother's back.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary for the midwife to have her hand on the fetus and then gradually turn it, making sure that it turns easily.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when this is done and how much has been gathered, then pause on the anus with what we have recommended of oil and mucilages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command her to move little by little, and when you have done this, then make her sit on a chamberpot and command her to lean over the right side, and also command her to strain; and make her sneeze conditionally.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Preparation for the exit of the fetus over the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you see the horrible face of the mother in this manner, consider, and then insert your second finger with your nail into the uterus until it is evacuated from the humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over its face and neck, then insert your hand into the belly of it, so that it may not be retained and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus out through its passages until it stops according to what is necessary, and command the woman to strain several times, and God willing, it will be forgotten with a light examination.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or multiple fetuses
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that many times twins are born, and sometimes three or four, but this is strange and rarely happens; but there are two causes for it, and not alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those (twins), whether they are multiplied or one by one, and separate them with a sharp instrument, distinguishing between them in the umbilical cord of each of them. And sometimes they are forgotten like this as if it were one fetus through natural examination that is light; but sometimes they are born through an examination that is not laudable, as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult during labor and delivery, as we have said about those with unnatural figures, then treat them in the way that we have recommended.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with patience, and is skilled according to all figures as they are prepared by nature leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Reminder of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborted
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten are formed in the mother's womb, and it has been verified that one woman aborted seven, and another had all ten formed, which was caused by measurement according to the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And also it is necessary for the midwife to know that this small figure of what has been described is very similar to this, and therefore pause if it is necessary according to what is needed.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	About the extraction of a dead fetus
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for a dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it has not been expelled, and if then you must use an operation with your hand, then consider whether the woman is of sound virtue and not affected by any accidents that could lead to its loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman must be placed on her back on a soft surface and her head must be lowered downwards and her thighs raised up.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant should hold the woman on both sides or wrap her in a sheet to prevent her body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of the mother with oil and a mixture of marshmallow root, fennel seed and fenugreek seed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mixtures, and then gently insert her hand into the uterus, and then seek with her hand where the hooks of the fetus are located.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the appropriate place to find is: then consider whether the fetus is prepared to come out on its own head, and if so, then grasp it by the hooks of its arms or neck or mouth or palate or beard or furcula or near the ribs or hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if delivery is to be on its feet, then grasp it by the penis or middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to grasp the hook with the right hand and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and gently insert the left hand and grasp it in one of those places which we have mentioned until you reach the cause of death.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and hold it in the appropriate place with another hook or third one if necessary, to ensure equal traction and not simply lengthwise extension.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be done for any delivery, so that the expulsion of it is alleviated as it is done in removing a tooth from its socket.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary that the extraction be softened between them; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint her fingers with oil and gently insert them and revolve around that which is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the extraction of the fetus has been forgotten, then change hooks to one that is sharper; and do this until the entire fetus is extracted.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is stuck ahead of the other one and it is not possible to reduce that by closing the fetus's mouth, then a cloth should be wrapped around that; and then extract that until all is extracted, and cut it either at the junction of the hand or in the joint.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do likewise with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large or it happens that its mouth is injured during delivery or there is water in its head, then insert spatulas between the fingers and cut its head open and extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat" to do so, whose form will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter which follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do if the head is large by nature; and then it is necessary to insert that with a bandage, or take it away thus as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is out but is compressed behind the clavicle, then let it be opened so that the fluid in the chest may flow out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if there is no complication or resistance to being born, then you should insert your hand into the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the belly is inflamed or in labor with dropsy, then you must pierce it so that the fluid which is inside may flow out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the child is on its feet, then its attraction will be light and its direction towards the mouth of the mother will be easy.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is compressed behind the belly and the chest, then you must extract it with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and open the belly and chest so that what is inside may flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are stretched out and the head returns, then let your left hand enter through the vagina; but if the mouth of the mother is covered, then insert your hand into the neck of the womb, seize the head with it, draw it back with those parts to the mouth of the mother, and at once insert a hook or two hooks, and draw it out with them.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed by an abscess which has occurred in her, then it should not be treated with it; but rather, she should receive administration of evacuating fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply poultices to her; and follow up by administering waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the child is lying on its side, then if possible, turn it gently; and administer what we have said for a live child.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	But if that is not possible, then cut through the flesh and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And you must leave nothing inside the secondine (afterbirth).
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said regarding the treatment of burned ulcers which have occurred in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then apply absorbent waters and administer the other treatments
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	I have seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus, and soon afterwards she became pregnant again, but the second fetus was also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened that an abscess formed on his belly soon after, and it became swollen until it burst open, and he began to vomit blood.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called upon to treat him, and treated him for a long time, but the illness did not abate
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed over him poultices of strong attraction, and after some days an bone came out from him, and soon afterwards another bone came out; and I was greatly amazed, for there are no bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore I cured the illness, and removed from him many bones. The woman recovered and remained in good health thereafter for a long time, except that she occasionally spat up a little blood.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not attribute this to anything strange, but rather it is a sign of skill and assistance for the physician who practices healing with his hands
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Concerning the forms of instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of cauls to open the mother:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	"This is the method of strengthening in which books are bound, which binding has two virtues in both ends of two feet."
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	"However, this virtue must be more subtle than the stricter one and should be made either of ebony or boxwood."
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	"And the width of each foot is two digits and the margin of each is one digit, and the length is a palm and a half; and in the middle position of two feet are two adjustments made by that same piece of wood which are already fixed, of which the length is mostly a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two digits or a little more."
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	"And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the press so that it may be opened with them when you turn the two prescribed virtues."
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	"Another similar form is that which is more subtle and lighter:"
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	"It should be made of ebony or boxwood according to the shape of forceps."
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	"But however at the end of it there are two adjustments like this, and the length of those adjustments is two palms, and the width of each is two digits."
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	"And when you want to open the press with those, then you should place the woman on her back on the bed with weights hanging down, opening what is between her legs."
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	"And properly open your hand with the instrument like you do with tongs, according to the amount that you want of the aperture of the mouth of the press until the metronome makes what you want."
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	"The form of virtue which they called:"
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	"The shape of the pushing device with which one pushes the thing:"
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	"The shape of the container in which the large head is contained."
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	"And it is similar to forceps at whose ends the teeth are like this, sometimes they are made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes their teeth are like those of a comb with which one incises and contains."
Forma de amesidat pauc:	"The shape of the container for little things:"
Forma de unci havent una spina:	"The shape of a hook having a spine:"
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	"The shape of a hook having two spines:"
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	"The shape of forceps whose teeth are made of iron with which the head of the thing is contained."
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	"The shape of a spoon having two extremities with which the head is severed."
Forma de dos espatums latz:	"The shape of two wide spoons:"
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	"Moreover, all those instruments are practiced and when they are multiplied and prepared by the craftsmen, the lighter they are in their operation, the more skilled must be the men due to their quantity."
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	"And do not operate those instruments in any way, for the need of them is not excusable."
De extraccio de la segondina.	"Concerning the extraction of the second part [of the fetus]:"
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	"When the second part [of the fetus] is retained during labor, then you should order the midwife to hold her breath, and properly make her sneeze with condition, and place your hand over her mouth and nose, and if by this it comes out, well."
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	"And if not, then take a cloth and make a hole in it through which you place those herbs burned over the mouth of the press like calamine, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabic cumin, cassia wood, and Saint John's wort."
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	"All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and place that over the fire."
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	"And properly place a reed cannula in the mouth of the press, and hold it there until the evaporation reaches the concavity of the press."
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	"And properly make her sneeze as we have said, and the second part will be expelled with speed."
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	"But if this cure is not promptly applied and it is not expelled, then order the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or an emulsion of almonds, and properly insert that into the vagina and search for the second part with it, and when it has been found, then take it and extract it little by little straight up so that the press does not suffer from violent traction."
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	"It is necessary that they be changed on both sides with ease."
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	"And moreover it should be adjusted in the quantity of traction, for she will obey and avoid adhesion."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	"And if the mouth of the press is obstructed, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and with medication of the cloth with herbs."
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	"But if it is not expelled despite all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful not to weary yourself with repeated attempts at extraction, but rather what has come out of her into the mouth of the press should be put on the thing of the woman, and properly cauterize that with ointment and tetrafarmacon; for that will cause it to disappear after a few days and it will be dissolved and expelled."
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	"But when it disappears, there will be an elevated bad odor at the head and stomach, and that will lead the midwife astray; and therefore fumigations and appropriate remedies should be administered for that."
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	"But some of the Ancients have already been tried with fumigation of mustard seed and dried figs."
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	"Form for an instrument by which a woman is fumigated due to the retention of menses and of the second part:"
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	"It should be made of glass or earthenware."
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	"And the subtle extremity should be placed in the vagina and the wide extremity over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed on the embers of the fire."
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	"And hold that until that fumigation is consumed, and repeat another one."
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	"Regarding the cure for an unperforated anal sphincter:"
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	"Many children are born with their anal sphincters not perforated, which appear thin and obstructed."
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	"Therefore, the midwife should perforate that sphincter with her finger; and if not, she should perforate it with a sharp spatula, being careful not to touch the skin."
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	"And moreover place on that wool infused in wine and oil; and properly cure it with ointment until it is healed."
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	"But if you fear that it may be obstructed, then place a cannula in the hole for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate."
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	"And it has already happened that the anus becomes obstructed due to consolidation of a plug or of an abscess; therefore that consolidation should be incised, and moreover it should be cured with what we have said regarding the cure and lead."
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	"Regarding the cure for fistulas that form from there:"
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	"The fistulas that form in the lower part of the buttocks are usually large and coarse, which form near the anus outside or in the space between the two buttocks."
E es una fistula o motas.	"And it is one fistula or several."
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	"And with that node being ancient and running with moist white matter or subtle pus, there are sometimes penetrating passages."
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	"And those passages are known by what comes out of them through the exit and the windiness; and sometimes the illness of egressions is used, and often much is expelled from them."
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	"And it happens sometimes that those fistulas have penetrating passages into the bladder and into the urethra, and from those passages there can be penetration into the junction of the vulva and into the neck of the womb."
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	"And this is how a penetrating or non-penetrating fistula into the anus is known: when you insert your finger into the anus and attempt to introduce a thin probe of wax or iron into the fistula where there is not a tortuosity."
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If in that case it is a tortuosity, then introduce into that subtle vein of lead or horsehair through which you feel the vein or the pulse in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not find that vein nor any cause of obstruction or worms or windiness, as we have said, then you would know that it is non-penetrable, and thus you should cease your treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then its meaning is emission of urine from there and prohibition of it until that place is healed in medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the joint of the hip or into the bone and causing pain around it, then its sign is that the vein has entered here if there is not tortuosity in the bone, and causing pain around the starting point; and that there will always be putrefaction from there; and that no medication will work there, nor will it heal with an ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure, and the cure of those is the work and vanity of foolish physicians about which we are firm.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that one which is not penetrating and is not ancient, cure with iron is hoped for according to what I will recommend to you, and that which I have already said.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the disease appears between your thighs but more especially towards its two sides and raises the skin of it within itself, with the hips inclined toward its belly, and appropriately enters a thread of lead or of wool if there is tortuosity in the fistula, into which you should know where the vein has entered.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that one feels the disease around its buttocks, then it is necessary for you to enter your little finger into its buttocks.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the vein already openly entered with your little finger, other than that which you feel between your little finger and that one or flesh, then you can be certain that that one is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that one, because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however some people say that it has healed in some men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medication by which help is hoped for in it is that you ignite a cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as it has been preceded, and enter that burned into the fistula until it reaches around its buttocks; and appropriately repeat that twice or thrice until you know that all those joined fistula tissues that are like feathers of birds' quills have already been burnt.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And also cure that with hot compresses wrapped in cloth until all those burnt tissues have cooled down, and appropriately cure it with medicines generating and strengthening flesh, and if it has healed, good. And if not, then it will never be healed by any other cure at any time.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the vein enters but does not penetrate within your little finger which is in its buttocks and between that one and the vein that is covered with flesh or skin, and if the fistula becomes wide at that point where the surface of the thigh begins, then dry up the thigh from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it dried by the vein, and may be inside the fistula until the section reaches to the place where the end of the vein is, and through the vein it is relieved and cleansed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And also clean those fistula tissues which are like feathers of birds' quills, and do not leave any remnant of them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flow comes between you and your operation when you are cutting those tissues, then the best thing to do is cauterize with fire or with an acute medicine, because cauterizing with fire adjusts good twice habits: it is a burning of those burnt tissues and an absorption of the blood and an exsiccation of humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And also cure it with hot compresses wrapped in cloth or in soft wool until that place is completely healed. And then also cure the wound with firm and hard flesh generating and strengthening medicine.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And such medicines are those which have astringent and exsiccant properties. When it is restored, then it has healed completely and there is no need for repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula already reaches to the front of its buttocks and is elongated from its surface on the body, then enter your little finger into it and inquire with that one.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you feel the vein and between it and you there is skin or flesh that prevents penetration, then do not operate on it except according to the faithful way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	And therefore administer one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it up until the concavity of it allows you to enter your finger and the appropriate cure; and do not proceed with cutting lest you cut into the sac containing its buttocks, and thus you cause suffering unnecessarily upon the estate without consent. And then appropriately cure it as we have said because strong and clean will heal quickly; or else remove that skin covering and clean up that pus which dries up within around its buttocks as we have said, either with your finger or with another instrument of sharp point, and also clean those fistula tissues which are in the section where you can do so by cauterization. And then endeavor to make the restoration of all the wound by cutting, and if the upper opening does not heal, and remains open on its buttocks, then it will suffer lightly from suffering.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is ended in this way: when you enter your finger into it and it goes around to its side near the surface of the body and on its margin, then take a needle with pierced point, which is like a needle for preparing hearts according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	"I now enter that tight fold of your thighs and turn those around, then I enter trying with a file into the fistula until I reach its cavity."
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	"But if you are penetrating into the margin of the anus from behind, then pull out the file from that track so that you can introduce your little finger into the anus; and extract the end of the file, adjust both ends evenly, and stretch each one, leaving it like that for a day or two. Then when the file has been inserted more into the flesh, carefully stretch that until those tissues have been cut which are between both ends of the file."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	"And then heal the wound once it has solidified and healed."
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate, in whatever way you are prepared, but only on the front, because it is not for you to do this so that you do not injure the skin; and then heal that until it is healed."
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	"The form of the spatula spinos with which the fistula is opened: its curvature is very sharp and the other edge is not-sharp, so that you do not injure what is not necessary, as sometimes happens."
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	"Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the opening of those [hemorrhoids]."
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	"Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: for some are between the buttocks resembling those that are like coal, or those which are like fat from lard."
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	"And of those which are small and large, and blood flows from them constantly and is one, and there are many, and they are outside the anus, and at its extremities."
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	"But those hemorrhoids which are outside the anus are according to few humors, from which yellow water or a little blood flows continuously, and they are according to the color of the body."
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	"And the treatment of that hemorrhoid which is inside the anus is to order the patient to sit down and squeeze until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear to you."
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	"Then you take hold of it with forceps or whatever you have available and lift that up with your nail, and immediately cut through those veins."
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	"But if the forceps are not held in those due to the humidity of them and their softness, then grasp that with coarse cloth or cotton or wool thread and extract that with your fingers, and immediately cut through those and sprinkle some powdered myrrh over the incision so that it is placed on those instead of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what has been mentioned in the chapter on cauterization."
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"And then treat those with the other treatment until they are healed."
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	"And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then you should cauterize the patient with cautery which has a small bite, and wash it with the water that is in the anus so that it may evacuate easily when the patient squeezes."
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight, and it is that you grasp them with your nail or with forceps and cut through those, and immediately treat them with water as mentioned above until they are healed."
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	"And when you have made the incision, it is necessary that you administer suturing of them according to this manner: take linen thread and wrap it around a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at their extremities above, and make the thread penetrate with the needle in the vein of the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread on either side of the needle, and stretch the hemorrhoid tightly, and then tie the thread and remove the needle."
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	"And do this to all of them, and leave one of those open and do not close it, so that the excess blood may flow from that."
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	"And then place over the anus cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and have the patient lie down on their back and command them to remain so."
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then leave that alone until it is healed; and when it has healed, treat those with an ointment or with another treatment until they are completely healed."
De curacio de fistulas.	"On the treatment of fistulas."
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Frequently occurs due to drying up of moisture or constriction of nature
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since those are old and no longer effective in that medicine, therefore it is necessary for you to remove those with the point of a spatula or with your nail until they are moistened and remove from above the accumulated pus which prevents them from consolidating; and then cure them once they have consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Now, remove those with great care so that the first one does not become inflamed and are scratched; and then cure them once they have healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The key to treating inflammation is...
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You should know that inflammation is key, and it is not if not red like the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body but more so in the parts below the hips and thighs, where you must apply ointment.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to cut what is in the area of the key and hold it with forceps or tweezers and remove its root; and then cure it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second one that is preceded in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	A verruca (wart) is a small, rough, fistulous elevation on the surface of the skin, often seen in many children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And to treat it, you should spread and cut that with a knife or shave it with thread or hair inside its capsule.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with an acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already those that are turned outwards and not turned inwards should be eradicated with the instrument that I will now describe to you.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A formicaria (milia) is a small, downy or fistulous elevation on the surface of the skin, occurring mainly in the forehead. When it is touched, it feels like the bite of an ant, and it usually appears around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And to treat it, take a quill from an ostrich or a vulture feather, strong and pointed, and press it onto the milium so that its circle covers all parts of it. Then revolve your hand with the quill inside the milium, pushing it down into the skin until you have eradicated the milium by its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a silver or iron needle in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The point of the needle should be drawn out to a fine, blunt tip (i.e. not perforated) and wrapped with something so that when you press it against the skin, it is smooth and its revolution causes no pain.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the milium, do so as described in the chapter on cautery of warts.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Regarding the shape of instruments used for giving circumcision:
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	"Sometimes a crucible is made of silver or brass, melted or hammered. Sometimes it is made small or large according to the one being served, for the one who serves in the care of little children should be small; and those whose backs are frail or crooked, their crucibles should be small."
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	"The shape of a large crucible is like this:"
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	"The head of the cannula's tip above which the bag is tied should be wide in this manner, and it should be at the distance where the bag is tied as shown."
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	"And the bottom end of it which is inserted into the buttocks should be blunt and rounded with precision; and on one side of it there are two cuts, and on the other side one cut, and the width of the cut should correspond to the thickness of the rays, being wider where necessary."
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	"And the bag in which medications are placed is made of bladder or sheep's skin, and its opening is one palm wide."
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	"And it should be pierced with many cuts all around so that when it is rolled up, the space between the cuts should be the thickness of a finger."
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	"And then insert a strong thread of raw linen into those cuts, or around them, and fasten it to the bag. And when the bag is placed on it, tie it tightly at the tip of the cannula between two marks with a strong knot, and then cristerize with that knot: But the quality of cristerizing with it is that you heat the medicine bag according to the quantity that can be tolerated by the patient; and make sure that it is not too hot nor too cold."
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	"And then the patient should lie on their back, raise their buttocks up and place under them a cushion on which they can lie comfortably. And then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg albumen or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; and then insert it gently into the anus, and then the assistant takes the bag and squeezes it forcefully between two hands to expel all that is in the cannula into the bowel. And then remove the cannula and the patient raises their buttocks up against the wall."
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	"And if the medicine causes a strong evacuation, hold it as long as you can. And if you sleep with it overnight, it will be more effective."
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	"But if you cauterize in cases of intestinal obstruction and evacuation is difficult, then repeat the cautery until it is healed."
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	"And if there are hemorrhoids or bleeding fistulas in the anus, then use a thin and pointed cautery, such as those with which children are cauterized."
De curacio de las plaguas.	"De curacio de las plaguas."
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	"I have already spoken in the division of the treatment of plagues what was suitable for the book, and I say thus the treatment of those with hand and medicine according to the completeness."
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	"Therefore I say that plagues are diverse according to what they are caused by, and according to the place on which case the plague occurs."
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	"And the causes by which often plagues are made are such as kidney stone, or incision of flesh or bone, or piercing with lance, or with club, or with arrow, or resembling those of many causes."
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	"But the plagues that are in the places of the body are such as plague which falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the thigh, and resembling those of the members."
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	"And I am recounting the treatment of some plagues for which that reasoning and rule are sufficient over the others."
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	"And I will begin with simple head plagues, because the memory of the composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	"So I say that when there occurs in the head a simple plague and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to kidney stone or something similar, and already the chain has struck only once and is a large plague, and you fear that having an aposteme will happen afterwards, then you perform cephalic cautery and phlebotomy at once, and do not delay; and draw out from there as much blood as possible according to the quantity of its virtue, unless some cause prohibiting phlebotomy exists, especially if the blood that has flowed from the plague is little."
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	"And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the parted plague, and guard the patient from sneezing, wind, and heavy foods."
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	"But if you prohibit any cause due to minuteness, then let him be diminished in his food and not approach meat or wine."
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	"And pause on the plague, if an aposteme occurs afterwards, then cut it open and place in it roasted rose oil or wine in which is steeped."
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	"But if it is sure of an aposteme happening afterwards, then pause on the plague, if it is fresh with its blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will recount later in a small way."
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	"And if the air has already changed that one, then pause on those injuries until they are healed."
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or caused by an incision and its edges are not well approximated due to pus, then approximate them with stitches according to my instructions on wound closure.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is already discovered from the bone and there is no retention of it but only a slight suspension, then cut that away and dress the wound with medicines appropriate for it, restoring the flesh properly instead of skin, and order the patient to be fed with foods that are easy to digest: capons and soft fruits and similar things until they are convalescent.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that is rotting and cast it out, and dress it properly.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows abundantly and it cannot be arrested by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find that it has not been cut, then cut it with a scalpel, or ligate it; and if necessary, cauterize it until the bleeding stops.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is slight; therefore, you should sprinkle this powder on them, so that they may be consolidated before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of this powder is as follows: take olive oil one part, dragon's blood three parts, and quicklime five parts; grind it all well and sift it, and fill the wound with it, and constrain it with a good dressing until it adheres to it, and coagulates with blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then press it gently from above with powders and leave it alone, without removing the dressing until it is completely healed, for if you remove the medicine too early, its effect will be lost before it has had a chance to heal.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this can be done with cautery alone when olive oil and dragon's blood are not available.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this same operation should be performed on large wounds when it is necessary to press upon them and constrain them, especially in fresh wounds with abundant blood that has not been altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially in summer time, then it is not appropriate to use this powder. Rather, treat these wounds with what was said earlier, such as applying some ointments or dusting flour mixed with water and honey on them until they gain consistency; and then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If you should encounter a small fracture in bone during surgery, then extract it with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will tell you the treatment of head fractures that are life-threatening.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds in the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and it should be treated like a simple wound on the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, there is nothing to be done except to avoid treatment of it with anything that causes great constriction, such as zinc and lead which burn like vitriol and cause contraction of the nerve.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any dressing to the wound for fear of damaging the nerve, because the substance of nerves is delicate and their continuity is connected to the brain, which is the source of power for all limbs.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if you should treat it with gentle medicines, such as washing it with rosewater or infusing it in olive oil, hot or cold, and turpentine when washed with rosewater and other minerals according to this method, then apply a damp compress.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then stitch it up or press its lips together and apply powder internally until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or has occurred on the lower part of the neck with gangrene, then pierce it in the most depressed place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery has been cut in the wound and there is bleeding, then separate it or press it to stop the flow of blood, ligature it, or cauterize it with hot irons if necessary.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the spinal cord has been severed completely or partially and the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with sutures over the bone of the spine and do not touch it; extend it gently and reduce it to its natural shape, and apply gentle traction decently, leaving it for a few days; and treat it with damp compresses that cause constriction and excitation internally until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has reached the bone and caused fracture, then percuss it and remove all fragments of bone that you can; and what cannot be removed, leave it until the wound heals and separates, and its inflammation is relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder that I have recommended for you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with the remedy that I will mention later in its proper chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Regarding wounds of the neck or similar ones when they occur between the shoulders and are caused by a slash or cut with a sword, dagger, or lance or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound caused by a lance or dagger, and its depth varies according to the weapon used, then consider whether there is wind from the wound when the patient breathes out; if so, you should know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with blood, then pause in it for the first hour with powder, and do not apply pressure to prevent blood from being retained in its depth and returning to the heart and aggravating the patient's condition, but rather use an attractive poultice and change it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if an poultice is not available, then cover the wound with cotton wool to prevent air from entering it; and make sure that the patient sleeps on the wound so that what is contained within flows out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound was inflicted and there is no spasm or trembling of the heart nor constriction of the lung, and all other conditions are good, then you should know that the wound is safe; and therefore treat it with hot compresses and other remedies until it heals.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of the wound is delayed and all this time has passed, then you should know that a fistula has already formed; therefore treat it according to its proper chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a slash with a sword or dagger and is simple on the surface of the flesh or back, then treat it with what has been mentioned for suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the bone has been reached and pieces of it have already broken off, then turn the wound and carefully try to extract those pieces if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separate, then leave them until the wound heals, as their extraction will be easier then.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And regarding other accidental wounds on the other limbs, the treatment for them is the same as what has been mentioned (for similar wounds).
De las plaguas del ventre.	Regarding abdominal wounds.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that occurs in the abdomen can be great, small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Regarding large wounds, sometimes the bowel or nerves of the bowel may protrude, causing intrusion of them and requiring delicate and precise suturing.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And small ruptures are difficult to repair by any other method, and since reduction of them is also difficult if the intrusion into its proper place is not immediately corrected, as it will widen and swell making the intrusion difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore the best rupture is moderate, as in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, unlike the two species mentioned earlier.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that abdominal suturing is done in four ways, but two of these methods are common and apply to other wounds on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And the other two methods are specific for abdominal wounds, although they also apply to other wounds.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I will now explain each method with its proper description and illustration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the bowel protrudes through it, making reduction difficult, this can happen in one of two ways: either because of the small size of the rupture as mentioned earlier, or because of inflammation of the bowel due to exposure to cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when this happens, you should then apply a poultice made of oak bark decoction or other similar plants mixed with the affected bowel until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Sometimes this poultice may contain astringents, which are better for resolving inflammation than water alone.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then moisten the bowel with water containing alum and mallows, as this helps to reduce swelling without much effort.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the reduction of the bowel is not achieved with this treatment, then carefully cut open the rupture a little using an instrument called emorroydas.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is best when it is appropriate and not a section, and there is no need to cut unnecessarily due to deficiency or lack of skill.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Regarding the instrument, here is its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One end of it is tapered and sharp, the other blunt, with a fine tip, but not too fine like a spatula, rather somewhat obtuse.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the wound is enlarged and some of the bowel protrudes, its reduction should be done according to its natural shape, in its proper place if possible, as this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the rupture is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back and elevate their buttocks higher than their head. If it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then elevate their head higher than their feet.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	"Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then keep your intention and consideration always there so that the part in which the plague is may be placed further away than the other."
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	"And also when you administer this in large or medium-sized wounds."
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	"And in small wounds, keep this preparation ready. And especially make sure that the one who ministers is between your thighs, holding the disruption entirely with their hand and adjusting the lips of it. And especially uncover from here to there so that no other cause prevents suturing."
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	"And this is the common manner of suturing: one should take the needle, or count needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and then leave from the end of the disruption of the ring finger, and stretch the needle through one side of the thread, making sure not to put the knot at both ends of the thread. And then insert it into that party from there, so that you have already joined two sides of the thread and two sides of the ciphac which is below the threads, inside which you will make those four rows."
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	"And then stretch with a double thread around the needle, and sometimes tie both parts together at once, and then join both lips and the wound by appropriate joining; and then leave the thickness of the finger and insert another needle there, and then tie it with thread as before with the first needle. And do not cease doing this if necessary with needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound."
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	"And needles should be medium in thickness and fineness, for fine needles hardly cut into the flesh, while thick ones are difficult to insert into the thread, and therefore they should be medium in both thickness and fineness."
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	"And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted too close to both ends of the thread, lest the flesh be lightly cut and the wound opens before its consolidation."
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	"And sutures should not be prolonged, so that the wound is not prohibited from healing."
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	"Next, carefully remove the points from the needles so as not to disturb the patient's sleep; then apply powdered plant extracts evenly over the sutures, which should be held firmly in place by the ends of the needles."
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	"For these suture methods using needles, it is most appropriate to use them for small wounds, as they can be secured with one or two needles or even several."
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	"The second suture method is as follows: you should administer the suture by simultaneously sewing all four extremities of the wound's edges with a single needle, ensuring that it is carefully and smoothly wrapped around each one."
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	"And when the needle has penetrated all four extremities, withdraw the needle from the first point where you began, so that the thread pulls the edges of the wound together evenly, creating a suture like one made with cloth."
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	"And pause between each stitch roughly the thickness of your little finger."
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	"And this suture is known to men."
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	"And with this suture I sewed the wound which had occurred to a man in his belly, who had been struck by a dagger, and the disruption of the wound was more than a palm's breadth, and it was extending from the bowels around two palms' breadth from the navel and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it so that the bowel which had been outside the wound returned into its place within twenty-four hours."
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	"And the wound was consolidated in the space of about fifteen days and healed; and afterwards he lived many years and regained his former health."
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	"And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and it was by miracle that he was healed, for you did not treat him with any ointment or medicine, but simply paused over the wound twice a day and washed it gently with honey water until it was healed."
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	"However, you mentioned two types of suture according to the narrative of Galen."
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	"And so you begin with the suture of the abdomen, inserting the needle from without inwards."
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	"And then with the needle penetrating into the abdomen and that same measurement following its lengthwise direction throughout the entire body, leave the end of the thread at which you inserted the needle; and make the other end of the thread penetrate from within outwards in the other extremity of the wound."
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	"And when you have done that, then make the needle penetrate again in the same extremity of the wound from without inwards; and leave the end of the thread on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity from within outwards."
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	"And make that penetration with which you make the needle penetrate into the thread in the extremity of the wound which is on the inside, so that all may penetrate."
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	"And then begin on this same side and bring together the two extremities which are of the thread on the other side, and remove the needle from the abdomen which has penetrated, and then reduce it in that abdomen and join the extremity of the thread which is on the other side with this extremity of the wound; and remove that which is on the inside of the abdomen."
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	"And do this once or twice until you have finished everything that is outside according to the example given."
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	"And the sum of this manner of sutura is that you complete it with a suture of skin with which you join the skin, so that you leave the thread once from the part of the extremity of the abdomen and leave it again until it has been completed."
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	"However, the second type of suture properly described by Galen is this: that you join it according to its half-length, as some physicians do; thus joining every part to its corresponding part by nature and applying the extremity of one to the extremity of the other, and this is done as I have recommended."
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	"When you have left the needle in the extremity of the wound near the outside, make it penetrate from without within on that same spot and leave two extremities of the thread; and then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from without within in the other two extremities of the thread."
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	"And then turn those casings around and make each one penetrate from within outwards in the other two extremities of the wound on the opposite side."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	"And this manner of suture is better than common light suture, and it is the suture about which I have previously spoken."
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	"This is Galen's speech"
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	"And some people say that suture of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so that you insert in each one a thread and begin with insertion of the needle from where it should be according to those who sew the hearts together."
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	"And know that when a rupture occurs in the middle of the abdomen, then its suture is more difficult than that of other parts of the abdomen."
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	"But the treatment of plague is judged by the treatments of other plague-like diseases."
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	"The cause of this is because when you encounter plague recently with its blood in front before the air alters it, and reduce the vein and join it and dress it appropriately, then it stops on that inflammatory powder."
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"And if the air has already altered the plague, then it stops on some of those things which are present inside that make hard callus and squeeze out the threads and consolidate skin and wound; and then treat it in this way as is the treatment of other plague-like diseases until it heals."
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	"But if the medicines are not present at that time, then it stops on it immediately, because soon after it begins to emit stench and pus, and changes its color twice a day, as you have seen, until it heals, for you do not need other medicine in many dispositions when plagues are simple."
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	"But if you fear that the plague will communicate to an injury of the main limbs, then it is necessary for you to immerse lion's wool in olive oil of good quality or in rose oil and apply it around the joints of those places and leave it on."
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	"And if there is pain or putrefaction in its veins because many times this happens, then cauterize it with black stiptic wine and especially if the putrefaction has reached the vein and an exiting penetration has been made into its concavity."
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	"And know that that which is of the great vein is of easier healing than that which is in the small veins."
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	"And it is of difficult healing because the vein which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from plague that occurs in it at all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of its size and subtlety of its body, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves."
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	"But if what proceeds from the plague is flesh, and you encounter it recently, then reduce it according to your skill with which you reduce veins equally."
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	"But if it has passed to that place and is already green or black, then stretch it with a thread dipped in pitch on the spot which is darkened by it, so that fluxes of blood may come forth, because in flesh there are veins and arteries."
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	"And then you shall cut away that which is other than this lymph, and pause two ends of the string hanging from the wound's edge outside the abscess, so that you may lessen its attraction, you must remove the covering of the fabric and emission of the arm from the abscess."
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	"Reminder of the treatment when such abscess occurs in the bowel."
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	"When such disruption occurs in the bowel and is small, it may sometimes be restored in certain individuals. For this reason, you should see him who was struck on his belly with a lance and had an abscess on the right side of the stomach, which was old and fistulous; and its treatment was accomplished with great ease."
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	"Therefore, you should follow the cure of that wound which is already confirmed in its healing, but cease to probe that part which was healed and let it rest consolidated."
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	"And since you saw that the place was consolidated, then you should consider what illness might result from this accident in his belly; and he did not change at all because of this misfortune, remaining in his usual good health, eating and drinking well, and even entering into baths and exercising as usual."
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	"And already some experienced men have said that when an abscess occurs in the bowel and is small, it should be tied up in this manner: take frogs with large heads, and exactly place both lips of the wound on either side of one of those frogs that has its mouth open, so that when it takes hold of them and stretches its mouth wide, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve."
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	"And also place another frog near the first one, and do not cease doing this until you have used as many frogs as there is of the entire abscess."
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	"And then reduce that [the wound] and close it with the abscess, leaving those heads attached inside the bowel until it is healed; and there will be no harm or damage."
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	"And it is also possible to tie the bowel with a subtle thread made from the gut of an animal, since this is thinner; and this is how you should do it: take the end of these gut threads, making sure it is well cleaned, and then tie the end of it around itself, wrapping it; and then insert that thread through needles and sew it together with the bowel, reducing it in its opening."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	"And this manner of suturing with frogs is nothing but a way of trusting and hoping [for healing]."
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	"But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small bowels because then there will be only a subtle scar left, not complete healing."
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	"Regarding the treatment of fistulas."
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every ulcer and abscess, when it bursts open and becomes ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and does not consolidate, continually throws out pus but is not cut off, then universally it is called a fistula, and we call it that same ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And truly a fistula is a hollowed out and closed off nodule, hard and white with it there is no pain and having concavity just like the concavity of a bird's foot; and therefore that ulcerous scar is named thus, that is bird's-foot.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in humans that ulcers are moist which throw out pus; but soon the moisture is cut off in some hours
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Sometimes this moisture is thick and scant and gross and subtle
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said before in the division, when you mentioned ulcers, that every ulcer which does not heal nor is on naked skin, this is because of one of these nine causes: either for lack of blood in the body; or for malice of the ulcer; or because between it and its lips there is hard cartilage preventing the growth of flesh; or because it is too large; or because that ulcer in itself is putrid and the matter which is transmitted to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine used for its cure was inappropriate; or when corruption occurs in the region, and there is pestilence; or because of the property of the region, as in Saragossa, where difficult digestion of illnesses occurs, and delay in the healing of an abscess happens by nature; or because there are bones in it, either one or many.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	All those causes have already been shown, along with the symptoms of each and their cure using medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary that I should make you aware of the treatment for fistula, which is done by operation with a knife.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; for some are fistulas which connect to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the bladder, or to the bowel, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the joints composed by composition as of the hand and foot; and some of them open into the vicinity of the main member and similar ones.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore those fistulas which are of this kind are difficult to heal and do not receive treatment, and occupation with them is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach those places that I have mentioned, and you hope and trust in its cure, and you want to arrive at knowledge of it, then take a probe or an iron hook, and if the fistula goes straight, then explore it with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of subtle lead, for lead by nature of its body is light and curved according to its tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has many holes, it will not be possible for you to examine it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the bowels through its bowels, for the moisture with which you cleanse that one goes towards the other bowels and runs from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And therefore ask carefully, according to which manner you may know if here you have the bone or nerve, and it is the concavity of the long-distance fistula or nearby, or is a fistula to whose mouth bowels are opened and is above all with the sum of your strength, with your examination, with which you examine the patient, and the invention of the pain towards your compression with the hand on the place, and similar signs and accidental causes concerning the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you shall have stood upon all those causes with true stay, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider now if it is apparent fistula near or in sound place, long-distance from junction, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which I gave to you and said.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you dry the fistula according to what was said before of its narration, and hold this which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and that which is born in the mouth of the flesh or of the bile and similar things, and cure that entrance which shall be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of long-distance profundity, and is according to rectitude, then it behooves that you insert that in the perineum as far as to you shall be possible, and properly cleanse that of all its corrupt flesh; and properly administer cloths wrapped in acute medicines, and introduce those into the concavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times within that the acute medicine may corrode all that is raw in the concavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And properly restore it with ointments which engender sound flesh within until it shall be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	"However, if it does not heal with this, then cauterize according to what we have advised."
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	"If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be certified as such, then you should inquire there and dry it according to what we have advised, unless there is any prohibition due to a vein, nerve, or main member, as we have said."
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness, then scrape away that within until all the corruption is removed; afterwards cure it with this, so that it may be healed."
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	"And if it does not heal and throws out arm as before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; therefore open up carefully again and thoroughly examine its cause and cleanse it with your strongest medicine, and afterwards restore it."
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	"And thus if it is healed, that is good. But if not, then know that the corruption is in the deep and distant parts of the body, which has not been reached; therefore in this case there is nothing else to do but leave it alone."
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	"And if the corrupt bone is small or cannot be pulled out, then pull it out with delicate forceps suitable for that purpose."
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	"And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any behind due to any fear of your strength."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	"But if there is any difficulty due to humidity or moisture, and there is no fear of harm or mistake in its incision, then incise those membranes or flesh that are here, and deliver the bones."
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	"But if there is no opportunity to remove the bones at that time, then place a plug in the wound and seal it with plaster so that the wound may not close up around those flesh bones and membranes; keep watch over the wound so that it does not heal until the section which you have incised in your operation is firm."
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	"Therefore, if you fear that the wound may close up before healing is complete, apply a poultice made of olive oil or Egyptian pitch or one of the other ointments to keep it open until the membranes are separated from the bones and the attraction of the bone ends is facilitated."
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	"But if it is a large bone like the thighbone or shinbone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape off only that part which is affected by the blackness and corruption, and immediately restore the plug."
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	"But if a large part of the bone is corrupted and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close up that wound and incise into the place where the corruption has penetrated; then cure it until it is healed."
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	"And I recommend to you that which pertains to a man regarding his shinbone, namely to place a bandage or splint on it as an aid in your operation."
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	"A young man of about thirty years happened to have pain in his shinbone due to a swelling below the knee, which extended into the flesh and reached the bone; it was an abscess with a large amount of pus, not caused by any external injury."
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	"And so the time was prolonged with that abscess due to the error of physicians who delayed its opening until a great deal of matter had accumulated; and its cure was suspended until the thighbone became fistulous, and many openings were made in it which discharged much pus and humidity from the body."
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	"And then after a long time of being cared for by many physicians over two years without any benefit or skill on their part, I was called."
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	"And when I saw the thighbone of that man and the matter flowing out of it through those openings, his whole body was already emaciated and his complexion was yellowish."
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	"And then I inserted a probe into one of those openings and reached the bone with it."
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	"Then you should examine all the openings carefully and find out which ones communicate with all parts of the thighbone."
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	"And then I took hold of the thighbone and incised one of those openings in order to discover a part of the bone which I found to be earthy, corrupted, and blackened; and a part of the thighbone was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the muscle."
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	"And then show what has been discovered and prepared from the bone laid bare to me."
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	"And I showed that it was not in the bone itself but only in that corruption which had been removed and closed up; you had already removed it."
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	"Then apply the restoration of the plug with a medicinal ointment for a long time until it becomes consolidated."
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	"Then you should reopen and lay bare again over the bone according to the first opening, and find that there is continuous corruption with the bone."
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	"Then close up what appears to you of that corruption, and then apply the cure and restoration for it, but it will not be restored."
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	"And then open it up again and do not cease cutting into the bone little by little particularly until you cut around about a palm's breadth of it, and remove its marrow with it; and then apply medicines to restore it, and it will be easily consolidated and healed."
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	"And there is no need for iteration in the operation and section of it except for the disposition of its weakness and the poverty of its tolerance and fear of death, because it always has accidie from too much evacuation or bad syncope."
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	"Therefore, when it is healed, it will be completely healed and there will be nothing in place of the hard bone and flesh. And its disposition within its body will be good and it will return to its natural strength; and it will be converted into its former state without causing any opposition in walking or harm from any cause."
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	"But if the bone is prominent in place of the flesh, then you should section it in this manner: take linen and strengthen that at the end of the projecting bone, and command someone to extend that outwards; then pause that first bandage made of thick wool; then bind that over the flesh which is near the bone, and extend its extremity so as to draw back the flesh from those parts, and uncover the flesh where you want to cut so that the saw does not touch it."
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	"And place a piece of wood or table beneath the bone appropriately, for when you do this, it is prevented that the saw may cut into the corrupted flesh."
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	"And the sawing must be done little by little over that corrupted place because if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and it does not appear on its surface to the touch, then it will have to be sawn open again."
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	"If the bone is corrupted but not prominent, then one part is continuous with another and the corruption is in its middle or at some other part of it. Then uncover the flesh completely from all sides; next place wood beneath, and cut into that first part where the corruption is found until the sawing continues through to the other part."
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	"And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said."
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	"If the corruption is at the junction, then cut into that corrupted junction and saw through the bone where it continues with the other part."
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	"And if from the corruption it goes to the continuity of two junctions, then it is not in the bone but rather in the flesh."
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	"If the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless you must discover the corruption however it appears to you, then scrape it away and cleanse it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and with every sinew make it straight if it does not oppose any vein or nerve."
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	You should know what kinds of chisels and saws are appropriate for cutting these bones, as they vary according to the location, preparation, size, fineness, greatness, smallness, hardness, and rarity of the bones; therefore, you must prepare suitable tools for each type of operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Know that this operation requires you to have knowledge about the type of tool you need; when you have extensive study and experience in the methods of this art, and are knowledgeable about the treatment of illnesses, then you will already know what is appropriate for each tool regarding every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will find at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you should have with their simple names, which you will use for your practice on others.
Forma de serra:	**Saw shape:**
Forma de autra serra:	"Another way to operate:"
Forma de autra serra:	Otra manera de operar:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Otra forma de una gran operación
Forma de ray:	Forma de rayo
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	El extremo de este rayo debe tener forma como la de una llave de estrella, y sus puntas deben ser como las puntas del Alfabeto Stegeman.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is not necessary that they be confined to the heads of joints when they are corrupted or the mouth is very large.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma de un rastrillo mayor que los otros
Forma de razori menor:	"Forma de una hoja de afeitar pequeña"
Forma de razori lat:	"Hoja de afeitar ancha"
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Otra forma de sierra adecuadamente hecha: que sea arqueada en su parte superior y afilada como un cuchillo de hierro, y su miembro inferior esté adecuadamente hecho como un punzón.
Forma de lu:	Forma de él
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma de hoja de afeitar con concavidad
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Otra forma de hoja de afeitar sutil
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Otra forma de hoja de afeitar con extremo curvado
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Forma de hoja de afeitar pequeña parecida a una lengua
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	"Forma de cortador utilizado para hacer incisiones en los huesos"
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Otra forma menor de cortador
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Otra forma de cortador; este parece una lanza y su extremo está serrado, se utiliza en muchos lugares en la relación de los huesos.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Forma de lanza adecuada para la relación de aquellos que son perforados por los huesos
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	Y su extremo es triangular y puntiagudo.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	Y está hecho de hierro de la India, y así como todas las causas que hemos dicho de hojas de afeitar e instrumentos para hacer incisiones y sierras.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	De la incisión de extremo puntiagudo y de la sierra de huesos.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Las extremidades se pueden perder por causas intrínsecas o extrínsecas. Si después de haber medicado la corruption y no ha habido curación, a veces la corrupción puede avanzar hacia el miembro sin ninguna causa aparente, entonces es necesario hacer una incisión en ese miembro dentro del hueso donde se encuentra la corrupción para que el malestar desaparezca mediante la muerte o la extirpación de la parte corrupta, que es el mayor defecto del miembro.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	Y la señal de aquellos a quienes les ha ocurrido es que el miembro está hecho negro dentro donde sea cortado o quemado por fuego, ya sea porque se haya perdido la carne, o porque se haya perdido cerca de la negrura donde la podredumbre haya avanzado hacia el interior del miembro y haya alcanzado todo el cuerpo; entonces es necesario hacer una incisión en ese miembro.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Y así como, si la causa de la corrupción es una percusión provocada por algunas causas venenosas, como el escorpión marino, la víbora o la rata, entre otras cosas.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	Y si la corrupción o la percusión se produce en la extremidad del dedo, entonces debes hacer una incisión en el dedo y no permitir que la corrupción avance hacia la mano.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Y así como si ocurre en la mano, entonces debes hacer una incisión en la raíz del pulgar y no permitir que la corrupción avance hacia el brazo.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	Y si es en lugar de ese, entonces debes hacer una incisión en el brazo en la articulación del codo.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	Y si pasa más allá de la corrupción y a veces se acerca al codo, entonces es la muerte del malestar. Y administrar cualquier otro medio para su cura sería una cantidad de virtud.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do for the foot when corruption enters within it, then you incise that into one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if the disease reaches the tip of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it can enter into the anus, then you incise the buttock within the junction of the anus.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already reached the anus, then there is nothing else to do but let it run its course and allow the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way to incise the member or cut it is that you stretch the ligament at the part where you want to make the incision, and stretch another ligament above the place. And extend one ligament to the parts outside, and extend another ligament on top of it; and separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments with a knife wide enough so that all the flesh is exposed; and then it should be incised or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary to cover the wounds with lint from all sides so that it does not touch the place where it was, and that proper healing and suppuration may occur.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if bleeding occurs while performing the operation, then you should cauterize the place carefully, or put some powders that are able to stop the bleeding on it; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then wrap the member with a bandage at the place where it is convenient, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I tell you this that happened to a man on his foot, this incident which you and I are discussing, which is the fourth one, occurred to him on the blackness of his foot with burning that was like the combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurred in his toe and then spread throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared to go ahead with the treatment since he was in such pain and burning on the member, and he incised that foot at the joint, and it healed well.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	That corruption remained for many days on his finger of the hand indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and that superfluity began to spread around with what I had put on the hand for medicine, specifically the cleansing of his body; but the superfluity did not spread, instead it began to go towards another finger until it reached the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to incise his hand, but I did not want to do that hoping for the spreading of that superfluity, and more so since I feared the death of the incision of his hand, because the power of the disease was on the skin.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And even though he despaired of me, he returned to his land and it came to my knowledge that that man prepared himself and incised his entire hand, and it healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not written this narrative except in order to help with what can be learned from this disease, and that there may be significance for which it is significant and according to which it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Concerning the treatment of sinuses and the quality of enemas with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	"When an abscess occurs on some fleshy member and the space of the abscess extends to form a collection of pus, and it is suddenly burst and perforated, and the pus exits from it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it appears thin like a piece of cloth, and has not yet reached putrefaction, and does not impress itself on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and not fistula."
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	"If however the space is prolonged until corruption impresses itself on some member, then it is called a fistula."
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	"And its treatment consists of cutting away that entire skin layer as it is turned up, especially when it is thin and looks like cloth, and ensuring that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption."
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	"But if you hope that the skin will adhere and that corruption has not yet reached its final stage, and there is pus issuing from it, then you treat it with a clyster."
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	"And when considering the sinus, if it is large and the arm that comes out has a fetid odor, then you treat it with an Egyptian clyster made from oil, vinegar, and honey in equal parts, ground together into a vessel and cooked over the fire until it reaches the consistency of honey."
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	"And then you take what is necessary of it and dissolve it in water and honey; and apply this to the sinus with a syringe, stretching the opening of the sinus, and leave the medication in it for about two hours."
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	"And then extract it with a sponge; do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the putrefaction removed."
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	"And sometimes it is washed with water of ashes when this medication is not present. And if you take the ash of grapes and put it on the water, then collect that and apply it to the sinus until you are satisfied that it is clean."
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	"And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicament or the water of ashes, then apply a clyster with warm water mixed with honey three times, and afterwards apply one with wine and honey mixed together, because it has the property of cleansing and washing away corruption; wine also helps adhere the sinus, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness."
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	"And once you have done this several times and are satisfied that the sinus has been cleaned out, then apply a clyster with something that promotes flesh growth in it."
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	"And take some of the delicate diachylon and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine, which you will use to wash the wound. Or you may also apply other medicaments and ointments that have properties that were already described in the treatise on ointments."
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	"And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and does not allow for the insertion of the clyster tube, then gradually dilate it with a small iron instrument, pausing from time to time and applying Egyptian or basilicon ointment around it until it has been sufficiently dilated."
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	"And likewise, if the opening is too wide, then narrow it with a suture and leave enough space for the insertion of the clyster without any addition."
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	"And if the opening of the sinus from which the arm is elevated above is located below, then dry it with pus as close to the area where the arm passes in order to prevent coarctation and allow for greater movement of the arm."
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	"And if it is not possible to dry the sinus near the elbow using pus alone as you wish, then prepare the limb with preparations such that the arm moves freely according to your satisfaction and without any retention of the arm."
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	"And apply consolidating medicaments paused on gauze over the sinus in order to extend those onto a piece of linen."
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	"And the linen should be of sufficient size to cover all of the sinus; then, using forceps, incise on the right side of the sinus opening an oblong slit somewhat larger than the sinus opening. Then extend ointment lions over another piece of linen according to the size of the slit and apply it over that at a distance from the sinus opening in order to alleviate the movement of the arm from it and not to have the linen too large, but only for a few days once."
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	"However, that which is placed over the sinus opening should remain in place at all times to prevent anything from entering into it."
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	"And so you may know if what runs from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or undigested:"
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And now consider the location of that sinew, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And since your treatment is prolonged in this manner, you will see that the material placed over the opening of the sinew has already adhered or acquired some adherence. Therefore, three days later, gently detach it; but when you do detach it, immediately change the cloth for another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the sinew a rather long space has grown filled with subtle virus, then do not despair of its adherence, because the healing of it will be appropriate, for there are some people in whom the generation of flesh is slow in their wounds, and others in whom it occurs rapidly.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if after many days it is still not possible to draw the sinew together, then you will know that the sinew has not adhered. But if the adherence of the sinew is delayed and prolonged as a result, then adjust the dryness of the medications; for even though the medications may be moist in their substance and virtue, they should be dried like thin ointment when there is an appropriate amount of addition of cypress resin.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last remedy that you should use is to take some thin ointment and dissolve it in rose oil; then mix it with old vinegar according to its substance, and apply that ointment over the wound, using it gently.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And similarly in that action, when there is no ointment available, you may use honey instead. When it enters the wound and becomes thickened, then apply it gently. Or you can take myrrh and aloe and frankincense, grind all of them together and powder them over melted wax, and then spread this mixture on cloth and apply it to the sinew. Then spread that same honey which has been cooked until it thickens, powder it onto a cloth, and apply it gently to the sinew.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes it is appropriate to use long and sharp irises (and they are called irises) along with aloe vera and ground frankincense centaurium. Use these simple ingredients either separately or combined, grind them together and sift them, then powder them over the melted wax which has been cooked. Apply this mixture gently.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the curve of the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, know that the corruption is in its head, and then make an inquiry among the bones or other hard members or ligaments. Then treat it with a fistula cure, as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	To treat calluses, broken nails, and added digits by cutting them off and dividing them.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	A callus is an aposteme that appears under the nail of the thumb or another finger, often growing larger on other fingers. When it prolongs and its treatment is less desirable, it is either a cauterized aposteme or corruption, which penetrates and corrupts the root of the nail. Sometimes it corrupts the entire digit, penetrating to the bone, causing a foul odor, and darkening the tip of the finger.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so, when you have that which we have said in the division and your cure does not conform to it, then you must cut with iron all the superfluity that remains of the nail and immediately cauterize the wound near it, because cautery is very helpful in this matter.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions to the nail begin to compress the flesh at its sides, causing pain and discomfort there, then you must carefully remove a thin layer of the angle of the nail that causes the pain, elevate it slightly, cut into the flesh easily with iron, and pause over what remains of the flesh with burning corrosive medicines until all is removed. Then cure it with ointment until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then you must cut into the bone and remove it, because no time will heal when the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the corruption and corruption spread to the finger, then you must cut into it at one of its joints according to how it is remembered, and cure it until it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail receives percussion or friction and painful sensation occurs there, then you must first flebotomize the affected area. Then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse section from top to bottom, making sure that the section does not reach the flesh near the nail. Otherwise, you will cause acute pain in the affected area due to the excessive, superfluous flesh becoming inflamed there. Then treat the area with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	A finger joint, which is born in many men, is often fleshy throughout and has a loud noise in the bones or a loud sound in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	Some are born at the junction of the joint, or it is the birth of one of the joints of the said fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in some joints of the finger does not harm, and this which is born at the junction is often painful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And those that are born fleshy have an easy section, so you should cut into them with a wide spatula at their root.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But that which is born at the root of the joint has a difficult cure; therefore beware of its amputation.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But that which is born in a finger between the joints requires you to first cut into the flesh of it with a round incision down to the bone. Then saw it off with one of those suitable saws for this purpose and then treat it until it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But the consolidation that occurs in the said fingers between their joints viewed or by nature of the person who was born with it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning with fire, or by likeness, then you must cut off that consolidation until the said return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their skin layers of linen soaked in rose oil so that they are not easily consolidated, and separate them or place a thin sheet of lead between them so that it may be consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of these fingers at the palm, then cut off that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incision of veins, there are three types.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose, and they are rolled-up thick veins full of superfluous black bile which come out onto the surface of the limbs of the body. They most often occur in the chambers, especially in those of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore you should administer purgation of the body with black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But their cure with iron is done in two ways: one way is to cut into them and draw out that black blood; the other way is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of it is done in this way: first wet the chamber at its beginning with cold water until the thick blood is resolved, which is a kind of mucus from the chamber. Then bind the chamber of the affected person to the upper part of the thigh up to the lower part of the bone using a bandage. Then cut into the vein at one place or two or three with a wide incision, and then raise the black blood with the tie-up hand from below the chamber outwards and upwards until as much blood as you desire has been let out and that will suffice for the virtue of the complaint.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then ligature it, and command him to abstain from foods that engender black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full, as needed for the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the raising of them is done in this way: you who shave the chamber of the affected person if it has hair on it and then put it in warm water. Then wet the chamber with cold water until it reddens and the veins become prominent; or have him exercise strongly if there is no bath present, until the member becomes hot.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the cord in the right of the vein at its length or end near the bone, or at its lower part near the tendon.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then tie the cord with hooks and strip off the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch. This is how you know its appearance when it inclines somewhat towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then after evacuating, tie that white string which is a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place below it that red ray so that it may be elevated and removed from the cord and suspend it with a golden hook.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another incision nearby that incision at three places and then strip off the cord from above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise it and cut into it with another incision near the tendon, and then extract it and raise it until it has been removed through the first incision. Then extract it from the incision that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you have extracted it from the incision that is above all the incisions so that all of it has been removed; and then close the wound.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you are unable to extract and elevate it, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie it up and remove it, or place below it that red ray and turn your hand all around until it has been removed.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be sure not to break it for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate that vein and harm will come upon the patient through that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of it has been removed, then place over the wound soft wool moistened with rose oil and unguent and olive oil that is not rosy. Then care for him until he is healed
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	"And if the vein is constricted with a twist that requires unwinding at the affected parts, and it is not as straight as we have said, then you must cut through all the twisted parts of it and where it is coiled, and then raise it up using forceps."
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	"And be careful with your section so that you do not incise the vein and harm it, because it will be difficult for you to elevate it; therefore, use caution in this."
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	"Form of the incision where the vein is cut:"
Forma de unci orp:	"Shape of a curved cut:"
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	"It is not too acute like the curved cuts and it does not have a sharp point so that it does not harm the vein; rather, it has sufficient thickness and flexibility, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; as we have said, there is some excess thickness in it."
De extraccio venae cruris.	"Extraction of the vein from the leg:"
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	"This vein is generated in the cavities in the tail areas, such as the one called 'Al-Atiq' in Arabic lands and in dry, barren lands with little tenderness where there is neither grass nor shrubbery."
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	"And sometimes it is generated in other places of the body besides the cavities."
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	"And its formation is due to corruption that comes from the tail, just like poison from within serpents and worms and crabs and worms generating between the tail and the flesh."
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	"And the sign of the suspicion of its arrival is from this vein that occurs in the cavity with violent inflammation; and around that place it becomes swollen, and from there begins to come out the vein that appears like a shrub."
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	"And then, when the extremity appears, it is necessary that you wrap around that one a lead weight whose weight is that of one sixth of a dragon, and knot it and leave the lead hanging from the cavity."
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	"And whenever some cause makes it go outside towards other parts, wrap that in lead and knot it."
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	"And if it is not prolonged, then you cut off a part of it and wrap the remainder; do not cut that with a sharp edge inside because if you do, it will contract and go into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in that place and bad ulcers."
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	"Therefore it is necessary that it be treated gradually and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the body, without leaving any cause of it inside the flesh."
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	"And some men have had this vein come out that is as long as twenty-four palms, and I have heard of one that was thirty palms."
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	"And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the ray into the wound of it and pierce that with a long probe along the body until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to that place for several days with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses."
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	"And sometimes this vein has many branches, and especially when it appears at the junction of the thigh or in the thigh, and comes out with many openings, and each opening has its own branch."
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	"And then cure that as we have said in the division and with what is written above."
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	"Concerning cutting for worms generated under the skin, which is called bovine illness."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	"This illness is named bovine madness in some lands because many times it appears in oxen and is rarely found in humans; it begins between the spine and flesh, spreading throughout the body, causing pain and weakness, and is evident through discomfort moving member to member until the spine breaks."
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	"Generation of it occurs by putrefaction of certain humors, like that which happens with worms and serpents and earthworms and ascariasis in the belly."
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	"It is feared because when it reaches the head and goes to the heart, it causes great trembling in the body and enters and destroys it; this happens many times."
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	"And therefore when you want to cure that and remove it, then its motion and appearance must be felt in the sensation; then you should grasp what is above it and what is below it with ligature and constraint, and press it dry and extract that."
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if it is in the flesh and not on the surface, then you should apply a cautery with fire to the place where it resides; the greatest fear is corruption of it by which it corrupts the place, as we have said."
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	"And if you wish that being to reach the head near the heart, then grasp above the eyebrow with strong constriction and press it dry, extracting it; and the patient should cleanse his body with medicines that evacuate corrupt humors, avoiding foods that cause putrefaction."
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	"De Sectione Super Aegritudinem Naffir." This is a phrase in Latin that could be translated as "On the Operation Against the Disease Naffir." It appears to be a title for a medical text or a section of one, with "nafir" possibly being an Arabic term referring to some kind of ailment.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	"This illness is called in our land 'nafir,' and it is pain that comes into certain members, and it changes from member to member." This suggests that "nafir" refers to an unspecified type of migrating pain or discomfort that affects different parts of the body. The use of "nostra terra" implies that this text was written in Catalan-speaking region.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	"And you have already seen it as I will describe to you." This is a continuation from the previous sentence, indicating that the speaker assumes that the listener has some familiarity with the condition they are discussing and will now provide further details about it.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	"You were called to see a woman patient in a village, and you discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation on the vein of the elbow; after about an hour had passed, you saw that inflammation move like this: it went forward as if it were alive and moved from place to place, but rather slowly, as if it were liquid silver running here and there." This description suggests that the author witnessed a migrating inflammation or infection in the woman's arm vein.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	"And then pain came from that place and it became fixed in the muscle; indeed it remained there for about an hour." This continues the description of the migrating inflammation: after moving around for some time, the pain eventually settled in a specific location, the muscle.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	"And then it moved to the other side of the body and reached the other arm."
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	"And then recount to me how he turned around throughout his body according to what I saw; and he was too amazed by the change in him and the swiftness of member to member."
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	"I had already seen something similar in my eyes according to that manner, however I saw much more pain being exchanged from member to member."
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	"But I didn't see that in the eyes as with the woman."
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	"And you don't think it is because the woman was old, having a dry body and visible veins, and in this appearance there was that exchanged windiness."
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	"And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this recoil in those who are pleasing and have moist bodies with veins veiled."
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	"And as you wish the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to the eye as we have said, then you press upon him gently and cease suddenly and quickly over that spot where that choked windiness has exited, and cauterize the place."
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	"But if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure that with exercise of the body and with what drives out windiness, and treat those with stinking pills and pills of saffron and similar things."
De extraccio de sagetas.	"On Extraction of Arrows."
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	"Arrows vary according to their types and the parts of the body where they strike, for they differ in that some have large points, others small, concave, or blunt, which are solid; some have three edges, and others have tongues; still others have stars."
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	"As for those that strike the limbs and organs, there are two ways: either they pierce the main limbs such as the brain, heart, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and their equivalents; therefore when they strike one of these members and appear to be fatal signs, which I will explain later, then you should avoid removing that arrow in those cases where death is imminent. But if no such signs appear and the arrow is not deeply embedded in the member, then remove it and treat the wound."
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	"And the signs of brain injury include: when an arrow strikes and penetrates the bone, and exits from the fontanelle which is above the brain, causing sudden intense pain, blindness, dizziness, ringing in the ears, inflammation, swelling of the tongue, confusion and vomiting bile. Then the speech is suddenly interrupted and destroyed, and a white humid fluid like dust comes out from the wound site, resembling the consistency of water."
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	"And therefore if you see these signs appear, then you should refrain from attempting treatment and removing the arrow unless it is external."
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	"But when an arrow strikes the heart near the left nipple and it is firmly embedded in hard flesh and not soft, then there will be a sudden decrease in pulse movement like that of blood. Then black blood flows from the wound site, chill spreads to the extremities, cold sweat appears on the forehead, fainting occurs; therefore know that death will come suddenly without warning."
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	"And when an arrow strikes the lung, there is frothy blood sputum from the wound site. The vessels near the neck become congested, the patient's complexion changes, and they exhale a large breath or gasp for air with great effort."
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	"And if an arrow strikes the pleura which is in the chest near the ribs, then there will be pain close to the little lungs. Then the breath becomes rapid with intense pain and sighing, and all the members of the muscles become rigid."
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	"And if an arrow strikes the stomach, then there will be vomiting of undigested food from the wound site."
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	"And if an arrow strikes the abdomen and is embedded within it, then there will be some opening of the wound site or tearing of tissue or intestine which is disrupted. There is no hope in the treatment nor extraction of the arrow."
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	"And if an arrow strikes the bladder and urine exits externally, then there will be leakage of urine from the wound site. Then there is sudden pain over the wound; therefore know that it is fatal."
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	"But other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, spinal column, collarbone, thigh, knee and their counterparts are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not venomous."
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	"And I recommend this to you as something I have seen regarding these arrows, so that you may use it as guidance for your treatment."
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	"The reason is that when a man was struck by an arrow in the lachrymal bone of his cheek near the root of his nose, and I extracted it from the other side through the ear canal, he healed without any injury to his cheek."
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	"And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in the grey of his cheekbone near the eyelid. The arrow was already hidden and only a small extremity with which it adhered to its shaft remained. It was a large, sharp arrow of the type used by the Turks, with a lion-shaped head that did not have ears."
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	"And the Jew healed without any harm or injury to his cheek."
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	"And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had struck his throat. It was an Arabic arrow with ears on it. Then I incised over that between two guides and it was already submerged in his throat. Then I carefully extracted it with forceps and the Christian healed."
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	"And I extracted another arrow from a man which had struck his abdomen. I thought that he would die from it. But since thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to his good constitution, I incised over the arrow and extracted it with forceps, and he healed without any harm."
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	"I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck his back and the wound had healed over it. Then after about seventy years, the arrow was expelled from the root of his thigh."
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	"I saw a woman in whom an arrow struck her abdomen and the wound healed over within it. Her condition did not change in any way, and she did not suffer harm to any of her natural functions."
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	"I saw another man who was struck by an arrow in his face and the wound had healed over and the arrow head had broken off without causing much pain. Many others are similar to this."
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	"I extracted the arrow from the chief of the king's guards which had struck him in the middle of his nose and had already deviated slightly to the right. The entire arrow was hidden."
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	"And I was called for his treatment almost immediately after the wound from the arrow entry happened within three days."
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	"And then I withdrew the arrow from the wound very carefully; and then I examined it with my subtle fingers, but did not feel it; yet he felt its puncture left behind in his right ear."
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	"I applied the plaster to the place with healing and digestive power, ensuring that the location was accurate so as not to appear too close to the arrow's wound."
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	"No accident occurred at the site where the arrow had pierced it; I continued applying the plaster there for several days without any accidents occurring. Meanwhile, the wound healed and the patient's condition improved over many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and recalled this to me."
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	"And then I applied a caustic corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it opened up. And with my fingers I examined that, and withdrew the tip of the arrow gently, which adhered to the shaft."
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	"And then I applied the caustic medicine to the opening of the wound until I saw clearly the tip of the arrow appear. And I spent time on this for the space of four months."
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	"And then after the wound had healed and I was able to introduce tweezers into it, and hold it firmly without causing any damage, at that point I ceased my subtle efforts and ingenuity on that matter. And one day I began to extract it using tweezers made of down feathers according to the method described later in this chapter. After extracting it, I restored the wound."
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	"And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, but I restored it and the wound healed completely, and the patient was cured entirely without any lingering issue."
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	"And I tell you this story about the extraction of some arrows because it may serve as an example and indication of what I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and its definitions are not understood by mere narration nor comprehended by this book alone."
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	"And the wise craftsman compares little things with great ones, and that which is present with that which is absent. And he finds new operations and new instruments necessary for the descent of foreign causes when they occur."
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	"And therefore I say that arrows are not ejected from the members into which they have pierced except in two ways: either by attraction of the place where it has entered, or by the contrary movement of the other part."
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	"And that which is ejected by the place where it entered is either an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location, and it is thrown out."
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	"And if it does not obey extraction at the time when it is cut, then you should leave it for some days until the flesh around it softens and its attraction and exit are alleviated."
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	"And similarly if it is stuck in bone and does not obey extraction, then leave it for some days and repeat the attempt each day with attraction and movement, and it will be ejected."
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	"And if it still does not obey extraction after some days, then you must bore around the arrow in that bone with a subtle drill until the place is widened by the arrow, and then extract it."
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	"And if the arrow has penetrated into one of the ventricles of the brain in the bone of the head and some of those accidents appear which I have mentioned, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it there until the patient's condition is equalized over several days; for if the arrow reaches the cistern, death will not be prolonged."
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	"And if the arrow has only pierced the surface of the bone and not entered the cistern, but the illness remains for several days without any cause of those accidents occurring, then you must use ingenuity in attracting both the arrow and the wound."
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	"But if it is deeply embedded and does not obey extraction, then you should use drills around the arrow as we have described, and afterwards cure the wound until it heals."
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	"But if the arrow has already disappeared into the flesh and is hidden from sensation, then you should search for it with a probe. And if you feel it, then attract it with suitable instruments for attracting it."
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	"And if you cannot reach it due to the narrowness of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein in its way, then open up the wound until it is widened enough for the arrow to be extracted."
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	"And if the ear has been pierced with which it is held, then cut away the flesh in which it is embedded on both sides using all your skill; and work on that, whether you can accomplish the removal of the flesh in a fracture of the ears or in torsion of those until you succeed."
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	"And when you perform the extraction of the arrow wherever it may be, then use torsion of your hand and forceps on all sides until it obeys. And do so with utmost subtlety that the arrow is not broken and that it can be extracted with ease."
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	"And if you cannot succeed in extracting it at that time, then leave it for some days until the surrounding wounds have healed, and then try again when it has eased."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	"But if you encounter difficulty in the flow of blood, then administer what we have said regarding treatment in its chapter."
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	"And preserve your skill in incising veins or nerves or sinews, and use ingenuity in every possible way to remove the arrow. And do so with ease, calmness, slowness, and steadfastness as I have mentioned and recommended."
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	"And thus when you contract the arrow for that purpose, the illness will follow the figure according to which the case of the arrow entered it, for it is more beneficial."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	"But if this is not possible, then administer what is possible according to the figures."
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	"But if arrows are ejected due to the other side being opened, or if some wound has already occurred in those surrounding it, or if there is swelling around the tip of the arrow due to inflammation above the wound and its emergence is prominent, then cut into that. And make the section according to the amount which the forceps grasp; and then attract it, for it will be easy to extract."
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	"But if it is retained in the bone, then twist the limb in opposition until the arrow presses on the bone, and widen it from both sides, and then extract it."
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	"And otherwise leave it for several days, and then try again until it is ejected."
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	"And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then push it out with it."
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	"But if the shaft has broken off and you wish to administer impulse, then insert that [the concave instrument] if it is blunt, such that its concavity enters the end of the arrow, and then push it out with it."
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	"But if the arrow is concave, then push it out with a strong instrument entering into it, for the arrow will be eased by that."
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	"And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh in which there is a vein, if this is possible for you, and then treat it with what is appropriate."
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And if the arrow has struck bone, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is close such that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut into it, then cut into it and guard against incision of veins or nerves, and extract it, and sew up the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed."
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	"Form of forceps upon which arrows are drawn:"
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	"The ends of them resemble the beak of a bird, which is made serrated when they grasp the arrow in order not to let it slip."
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	"And of those there are many kinds: large ones for larger arrows, few ones for smaller arrows, and medium ones according to the size and thickness of the feather."
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	"Form of concave impeller at this end shaped like a bird's feather to ease the insertion of the arrow into it, and propulsion of that sound:"
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	"Form of propelling from the blunt end."
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	"Like a reed, so that it may ease the insertion into the concave arrow and be propelled with it."
De fleubotomia de las venas.	"Of phlebotomy of veins."
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	"The veins for phlebotomy are thirty in number, of which sixteen are in the head: two pulsating veins near the ears called 'aurels'; two herbs appearing on both temples; two veins in the ducts of both eyes called 'aspicients'; a vein prepared at the middle of the forehead and another at the tip of the nose; two veins on the neck; two veins above the upper lip, two veins below the lower lip (these are called 'algelics'), and two veins on either side of the tongue."
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	"However, the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five: of these one is cephalic and is located on the wild side (the outer side); the people call it 'the vein of the head'. The median vein is also called 'midline vein', and is composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic. The basilica is a vein that is located on the domestic side (inner side) of the arm, and is called 'cubital' or 'elbow vein' by common people. The funis of the arm is paused above the elbow and is that one in which phlebotomy is performed; it appears prominently over the pulse. The savatella is the vein that is between the auricular and the little finger, and has two branches."
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	"And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these is located on the outer curvature of the ankle on the wild side (outer side); the second is the saphenous vein, whose location is behind the knee on the domestic side (inner side); the third is the sciatic vein, whose location is behind the knee on the wild side (outer side). There are other veins in the leg similar to these."
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	"The benefit of phlebotomizing the veins near the ears is for ancient catarrhs, migraines, sciatica, and ulcers of the head, especially those that are chronic."
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	"And the quality of bleeding these veins is according to what you consider appropriate for the patient: it should be done on the crown of the head, and the head should be wiped with a cloth on both temples using gentle friction. Then, press the patient's neck with a bandage that covers the two locations where the veins are close to the ears in two depressed areas of the head. Use your index finger to locate them, and if you feel their pulse with your finger, then proceed carefully."
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	"Then, take the lancet called 'cutter', which is the one that incises, and insert it into the vein in the elbow until blood begins to flow out."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	"And then raise your hand with the vein and elbow upwards and incise the vein with an incising incision."
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	"The length of the incision should be equal to two fingers' width or thereabouts; and let as much blood flow out as desired."
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And apply powder and bandage that which has been healed."
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	"It has already been mentioned at the beginning of this book the incision of those and their cauterization."
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	"The benefit of phlebotomy on the two arterial veins that are in the temples is for ancient migraine, persistent headache and frequent eyestrain, and sharp pains in the chest due to excessive blood flow to the ears."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on those is as I advise you: constrain the patient's head with a cloth until both veins appear clearly to the touch and demonstrate their pulse under your fingers; and then proceed with caution."
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"And then you raise the chain above the vein at its division with your index finger, insert the bleeding lancet into it, lift the vein upwards and cut it thus as you have done in the other two veins; let as much blood flow out according to your need."
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And then release the bandage from the patient's head, and keep your finger on the vein for an hour, then press over that cut with cotton and powder, and strengthen it above with a tight constraint, and leave it alone until it is healed."
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	"And as mentioned at the beginning of this book, the memorandum of them and their incision, and attraction has already been preceded."
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	"And therefore, the benefit of phlebotomy from the frontal vein is especially for the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein in ancient facial diseases and migraine and stiffness and foul ulcers."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the quality of phlebotomy on it is as I advise you: so that the patient ties their head with a bandage until the vein appears; and then takes the instrument called 'fossor', which has this shape:"
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Press the prominent point that is at the head of the 'fossor' onto that vein and puncture it with a quick movement or another cause in its manner, and let as much blood flow out as you wish; then release the perforation from the patient's head and tie it up until it is healed."
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	"And sometimes it is opened with a wide phlebotomy, but it does not need to be very pointed like the other phlebotomies, because if it were too sharp, it could break through the bone and cause injury when using the phlebotomy if it is too thin."
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	"But the benefit of the two veins that are near the lachrymals of both eyes for scurf of the eyelids due to inflammation and sebum in the eyelids, and facial diseases."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	"And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient ties their head with a bandage, and then performs it, and you stand over the patient's head."
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	"And the phlebotomy should be done across slightly along its length with a little phlebotomy knife, because there is not much flesh in that location; and if the phlebotomy knife is too thin, it could break through its tip."
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	"And then let the blood flow out as much as you need, and press on that cut, and tie it up for one night, and then release it."
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	"But the phlebotomy of the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and violent colds, and facial diseases such as migraine and inflammation that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	"And the quality of phlebotomy on it is that the patient ties their head and then places their nose in your left hand, and takes a long thin phlebotomy knife and inserts it into the middle part of the top of the nose straightaway, because the vein does not appear to the touch here, and because blood begins to flow soon."
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	"You should withdraw your hand slowly with the phlebotomy knife and let the blood flow according to your need; then tie it up for one night, because that vein is easily restored."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	"But the benefit of phlebotomy on both tendons is for contraction of the eye and the onset of leprosy, and many diseases such as elephantiasis and destructive ulcers such as herpes."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	"And the quality of phlebotomy on it is that each patient ties one side of their head with a bandage; and the operator stands over the patient's head, and the patient sits on a seat."
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	"And then phlebotomize the vein along its length with a wide, thin phlebotomy knife slowly; and then let out blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what seems necessary at that time; and do the same for the other vein."
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	"And then untie the bandage and tie both veins with a midrib tourniquet so that the patient is not fainted, and leave them overnight because the wound will be healed by tomorrow."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	"But the benefit of phlebotomy on the veins of the armpits is for small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, gum decay, and destructive ulcers and fissures, as well as destructive ulcers that are in the nose and around it."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	"And the quality of phlebotomy on them is that you make the patient sit before you, and tie their head with a bandage, then turn back their lips and look for two veins, one on the right lip and one on the left; and their demonstration is by the darkness of each of both, and especially because around there are small dark veins; and then incise each one with an oblique incision."
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	"But if there is doubt about which of them it is, and you do not know which one it is, then make the incision on the larger one of them, and the one with the more evident pus."
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	"And do the same for both veins that are on the upper lips."
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	"But it is more common to incise both veins that are in the lower lip."
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	"But among the two veins that are under the tongue, the benefit of phlebotomy is especially for syncope that occurs in the throat, for the disease of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	"And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is that you make the patient stand between your hands before the sun, and raise their tongue, and look underneath it on one side of the vein and on the other side the vein, and each color is tending towards darkness."
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	"And then phlebotomize each one; but be careful not to withdraw your hand while phlebotomizing those veins, because below them are arteries."
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And your veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those which are commonly found in all men, and phlebotomy on them is done in two ways: either they are punctured with a mulberry-shaped or olive-shaped phlebotomy knife with decreasing thinness; or they are cut with a scalpel-like phlebotomy knife, and it is called 'if necessary'; this is its form:"
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	"And this 'if necessary' means that it should be done by section, and those are special sides and thin according to the width of the veins and according to their narrowness."
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	"Form of mulberry-shaped phlebotomy:"
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	"It should be like this on one side as often as possible, and it is suitable for opening concave veins that are full of blood appearing thickly, and those that contain turbid thick blood."
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	"And this is the form of olive-shaped phlebotomy:"
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	"And this phlebotomy knife is of lesser width and has a more subtle tip, and it is suitable for phlebotomy of thin veins that contain clear yellow blood."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	"Yet the remedy of phlebotomy on the basilica vein, which is one of three veins, extracts blood from illnesses that are below the throat and collar, and helps reduce swelling in the feet and belly."
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	"And tell the phlebotomist to be careful when performing phlebotomy on that [area], and to be especially cautious, for there is an artery nearby. If they err in puncturing with the phlebotomy needle, they may cut that artery and cause a flow of blood."
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the basilica is not visible by manifest appearance, then you should abandon that and move to another one, searching for some branch vein. You should phlebotomize at the end of the arm instead, as that is more visible."
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	"But if you wish to phlebotomize at the elbow, then you should first locate the arm's crease where you know the pulse point is located. Then, carefully place your finger there with the fleam; raise the arm and cut the vein at a concave angle using an alnessil fleam as we have described before. Be sure to avoid percussion within some space of the artery location."
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	"And when you press with strength on the limb, if there is inflation in the area where you have placed your finger with the fleam, then that inflammation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid it."
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	"And if the blood flows in a phlebotomy like a child's urine stream, then know that it is artery blood. Then you should compress and pause your finger over that area for some time; then lift your finger and if the bleeding stops, many times it does stop, then strengthen the arm and abandon it."
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	"And guard the wound from moisture of the air, and avoid overheating or overcooling it for a few days until it is healed."
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	"But if the bleeding does not stop, and you realize that there is no present medicine for this, then cut into the artery if it appears to you; for the extremity of the limb will be contracted, and the bleeding will be stopped. Or else take some lint soaked in egg white, and apply it there, then take a bandage and bind it over the area of the vein with pressure downwards using liniment and powder for another day."
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	"And then if the bleeding has stopped, good. But if not, then cure it with that which is mentioned before regarding the location of the powders causing bleeding."
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	"And the arresting of bleeding from there can be difficult in many situations due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of swelling of the limb."
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	"But regarding the dark vein, phlebotomy is useful for removing blood from the upper part of the head and from below the chest; because it is composed of branches of the basilica and of branches of the cephalica, as we have said."
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	"And beware of the phlebotomist who performs phlebotomy on it, for below that is a nerve. And therefore if he adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and hits the nerve, numbness will occur, and healing will be difficult, and perhaps not completely healed. This nerve often appears during sensation; but sometimes it is hidden in some people and is subtle and does not show itself. Therefore you should pause the phlebotomy with which you are performing it with an alnessil section, and avoid the nerve with your strength."
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	"And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length."
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	"The benefit of phlebotomy on the temporal vein is that it draws blood from the head, relieving illnesses of the eyes."
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	"And now the question is, if you want the phlebotomy to be done with an olive or myrtle lancet; for this vein is the safest of all, as it does not leave behind any artery nor nerve."
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	"But nonetheless you should take care during phlebotomy that with the lancet you do not prick only the head of the lizard (scalp), but rather seek out the place that is easiest to find, and do not touch it unless it is first properly cleaned by percussion."
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	"But often an abscess forms in some men if they are not phlebotomized during the first percussion, but rather touched there."
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	"But the quality of that phlebotomy and its complications are many, in which you must think about their correction."
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	"The first one is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only for the conservation of health and with hope of recovery and caution against approaching illnesses, and that it should be done in one of the veins on the head, which are: cephalic, dark, and basilisk; and that phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and around meals in winter when there are signs of repletion."
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	"And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or even earlier than that, as long as three hours have passed since the beginning of the day."
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	"But phlebotomy that is administered, but when it causes convenience and necessity for it, whether now or later, at any hour and at all times."
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	"And it should not be done in children under the age of fourteen, and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month is over, and elderly people who have already passed seventy years should not be phlebotomized."
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	"And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for whatever reason, it is necessary that they clean their bowels beforehand with a lion's clister, especially if there is much retained feces in them, so that the veins do not attract the superfluities during the phlebotomy of the cleaned bowels, which are pure, and do not harm the principal members."
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	"And patients who are in sacred fasting or drunkenness should not be phlebotomized until they have recovered from their illness or drunkenness, nor those suffering from dropsy. And phlebotomy should be avoided near colic pain and vomiting, near abdominal pain, near multiplication of coitus, work, exercise, fasting vigilance, and all causes that dissolve virtue, whether bodily or animal."
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	"And before phlebotomy, consider the subtlety of humors beforehand, if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so."
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	"And before phlebotomy, if there is no prohibition due to some cause or weakness, one should bathe or exercise somewhat so that the blood may be subtilized."
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And pause phlebotomy in the afternoon of the day, especially around the hour of Terce, as we have said."
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	"And perform it in such a way that the time of that day is guarded from all animal accidents such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents such as work, unnecessary pain, coitus, and similar things."
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	"And at the same time, let the causes be present in the use of which men are accustomed with aromatics and fragrances and balms and similar things according to the quantity that is possible."
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	"And let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the patient who is to be phlebotomized."
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	"And first, extend your arm, and rub it with the phlebotomist's hand two or three times; and then tighten the ligature with a cord and wrap it twice."
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	"And let the ligature be moderate, for if it is too tight, it prevents the flow of blood, and if it is too loose, it causes superfluity of blood. And if it is moistened, it hinders the course of the blood altogether."
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	"And then, while tightening the ligature, let the patient rub their hands together so that the veins become inflated and are clearly felt."
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	"And then, the phlebotomist should anoint the phlebotomy instrument with a little ancient oil properly; and then place his left index finger on that vein where the phlebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein may yield a little, and the percussion may be more precise because among veins there is one that appears like a fleeing chord before phlebotomy, and among those is the one that is full of windiness, and when the phlebotomy instrument is placed on it, it contracts before the phlebotomy instrument, and the phlebotomist becomes uncovered; and the phlebotomy instrument does not pierce the vein, and if it does pierce, then the vein is narrow."
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	"And therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be steady and attentive to all these causes."
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	"And then remove the phlebotomy instrument, but if the vein is not filled in one attempt, it is better to repeat it on another vein nearby or above it with haste, if that place is not inflamed."
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	"If that place is inflamed or the illness worsens, then you should leave it for one day or two and do not tighten the ligature, lest it draw out an inflammatory boil, nor should you bathe."
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	"And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary."
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	"If the opening is small and blood flows out subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will flow out, then you should repeat the phlebotomy in that vein according to the rules and adjust the opening a little, and do this with haste before that place becomes inflamed, for many men become inflamed even with a small opening."
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	"But if that place is already inflamed, then do not repeat it there, for you have no cause to excuse yourself. And instead, apply some of the oil from the wound, for it alleviates the course of blood."
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	"And it is better here to use olive oil rather than other oils."
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	"Similarly, administer oil wound on all phlebotomies where veins are opened with the prohibition of blood flow. And they do this with tyriaaca alfarca and sagzenea when pausing one of those over that place, for blood is subtilized and revolved when it is thick."
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	"If a large boil has formed at the site of phlebotomy, as often happens, especially in those who have not been bled before or whose vein opened little, then you should cauterize it and apply a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly scraped, to that place for an hour, for it dissolves."
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	"And this should be done immediately after the bleeding of that vein with completion of it or another vein."
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	"If there remains in that place for some days any blackness or greenness, do not worry about it. And if you wish, apply to that place some of the following: aloen and myrrh dissolved, or some of the juice of mint or calendula or similar."
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	"And many times it happens that boils and elevations occur due to phlebotomy at the basilica (temple)."
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	"Therefore, place your hand over that (elevation), and if you happen to feel softness under your compression there, then know that that elevation is harmful and bad; and therefore guard yourself to apply some of what we have said there, for a lot of blood flows from the artery."
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"Apply a plaster containing astringents to make the area firm, then treat it with another remedy until it heals."
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	"It is necessary to withdraw blood from each person according to their strength and the prevailing color that appears over the blood."
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	"If the blood is dark, allow it to flow until it becomes red; likewise if it is thick, allow it to flow until it becomes thin; and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is alleviated."
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	"It is necessary for someone who is full and strong with a need for bloodletting in one session to have the venipuncture incision widened, and the incision should be broad."
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	"For the frail person, do the opposite [of what was said above], and it is necessary to withdraw blood from them in several sessions, with a narrow incision."
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	"It is better for venipuncture to be performed as a transverse section, not a puncture."
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	"This manner of venipuncture preserves blood flow and avoids nerve incisions. It is more praiseworthy and safer than venipunctures made horizontally or vertically."
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	"If syncope occurs during bloodletting, you should care for the patient beforehand by giving them a small piece of bread infused with chamomile or simple rosemary tea to drink. Then withdraw blood from them in three or four sessions."
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	"If there is coldness of the complexion, then before bloodletting take bread infused in myrrh essence or aromatic honey essence seasoned with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or a highly fragrant aromatic essence."
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	"If syncope occurs during bloodletting due to the loss of too much blood, then you should give them water of flesh and a highly fragrant subtile honey essence to drink. Use aromatics with lavender, and bind their forehead with it."
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	"And use the other causes that have been mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope due to evacuation."
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	"For those who want to raise their arm and dissolve their blood on the second occasion, if venipuncture is done for too much evacuation, then it should be done in small amounts gradually according to the strength of the person over continuous days."
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	"For those who want to raise their arm and dissolve their blood on the second occasion, if their body is strong, then they should do it about seven or nine hours after the first venipuncture."
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	"For those who want to remove blood from their body contrary to the direction of the sun's movement, it should be done on the second or third day."
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	"But in a body where much blood has already been shed and is acute and causes fever, it should be removed from the body in one session, with a large amount removed, increasing the aperture until syncope occurs. Be sure to keep all conditions of venipuncture; place your hand on the pulse of the body while removing blood to prevent death instead of syncope, for many deaths occur due to ignorance and negligence."
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	"And when you want to release the arm and evacuate blood on the second occasion, if the opening of the vein is already closed and it's difficult to draw blood, then press on that area with force and slightly bend the arm to extend it. This is not good."
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	"Leave the area alone until it can be venipunctured again. Or remove what has coagulated of the blood in the opening of the vein with the sharpness of the flebotomist. Or apply theriac or sageseed and press lightly on that area until the blood is completely evacuated."
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	"If the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	"If it is necessary to provoke bloodletting secondarily, then you shall do so on that spot or in another vein."
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	"The vein called 'funis of the arm' is opened in place of the basilica or cephalic veins when they are not visible or concealed because it consists of those."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	"The quality of the bloodletting is that the patient should immerse their hand in cold water while the tourniquet tightens and until the vein appears prominently."
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	"Thus it is recommended to stretch over that area with firm pressure along the midline, avoiding lateral or longitudinal incisions."
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	"And make sure your incision is wide and when you perform bloodletting on that area above the wrist, do so gently."
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	"If bleeding is not flowing freely, then immerse your hand in cold water again and allow the blood to flow into the water until you have achieved your goal."
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	"But if it is summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in cold water, and in winter, the flow of blood is slowed down by cold water."
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	"And bloodletting from this vein is safer than from all other veins because it has neither a pulse nor nerves."
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	"Bloodletting from the wrist of the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	"The quality of bloodletting from that area is to press the hand with a bandage or your hand, after immersing it in cold water until the vein is inflated and clearly visible; then incise it transversely; if you cut too deep, it will be difficult to stop the bleeding."
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	"And take care not to press your hand during bloodletting because that is where the nerves are exposed without flesh."
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	"And immerse your hand in cold water again and allow the blood to flow into it because if you do not immerse it in cold water again, the blood will coagulate in the incision of the vein and prevent free flow."
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	"After extracting blood according to the required quantity, then apply oil and salt over the vein so that it does not heal too quickly; do the same for any other wound."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	"But the benefit of bloodletting from this vein is that it helps digestive diseases."
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	"And do likewise in the bloodletting of this one as you did with the other."
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	"And the benefit of bloodletting from the median vein is for diseases that are located below the waist such as menstrual disorders, retention of menses, and skin diseases like scrofula and old wounds."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	"And the quality of bloodletting from this vein is that the patient should immerse their foot in cold water and rub it until the veins appear clearly; then tie a bandage around the junction of the foot; the location of the vein can be seen near the ankle, where it branches into several smaller veins on the surface of the foot."
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	"And therefore bloodlet from the largest branch or one near the heel below the ankle joint because it is better and safer."
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	"And if you perform bloodletting on the surface of the foot, beware of the nerves that are located there and pause your bloodletting once you have made a transverse incision as deep as you wish to go."
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	"And that is how bloodletting should be done."
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	"But if bleeding is prohibited, then immerse the foot in cold water again and allow the blood to flow into it until evacuation is complete."
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the bloodletter makes a mistake on the first attempt, then try again a little further away because the location is safe; do not fear too much bleeding, but rather beware of the nerves as mentioned before."
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	"And do likewise for the median vein of the other foot."
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	"And as for the sciatic vein, its location is behind the ankle joint on the outer side of the leg."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	"And the benefit of bloodletting from this vein is for hip pain when it is caused by heat."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	"And the quality of bloodletting from this vein is that the patient should sit in a warm bath and hurriedly and tightly wrap a long thin bandage around their thigh on the outer side of the hip above the ankle for about four finger breadths because that is where it appears."
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	"And therefore when it appears, then bloodlet from there according to each person's ability and across the transverse incision is better; or incise that vein with an incision or cut it with scissors because its location is safe."
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	"And this vein is more abundant in men than women. And if you cannot find it, then bloodlet some branch of it, which appears on the back of the foot near the heel and the little toe."
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	"And beware of the nerves and let out as much blood as you want."
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	"After that, untie the bandage and apply pressure to the wound site and compress it tightly because it heals quickly."
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	"On wind and on the qualities of using them."
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	"Winds are of four kinds: north, south, east or west."
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	"And bloodletting is done in two ways: one is with scarification and blood extraction, and the other is bloodletting without scarification."
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	"And this bloodletting without scarification is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire."
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	"And the locations where bloodletting is administered with scarification and blood extraction are fourteen in number, of which:
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	"The purpose of venesection is not to extract blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, as this does not release the virtue through them, like flebotomy; nor is it necessary for venesection to be performed with heat or without heat in any disease caused bypletion until the entire body is evacuated."
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	"However, venesection may be necessary to treat disease or continuously, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, and in the middle of it and at any other time."
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	"This cause is for those men in whom blood is multiplied within them, requiring its extraction by venesection and they find heaviness and hardness on their head; and there are those who findpletion and heat in their face and head, and neck; and there are those who find pressure in their face and forehead, darkness and dimness in their eyes; and there are those who vomit at the location of their venesection; and there are those whose laughter is multiplied; and there are those who find a taste of blood in their mouth, or that their tongue is ulcerated and they spit blood; and there are those whose sleep is increased, and those who see blood in dreaming, heat and anxieties and plagues and other causes according to their appearance."
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	"And therefore, in any cause of those mentioned, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, we command venesection to be done after two or three hours have passed since the beginning of the day."
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	"And it is beneficial to venesect the nape of the neck when there is heat in the head and pressure on the eyes, but care must be taken that this is accompanied by evacuation of the whole body."
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	"And this venesection is located at the site of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein."
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	"And it is not lawful to use it in those who are of full habit or in whom there is catarrh, for it causes great harm."
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	"And therefore it should not be used on the old, and on the heads of those with hot diseases."
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	"But it is said that continuing this causes forgetfulness, therefore you should command the one performing venesection to pause his hand a little while holding the cup at the party lines of the veins, so as to prevent generation of forgetfulness."
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	"But venesection of the right arm is in the site of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilica vein: and therefore it causes asthma, and constriction of the lung, and splitting of the lungs' instrument, and coughing, andpletion."
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	"And therefore it is necessary that venesection on the right arm be a little delayed, for if it is paused at the party lines it causes weakness in the body and stomach."
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	"And venesection of the left arm causes accidental pains in the head and opacity of the eyes, migraine, and inflammation, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is located at the site of phlebotomy of the basilica vein."
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	"And you should command the one performing venesection not to press his hand at the scarification, so as not to incise the artery and cause a flow of blood."
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	"And venesection of the left cheek causes coldness in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and the appearance of diseases that are in the mouth, and it is located at the site of phlebotomy of the left helic vein which is on both lips."
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	"But venesection that is done over both spatulas causes headache, which is caused bypletion of heat."
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	"And venesection of both sides of the cheekbones causes benefit from phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilica, dark, and cephalic veins, for it attracts blood from all those smaller veins that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins of other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins."
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	"And command the one performing venesection not to proceed with scarification, for the site is devoid of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries beneath it."
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	"And it is a venesection in which one is venesected over the hips, and it causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers that are there."
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	"And you should command the one performing venesection to make it large and of iron, for the site requires a strong section; and strong pressure is attracted by subtle venesections, and it should be scarified with scarification."
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	"But venesections of the calves diminish by diminution manifestly, for they attract blood from all the body, and they cause old pains in the loins and belly, and the bladder; and they provoke menses, and they cause dropsy and edema; and they are located at the site of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, one left cavernous vein, and two lesser cavil veins."
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	"But they greatly debilitate the whole body and cause syncope in many men."
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	"And from venesections of the left cavernous vein, the benefit is near to the benefit of venesections of both calves."
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	"And the quality of the position of venesections is that one pauses the venesection at the beginning, draws it out, and then continues with moderate suction, and does not prolong the position of the venesections but pauses them lightly and remains them gently, so that humors come to the site by equal arrival."
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	"And do not cease iterating this and continuing until you see the site already reddened and swollen, and that the color of blood appears."
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	"And then scarify and iterate suction little by little, and consider carefully the disposition of the body."
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	"For that man who has tender flesh with few pores, you should scarify him once and not more, so that the site is not ulcerated."
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	"And command the one performing venesection to widen the scarification a little and press gently, and temper the suction with ease."
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	"And if there is thickness in the blood, then you should scarify twice, for in the first time the way of subtilection to the blood and the wateriness of it is opened."
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	"But in the second one, the extraction of thick blood is acquired by examination."
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	"And if the blood is very fetid, then there should be no scarification on the third time so that it succeeds lastly."
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little bit, one scarification suffices us."
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	"And if we want to extract much blood, we scarify with many scars; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify with a pressed scarification."
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	"And the term of scarification in which only the depth of the cut is considered is when one presses upon the skin with the middle joint of the finger until it reddens, but without drawing blood."
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	"And if the skin of one is thick, hard, dark, and his pores are narrow, it is necessary that the sites of the cups be anointed with lenient, opened, resolved oils; if it is in summer time, thus as oil of aloes or oil of violets, or oil of mallows seeds, or oil of camomile flowers; and if it is in winter time, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lilies, or oil of chamomile flowers, or blood, and to those similar."
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	"And if the superfluity is thick and fiery, then the oil should be amaranthine, or balsamite oil, or aloe oil, or aneth oil, and to their similars."
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	"But if the person performing venesection has large pores with tender flesh, then it is necessary to prohibit oil, and that for this one the sites of cups near the venesection should be washed with warm or hot water of salt, or water of chamomile flowers, or water of borragem, and similars to those."
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	Guessed Translation: Those whose blood is of great humidity, wash their breath with vinegar or water mixed with myrtle and sumac.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	Guessed Translation: For those whose excesses are abundant, wash their breath with old vinegar, or water of sanjus (savory), or decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and similar ones.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	Guessed Translation: It is necessary that exhalation be guarded before bathing; sometimes it should be administered approaching the bath for one or two hours, and sometimes it should sleep near exhalation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	Guessed Translation: What is necessary so that the breath of a phlebotomized person may be regulated before breathing exercise.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Guessed Translation: At the beginning one should consider: if the breather or the one who needs phlebotomy is choleric and has hot blood with inflammation, then they should take cooling causes, such as sour pomegranates, endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secanabin, julep, and similar ones.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Guessed Translation: Pause their foods such as poletts (young pigeons), roasted birds, and foods seasoned with sour ones, and similar ones.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	Guessed Translation: And for the one whose constitution is cold, it is necessary that they take to drink essarop of almonds or essarop of fennel seeds and sumac, and sweet musk between young and old; and that they are recommended to use little drinking and eating, and pause foods like poletts (young pigeons), cannabis, fish, small birds, and pigeon.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	Guessed Translation: And it is necessary that on the day of breathing exercise and phlebotomy drinking should be greater than eating.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	Guessed Translation: And it is necessary to give in drinking at some hours for certain people triaca alhacena or musk medications, such as muscaded or alcelita before breathing exercise or phlebotomy or close by, so that the main members may be comforted and the blood may be subtiliated; and they should not take those scalpets.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Guessed Translation: Most breathing exercises that are not scarifications are breathing exercises that are paused on the liver, and on the spleen and podagra, and on the navel, in the locations of the kidneys and the armpit of the arm, because these members do not suffer scarification upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	Guessed Translation: And it is not sought by those but attraction of blood from member, such as paused breathing exercise on the breast in illness of flux of blood from the nose; and they use that for dissolving cold viscousness of the member, such as paused on the belly and navel; because that rarifies the member and scalps it and relieves pain because it resolves ventosity.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	Guessed Translation: And it is paused on the nostrils when it happens in their obstruction or phlegm because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out opacity and eradicated phlegm from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Guessed Translation: And similarly it does when it is paused on the liver and spleen to resolve ventosity in those enclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	Guessed Translation: And these breathing exercises are administered widely with suction alone; and sometimes they are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Guessed Translation: And sometimes they are administered full of hot water in illnesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	Guessed Translation: And this is why the breathing exercise should be filled and made greater, it is cold water alone or water in which certain herbs have been cooked for that purpose.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Guessed Translation: Form of breathing exercise administered with fire: the width of the opening should be two fingers wide according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of breath should be half a palm; and it should be on the side of him, in the location that is in the circuit, half his height; and the traction should be small according to the quantity that enters him like a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Guessed Translation: It should be made of wormwood or citron, with thick margins, lion's ear, mulberry leaves and fig leaves so that it does not hurt the member by its position upon it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	Guessed Translation: And there should be in the middle of it a transverse tongue of wormwood or iron where the candle is paused with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	Guessed Translation: And this breathing exercise should be much greater than that which we have recommended; and the pause should be less according to the illnesses and condition of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	Guessed Translation: The breathing exercises of feeble and emaciated people are different from those of young and stout ones.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	Guessed Translation: And the quality of pausing this breathing exercise with fire on the member is that one should extend the heat with fire of decently burnt wood before a small candle of wax, and pause it on the middle of the transverse tongue in the middle location of the breathing exercise, so that the fire may be kindled around the edge of the opening so that not burn the skin of the sick person.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Guessed Translation: And promptly it should be paused on the member of the sick person, and the finger should be on the traction that we have said, while when we hold the breathing exercises and do not need to stretch the finger and make the vapor rise over that traction, then the breathing exercise will soon be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	Guessed Translation: And quickly relight the heat according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Guessed Translation: More in the breathing exercise that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse tongue nor traction, and it is not administered but only filled with water, and it is paused on the member alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	Guessed Translation: And this is its form: This breathing exercise, the larger it is, the better, for it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter XCVI
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Guessed Translation: Bloodletting is not administered on most members but on those in which it is impossible to place breathing exercises due to their smallness, such as the hand and gum and similar ones; or on member devoid of flesh, such as the finger and nose and similar ones.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	Guessed Translation: And the quality of using those that if they are found, the blood-suckers should be in the waters of pools clean and clear.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Guessed Translation: And promptly they should be placed day and night in water clear until they are hungry, and that no remnant remains in the belly of those; and promptly the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and breathing exercises; and promptly rub the member of the sick person until it reddens; and promptly pause them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full, discard them.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If suction from the location with a breathing exercise is possible, it is more preferable in healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the location with vinegar and promptly with much water; and rub and squeeze it out.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the body of blood is prolonged promptly at the cutting off of the blood-suckers and it is abundant, then you should put a cloth dipped in hot water on it, and pause that on top until the oozing is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle on it sublimated vitriol, or gallstones and similar ones of the styptic causes until the blood is cut off; or pause on the location many dried broad beans, and lay them there until the beans adhere to the location, and the blood is cut off.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And it is necessary, if necessary, repetition of bloodletting when it is possible to change those [blood-suckers].
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if blood-suckers are prohibited from suspension, then rub the location with fresh blood or insert a needle in the locations until it draws out blood; and promptly pause them there, for those [blood-suckers] when they feel some blood immediately adhere.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle on them a little of sublimated alum, or salt, or ashes, and they will fall off promptly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the procedure of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it concerns the reduction of fractures and dislocation accidents in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that many foolish doctors and laypeople boast about this chapter and those who at some time did not consider the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And because of this reason it happens that this method is hidden among the learned in our land; and you are not oblivious to this at any time whatsoever; and I have not added what follows except for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, so as to extract knowledge from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And thus I direct you towards experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that contains my knowledge and on which my experience has been passed; since here I have summarized it for you other [and] delivered it from the occupation of lengthening; and have summarized it at the end of summarizing; and have shown it at the end of declaration; and have formed many forms of instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the fractures of bones, from those which are necessary before we begin to remember the members that have been broken and various, if any.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, I will say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of my speech and the chapters whose understanding at the beginning is forced upon the craftsmen and those who are diligent about the truth of them; thus it is you and they who are prompt to know or learn this noble art besides you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And thus I say that when there occurs some fracture or dislocation or torsion or crushing, at that time you must begin with flebotomy on him or let him bleed, or sometimes both, if no prohibition prevents it, such as debility of virtue or if he is an infant, or old in decrepitude, or it is a time of great heat or cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And thus it should be content with its food of fresh herbs and of flesh of birds and of crabs; and prohibit coarse meats and foods that are stuffing, especially those that fill the veins with blood, so that you may be sure of cauterizing an aposteme, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And at this time return the sick person to his first regimen with which he is accustomed to live.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And thus when the bone begins to be restored, at this time the sick person should be passed foods nutritive of much and coarse nourishment in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and bellies of cows, and eggs, and fresh cheese, and thick wine and similar to them; and with this regimen coagulation of the fracture is done more lightly and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones of those who are in their first vigor and the elderly do not have the possibility to be reunited and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of the members of them.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and reunited according to their nature at all times due to the drying out of those members, and those that are of them at the end of growth, such as the bones of young infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But however nature adjusts and connects over the broken bone of any part whatsoever, glutinous cause similar to glue that adheres and strengthens that until it is conglutinized and let together, until there comes the end of fortitude and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, except for some cause prohibiting it from its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And because of this reason, it is necessary that you suspend the foods of the sick person, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and coarseness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Great diversity of fractures according to the diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all the other members are diverse among them.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I come with memory of each species of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinguished from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Great diversity even within itself [the bone].
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fractures of the bone are diversified among themselves; for an arched fracture occurs other than those that happen in it like stars; and sometimes there is a fracture according to the length of the bone: and these are called spiral fractures and stellar and additional ones and non-additional ones, as it happens in the pen when it is prepared to write, and there is a fracture with swelling and disruption at the head, and there is a fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each species there is some torment or proper suffering in its restoration according to what will come later, remembered distinctly in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Many signs of fracture of the bone
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this is known a fracture of the bone: its tortuosity and its prominence and depression to the touch, and it is like that when you compress it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And thus when there is no apparent tortuosity nor is it done with your touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the sick person does not find great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It can happen that there is tortuosity or a small fissure, therefore you should not move it with your hand and compress all of it; but pause over it with the medications of which memory will be made at that moment which is convenient for the place; and especially let there be streightness by subtle strictness.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the place where it is arched and not split into two or other than those that happen in the spiral ones, when all the part of its comparison is removed, then you should begin immediately to rectify it having had an abscess cauterized on it.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if there is an abscess cauterized on it, then let it be left for a few days until the abscess ceases; and especially lift it according to each manner that you can of elevation and torment.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and healing of it is lighter than of the bone in which such a fracture has happened.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And especially strengthen it according to what will come later, remembered about it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if there are spiral fractures, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from both parts, if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or one rope and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And let your position be such that you hold the member where it is twisted according to its natural figure while the parts of the broken member are extended, then you should strive to return those additions with torment and according to whatever manner you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware, according to your skill, that you do not cause harm to the sick person by your operation on them nor injury; and strive, according to your ability, to apply one bone to its companion in their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you touch it with your hand and if there is any different cause here, correct it and lift it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do who often cause abscesses to form because of their operation, or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen this happen because of the operation of many of them.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquele en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquella sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membro non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the fracture of the broken limb is such that I recommend, so that you know that the broken limbs are varied in their smallness and greatness and in their shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	Of those that are small, such as the arm or finger, and similar to them, then the bandage should be made of very soft cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those that are large like the thigh or calf, then in them there should be a bandage of linen and hard material, because the linen binds strongly and holds the limb together with strict compression on all sides without causing injury.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And first, first begin, first the evacuation of urine, pause conveniently there above the location of that fracture with three bandages or four according to how much the limb deserves; and strongly press with your hand using the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to that side of the fracture where it begins most, and press more strongly than before with your hand without letting go of the pressure you have already put on the fracture site.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then lengthen yourself with bandages from the location of the fracture a little, and slowly loosen the pressure bit by bit until you take hold of the location with your whole hand.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other side of the fracture over the location where it is broken with bandages, and then go to the sides that are farther from the fracture; and your operation should be in the tightening of the bandage and the loosening of that according to what we have said in the first bandage above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the bandages with a piece of wool or cloth with which to wrap around the deformity of the fracture if there is any deformity; and if not, do not pause on it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause on that other bandage, and then wrap it around these bandages decently made as fast as possible if the location is not inflamed or has a cauterized boil; and later pause on what sits under the boil and removes the inflammation; and leave that for some days; and then press on those bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the splints should be made of split cane bark or wood from a fig tree or branches of date palm; and each splint should be shaped according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the splint that is placed on that fracture should be a bit thicker and wider than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to how much the limb is in size and thickness; and then press on the splints with another bandage according to your first tightening; and then tie it above with thread decently as we have said about tightening, and let your tightening be stronger where the fracture is located, and the farther away from the fracture, the less tight it should be.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And the threads should be medium in thickness and subtlety, and made of wool; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some people doing by using strings of rope for tying, it is a great error when they try to achieve equality of tightening.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very thin threads are not suitable either, because you will not be able to achieve the desired tightening with them, and it is not necessary for there to be less than a finger's width between splint and splint.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient feels pain at the ends of the splints near the tightening in the rough places, then pause them with a piece of wool or carded lamb's wool between that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes a fracture occurs with displacement, and especially in the elbow, and I have mentioned it in that chapter about singularities.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not every broken limb should be immediately immobilized with splints; because when the limb is large, it does not require splints to be applied on it for at least 3 or 4 days, depending on your certainty of the appearance of a boil.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method used by the ancient plasterers to treat fractures and dislocations and twists:
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	"A plaster commonly used as a poultice for bone setting, especially suitable for complex fractures and more so for women and children, because it has no heat nor friction. Take powder of meal, which is the flour that remains after the movement of the millstone on its walls."
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	"And it's good like this, except that you should sift that flour with water, and make the dough not too thick or thin. Then use it accordingly."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	"Another way to make plaster for bone setting and dislocation: take asafetida, laudanum, acacia, enula, and radish, which is the root of wild radish; mix them all together in equal parts. Then add myrrh and aloe four parts each, aloechil twenty parts. All these are ground and sifted and mixed with water or flour paste if the condition is severe. Use this plaster for it has good composition and restores lightly broken bones."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	"Another way to make plaster for bone setting and dislocation: take radish root (margold) and white althea one part each, myrrh and aloe four parts each, acacia six parts, and tragacanth twenty parts."
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	"And all these are ground in a mortar with water added, then sifted and made into a paste with water or flour paste to be administered."
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	"A method for plastering joints and separated bones in their places, and to relieve sudden pain in those areas and for cracks and fractures: take fresh wool and immerse it in vinegar, oil of cypress, and set it aside over the affected area."
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	"But with this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, nor does it draw out pus or expel pain properly."
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	"Another way to make plaster that restores broken bones: take equal parts of fig leaves and poppy leaves; grind them together and make a paste with water."
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	"A shortened method for plastering to aid in the restoration of bone fractures and to resolve the remnant of an abscess: take white poplar bark, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, barley flour, all in equal parts; grind them all together and make a paste with wine if the limb is not inflamed."
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	"But if it is inflamed, use that made with water from fresh coriander or with water and a little salt."
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	"Another method of plaster that is stronger in resolving than the previous one, when a hard abscess occurs during bone restoration: take white poplar bark and its seeds, balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts; grind them together and make a paste with water from willow or sweet water or wine, depending on the quality of the limb and its color."
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	"But Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be applied to the broken limb during its restoration, but rather a cerote made of wax and oil, and not for any other cause; and he recommends that it be between thickness and subtlety."
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	"But it is seen that at Galen they are applied to the broken limb during its restoration and the causes in which there is drying with little heat are like myrrh, incense, and similar things, according to those causes that we have recommended."
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	"A method of plaster that alleviates injury and pain: take equal parts of ground frankincense, cypress, human hair cut off or chicken feathers, white poplar bark, and salt; grind them together and sift them, then make a paste."
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	"But the amount you should leave on depends on how much remains stuck and it is appropriate to remove it when: consider if there is no pain or swelling and the bone has not moved from its place, then do not remove it for several days."
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	"And if there occurs great pain or pressure or inflammation in the place, then you should remove it immediately or wait until the hour and remove that plaster from there."
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	"Then take a cloth and a wet sea sponge, immerse it in warm water, and wash the affected area internally until the pressure subsides and the pain is eased; then let the limb rest for an hour. Then apply clean wool immersed in sour wine and oil or rose oil, and leave it on overnight to ensure that there is no cauterization of the abscess, and that the inflammation of the limb has decreased and the pain has disappeared."
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then reapply that subtle strapping with a thin plaster until it is healed by your first strapping."
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	"And if at times the abscess and the heat and pain and inflammation and all accidents have already been removed, and you need plaster and strapping, then repeat that equally as you did at the beginning."
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	"And if no cause occurs in the limb from those that we have mentioned, then do not remove it but rather leave it on for three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes all of this is left on for twenty days according to what you observe in the dislodging of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches coagulation of the flesh over it."
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	"And then adjust the strapping more tightly than your first strapping, and adjust it according to the increase in the swelling of the sick limb, as it is remembered."
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	"But if you see the place of the fracture already dry and emaciated more than it should be, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore immerse it in warm water every time you remove it; do this for three days total. And loosen the strapping a little, so that through this operation the limb receives nourishment and heals easily."
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	"But what foolish restorers of the limb fracture do when it is not restored at first as it should be, and is restored crookedly, is an error according to their operation; there is great fear, and if it were done correctly this would have been enlarged by the Ancients in their books and taught."
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	"And I have not seen anyone among them do that, which is why it is more reasonable not to do so."
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	"Chapter Second: On fracture when it occurs in the head."
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The bones are broken into pieces and their shapes are diverse, and the causes are distinct because some fractures occur due to the impact of a blow that breaks all the bone inside the joint cavity, which is located within the bone itself, like what happens with an axe in a tree trunk, and this type of fracture is called axial; or the blow cuts into some parts of the bone and cuts the flesh without penetrating deeper than it. This kind of fracture is called absolute dislocation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is either great or small, and it is either crushing or grinding; and its cause is an impact with heavy force or falling onto rocky ground, both of which resemble each other.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either penetrating, approaching the periosteum that covers the bone itself, or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures can be either great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And there is also a fracture that occurs within the bone itself, in the subtlety of fine hair, and this type of fracture is called capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And there is also a fracture that occurs either from falling or from an impact of rock and similar things, which causes some lamellae of the bone to enter into the interior parts, and this happens particularly in concave locations, like what happens with earthenware pots when they are struck and their fragments enter into the interior.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this happens most often in moist bones, as in the skulls of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures seem to be pieces scattered like stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will find all this information in its proper place (i.e., in the book).
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you can recognize all these types of fractures by their detection on those parts and by investigating them with touches and by the odor of putrefied flesh that is above them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	Capillary fracture can be recognized by this: it appears as a dark line on the bone, and when touched with a probe, it feels smooth.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	However, in treating fractures, first consider the circumstances of the illness. If you see signs that indicate, with manifest significance, fear such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of consciousness, fainting, acute fever, dilation of pupils and redness of eyes, then do not treat it until these conditions have abated.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	But if you see unusual signs but the patient is otherwise healthy, then you may begin treating them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	This is because if the injury happened to you in the beginning when it was happening, and this occurred during the days of winter, then you should study the bone's fracture before the fourteenth day according to all its conditions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it occurs during the summer days, then you should expose the bone before the seventh day, ensuring that what is left of the bone has decayed from the surrounding flesh, and that the aforementioned signs have occurred.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the soft tissue covering the brain and is in many small pieces and rough, then you should insert the wedge-shaped probe according to what I will teach you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And so you should shave the patient's head and uncover the bone according to your custom and manner as best as possible following the pattern of the injury, so that it is light upon the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you detect the bone or fluxes of blood or a hard abscess, then you should pause treatment with what is necessary, and this: you should warm the place with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess is sedated and you are sure that there is no flux of blood. Then begin the operation around the bone and its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to one of two operative methods.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you insert the bone with a narrow straight probe like this:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	"And then administer more of the incision powder than the second one."
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	"And it is necessary that you have diverse incisions knives of different lengths, some being longer than others; some shorter ones with tips sharper than the others and made of steel or iron."
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	"And use them with ease in percussion on the incision knives, so that you do not hit the head and hurt him/her."
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	"And if the bone is hard and tough, then you must first drill around it before administering the incisions with non-depth drills."
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	"And these are not called such because those do not stop at the end of the bone of the test but approach it so that the drill has a rounded tip or margin above which is left sharp like the edge or small circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone."
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	"It is convenient that you take many of these drills with you, each suited to the thickness of each bone, so that you have at your disposal all kinds of drill bits for any skulls you may encounter, with tips sharp and lengths and widths suited to the thickness of each bone."
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	"And here are three types of drills: One for drilling around a broken bone is to place the drill on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the drill to another location, making sure that there is enough space between all tracks equal to the thickness of the drill."
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	"And then incise with incisions between each track of the bone, making it as subtle as possible in order to radiate the bone out, or with your hand, or with any other cause through some tools which you will have prepared for that purpose, such as tweezers and subtle forceps."
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	"And it is necessary that you be very careful to ensure that the incisions do not touch any cause of the brain."
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	"And then when you have drilled around the bone and it is separated from the brain if it continues with it, you will extract it, being careful to raise and remove it in the roughness of its surface that is on the bone with another tool similar to an incision, but nevertheless being more careful and subtle than other incisions."
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	"And if there remains any fragment of small bones and you try to remove it with ease using the appropriate tools, then take care to clean it with linen cloths and cotton which we have mentioned."
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And another method of operation is easy and remote from fear, which Gaulisius describes and praises highly; this is the language of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin uncovering the fracture of the bone from the place where the break is most violent and obvious, until you have uncovered that fracture and placed aside from there the tip of this gentle and happy incision whose shape is as follows:"
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	"And the lenticular incision is long and does not cut any cause, and the acute incision is of it on both sides beforehand in length, like this: ; that the lenticular incision is adapted to the brain with the face of it incidentally cutting into the bone."
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	"And then strike with a small hammer on the incision of one partition until you have incised all the bone with ease as it rotates, and you are sure that no panic occurs in it at any moment, even if the patient is the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, even if he was asleep."
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	"Then if any cause annexed to the bone of the panic is broken in certain places of the bone, cut that from it with the tip of this lenticular incision and separate it from it with ease, because it is separated from it without harm and without fear."
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	"And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panic, and that which is cut off or left on the bone remains rough and subtle satagias, then it is necessary to raise that roughness with subtle razors for which you have prepared in various quantities so that it may be possible for you to apply them in every place where they are most convenient and most appropriate according to what your operation of that broken bone requires."
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	"And it is necessary that you use in your operation with which you shave the bone at the beginning the widest of those razors, and then use little by little the most subtle of them, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach to administer the most thin and subtle of all."
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	"But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, it is necessary to proceed according to what you have found for their correction."
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	"And this is why not everyone who has studied that art agrees on it."
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	"This is what we have shown in relation to large fractures."
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	"And if the panic is stretched when you remove the bone, then it is necessary to take cloth according to the quantity of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it on the opening of the wound; and then take another folded or tripled cloth and immerse it in wine and rose oil and place it on the first cloth and do this as lightly as possible so that you do not press upon the brain, and then apply a linen bandage and do not bind it too tightly but only according to the quantity of the wound alone."
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	"And leave it with this care for one or two days until you are sure of cauterization; and then untie it and apply medicines that cause excessive dryness, such as linseed poultice and powdered earth and aristologia, and others similar to them."
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	"And make these medicines into powder that is sprinkled upon the wound, such as are dry; and universally apply to it any medicine that has the property of cleansing without biting."
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	"And take care according to your ability that the wound in your treatment is clean and not dirty with grease or anything else; and do not allow virulence to accumulate there because when it settles upon the panic of the brain it corrupts it and harms it, and you will bring about great mischief."
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	"And it happens in the brain of the head when the bone has been cleaned there and especially when care is taken of it that blackness appears on its surface; therefore consider now if any of the accidents that we have mentioned happen to the patient, you should know that they are harmful without doubt."
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"And if blackness does not appear except from the medicine that is applied above and this is done by the virtue of that medicine, then it is necessary to take one part honey and three parts rose oil and with these linseed a cloth, and then place it on the brain; and then treat it with the species of treatment that you deem appropriate until it is healed."
Capitol .iii.	"Chapter III."
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	"On the restoration of the nose when it is crushed."
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	"You should know that the nose is not broken except by two pieces rising together or one of them twisted, because it has two bones, for the left piece is made of cartilage and does not break but becomes bruised and twisted."
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	"But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you must insert your little finger into its socket and with the tip of your index finger press inward to reduce the fracture from within while using your thumb from without until the nose returns to its natural shape."
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	"And let this be done by you with ease, but take care not to cause harm upon the patient through your operation."
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	"And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it cannot be reached, then the extremity of the splint should be made thicker."
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	"And if the fracture is in two parts, then make a plaster cast accordingly."
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	"First day after a fracture, if possible, apply cold compress to the wound. If not, then apply hot poultice."
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	"If the fracture is in one part of the nose, insert a wad of cloth into the nostril. If it's in two parts, use two compresses; ensure that the compress is large enough to fill the nasal passage."
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	"Some ancient healers say that compresses should be bordered and changed every day, but I have not seen this practice. It is better to enfold the wad in an album of hard-boiled egg mixed with powdered mallow; leave this in place until the bone has healed and the cartilage strengthened."
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	"Sometimes, instead of using compresses, it is better to insert a strip of lion's cloth into the nose to absorb any accumulated pus. This should only be done if the nasal fracture is severe and there are no breathing difficulties."
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	"This method may not be necessary for you; feel free to choose whichever method you prefer: inserting a strip or using compresses."
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	"If another abscess occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with cerote or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diacylonal."
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	"But if there is no abscess formation, then you should apply a plaster on the outside of the nose using chickpea flour and powdered mallow with albumen of egg. Also, place it over the lion's stop, without pressing the nose for any reason."
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	"But if the nasal bones are fractured with a small break or comminuted, you should then split them and extract those fragments using instruments suitable for that purpose. Then close the wound and treat it with substances that enhance healing and consolidation, along with appropriate plasters."
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	"If a denture falls into the nose, you should treat it with compresses and administer lead cannulae until it is completely healed."
Capitol .iiii.	"Chapter Four."
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	"On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated."
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	"When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture does not involve the teeth, observe whether the fracture is only on the outside and not divided into two or curved inward at the edges. If so, its reduction should be easy."
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	"And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth and do likewise with the right index finger for fractures on the left side. Then gently press the convexity of the fracture inward using that finger, with your other hand supporting the outer part of the bone."
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	"If the fracture of the lower jaw is already separated into two parts, then apply traction to both parts in a straight line until it is possible to reduce them."
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	"If teeth are loosened due to disruption of the bone, then strengthen those that you expect may break with gold or silver wire or thread. Then apply cerote over the broken jaw and place a doubled cloth over it, followed by another cloth well moistened in cold water or a sole leather strip placed along the length of the jaw. Finally secure it properly according to your judgment without damaging it."
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	"And instruct the patient to rest and remain quiet, and avoid using straws for drinking liquids."
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	"If you notice that the jaw has already been distorted in any way, then on the third day gently manipulate and reduce it. Then correct any deviation and apply a plaster made of powdered mastic, egg albumen, or chickpea flour after removing the cerote. Finally cover the plaster with a lion's claw bandage."
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	"Once the plaster is attached and well-adjusted, leave it on without removing it until the fracture has healed and become strong. For many times this fracture becomes firm in three weeks."
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	"If a fistula appears later on, then apply the remedies mentioned above for its treatment until it heals and is removed."
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	"If the fracture involves teeth, then determine whether they are separated or displaced. If they are displaced, use appropriate instruments to remove them as you see fit."
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"If the opening of the tooth socket is narrow, then widen it with a dental elevator according to your need."
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	"Then, after removing the displaced teeth, if there is still some bone remaining, widen the socket with a dental chisel. If not, apply a suitable plaster and insert it into the socket until healed."
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	"On the reduction of a fractured clavicle."
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the fork of the hip joint is broken before the muscle, and that fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is broken, it can be separated or partially separated without displacement of the fragments. The restoration is easy in this case. Or it may occur with displacement of the fragments, which makes restoration difficult. Or it may occur with the fracture being comminuted.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	In the case where the fracture is comminuted, the operation should be performed as follows: have two assistants present, one to hold the adjutator and follow the broken fork of the hip joint, and the other to extend the thigh on that side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then carefully reduce the fracture with those fingers, ensuring that it is properly aligned according to its natural shape and not prominent or concave at the bony prominence.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If more extension is needed, then use a sandbag or wool pad of suitable size placed under the thigh to achieve the necessary amount of extension. Then elevate the hip joint and press the sandbag with your hand while reducing the fracture as required.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you are unable to externally rotate the thigh to bring it to the front of the knee, then have the patient lie on their back and place a pillow or bolster under the opposite side's hip joint. This will help to achieve internal rotation of the hip joint.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The assistant should press the thigh at the hip joint while elevating it until the head of the femur is elevated to its normal position. Then you can reduce the fracture and align it with your fingers as described earlier.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if there are any bone spurs or osteophytes around the hip joint causing resistance to reduction, then you should gently fracture them with a bone cutter and remove them to facilitate easy reduction of the fracture.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the fracture is retained in the bone, then use one of the chisels you have brought with you to perform an osteotomy. After placing the hip joint in traction using the device designed for this purpose (which can be made of wood or iron and has the following shape), carefully insert the chisel into the bone at the fracture site and gently strike it with a hammer to complete the osteotomy.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	"This resembles an ulcer with such being its cavity; let its width be according to what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it."
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	"Let its length be according to what is possible for you during the operation; it should have two extremities like this, and one extremity is wide while the other is narrow."
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	"If the breach caused by the wound that you have made while extracting the bone's satire is wide, and you are sure of its cauterization, then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture."
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	"If the breach is small or you fear cauterization of the wound, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the wound's cut."
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	"If an abscess occurs, then take a cloth dipped in sour wine and rose oil and wine, and apply it on that place."
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	"The plaster that should be used when the bone is broken and cut is one made of ground barley flour with egg albumen, and apply it on top of the wound, and also apply it around the joints if necessary, and also take a long turban-like cloth that Saracens use, which should be about as wide as a palm or thereabout; and also apply doubled powders over the wound and the plaster; and also take a thin table knife whose width is three fingers and length likewise; and wrap that in cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the knife on the location of the fracture; and then apply hot humemati likewise, and roll that over the bone's collarbone and around its joints, both healthy ones and sick ones, and reduce that over all parts, and whenever the fracture's restriction begins to decrease, that is what should not be hidden from you."
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	"And all that, ensure that the knife does not touch the broken bone; and for this reason, check the injury every day so that when you see the limb softened or notice the knife already removed, then you should correct that and tighten the bandage."
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	"Also apply the sleep of the patient on his collarbone and place him with his arm on the bed's edge at night, so that with that he is elevated on his side, and thus the clavicle fracture is elevated by elevation of the muscle; or his arm is tied to his collarbone."
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	"And do not leave the limb untied until it has healed properly or an abscess appears within twelve days."
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	"And also renew the plaster if you have seen the face of the bone already set in that way, and adjust it in the restriction and restore that until it is restored and the clavicle fracture has coalesced."
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	"And it is strengthened and made comfortable within twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it can be done in less time than that."
Capitol .vi.	Capitol.vi
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Chapter VI: On the restoration of shoulder fractures
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	"A spatula-like fracture is one that occurs on the lateral side of the shoulder and only its margins are fractured, not its shaft."
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	"And therefore when the fracture occurs on its middle side — and it is only known through touch — then according to the figure of the fracture, force its preparation and reduce it according to its natural shape in every way that you can possibly do."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	"And also apply powdered barley flour with egg albumen and rose oil; and also apply doubled cloth powders; and also apply on top of it a thin table knife according to the quantity of the entire spatula or more a little."
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	"But if the knife remains concave in some of the locations of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with rose oil and also apply the knife according to equality."
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	"And also strengthen it from above with hot humemati with proper restriction and firmness of the knife until it is not removed from its location."
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	"And check the limb every day. And whenever it is softened, tie it again and tighten it and adjust the knife if it has moved from its location."
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	"And make the patient lie on his own side."
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	"And the spatula is restored in twenty days or twenty-five."
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	"And therefore when this number is completed, then you should untie the limb, and ensure that it is of those bones whose union is not endangered nor their dissolution."
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	"And if you proceed from the location of the weight-bearing bone and put the elbow down, then incise it there, and open it up, and do according to what we have said in the clavicle fracture regarding the treatment of abscesses if one occurs here."
Capitol .vii.	Capitol.vii.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	To repair a broken foot
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Sometimes the foot breaks in the middle of it and then the ends are either displaced or fragmented.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When the foot breaks in the middle of it, one of its complications is that it leans towards the sides and causes pain to the patient, difficulty in walking, coughing, shortness of breath and vomiting blood. It can also be felt inside the cavity where the bone has broken.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	To repair it, the patient should lie on their back and place a pillow between their thighs. Press gently on the muscles of the foot and adjust the bones using two hands until the bone regains its proper shape. Be careful during the operation and make sure to do everything that is necessary according to your ability and what suits the case best.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place gauze or cotton soaked in plaster on the foot and apply a thin layer of softwood or chalk powder, wrapped in cloth. Make sure to wrap it carefully around the broken bone without applying too much pressure. Sometimes, you may need to apply additional bandages on the back for support and secure them with appropriate tension. Keep an eye on the bandage throughout the healing process and tighten it as necessary when it becomes loose.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If the bandage causes discomfort such as itching or pain, if there is inflammation or an abscess at the site, you should remove and replace the bandage immediately. Clean the area and reapply fresh plaster and bandages according to proper wound care techniques. If necessary, adjust the tightness of the bandage gently and reposition it until the wound has healed properly.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	**Treatment of Broken Ribs**
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Bone breakage does not occur except in large spaces that are on the back; and at the extremities of its ends, it rarely happens at that location unless it is cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of this is not hidden from feeling during its investigation with them.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be done in such a way that it aligns the fracture with them according to the most possible manner, ensuring that it is well aligned as needed, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is leaning towards its interior ends, then there occurs in the patient intense pain and piercing, like piercing that happens to one who has cried, because the bone pierces the membrane; and there occurs difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting much blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And even the Ancients used this method with many devices.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they said this: whenever there is retention of food from the sick person who generates inflammation and windiness, so that the abdomen becomes inflated and extended, and thus the fracture is pushed towards its outer parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we should avoid this because it might cause an abscess if not done carefully; and if one does happen, then it would help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them said that it is necessary to stop the wind and then suck with force; and this seems reasonable, but nonetheless it is feared that the wind might drive the excess towards the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them said: whenever the place is covered with wool that has already been immersed in warm oil, and powders are inserted between the ribs until it is full, then let the bandage be done evenly according to its roundness; and then treat the illness with pleurisy cure and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the illness causes intense pain that is not tolerable, and the bone pierces the membrane with piercing hurt, then we fear for the patient; therefore we should cut over the place, uncover the broken rib, and immediately put upon it that instrument which preserves the cipher, of which the memory has been precedented, and gently insert the bone, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we should join together the two lips of the wound if it is large with stitches, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs, then take some cotton and dip powder into rose oil and apply it to the place; and treat the illness with whatever is suitable for treating an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him be propped up on pillows upon which he sleeps until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	About the restoration of fracture of the vertebra of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck, which then become stuck together, similarly affecting the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, consider this: if sometimes their muscles are softened and stunned and dead, and they cannot move those limbs nor extend them nor contract them, and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, they do not feel any pain, then you shall know that they will not recover. In such cases it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	But if those limbs move and they feel sensation when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, then you shall know that the bone is saved, and the illness will pass with care.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similar fractures in the vertebrae of the neck, and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider their weight.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you find that they are already softened, then it is as if what has happened to the muscles has also happened to them. And especially when they lie on their back, they have difficulty breathing and vomiting without wanting to, and sometimes they are suddenly turned onto their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you shall know that it is mortal, and at that point do not bother with its care.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of these things happen, the case is better and easier to treat.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of it is that you should perform cupping on the inflammation or swelling that occurs over the broken vertebra, either with a cautery cup or with mollified wax; place it on that spot several times a day until the inflammation is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then apply one of the comforting and resolving plasters, and strengthen it with lint; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the part where they feel pain until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that there is separation of the fractured bone or some other cause which is already separated from it, then it is necessary to tie a bandage around the neck and to keep that bone in place; and especially join together the edges of the wound with sutures if they are large; and also treat it with an embrocation of incense until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the lower end of the bone is broken, and this is the end of the spine, then you should insert your little finger into the anus with your left hand, and grasp the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible according to its shape; then apply plaster and bandages on it, especially if they are indicated, and also strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken pieces in the wound, then extract them and remove them, and treat the wound with the treatment that is previously indicated until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the ankle joint.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	"Bones of the wide hips are broken, and if they break, the fracture is not just a common break but one that extends to both ends and is inclined inward; this causes pain in the area and puncture wounds, making the limb numb when fractured."
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	"And the treatment for it is that you stretch your hand over that part which lies above the fracture, which is its shape."
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	"And if the fracture is only at the end of it, then you apply that which seems to you equal to the space assembled according to its natural shape."
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	"But if the fracture is in the long part or one that declines towards the joints of the left side, then you make the sick person lie on their stomach so that you can prepare the treatment for that fracture."
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	"And once you have applied that [splint], pause on it with plaster, and also pause on that staff or club, and bind it tightly without fear of puncture from the fracture or movement of the splint."
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	"And apply the concavity with what fills that space which took on the binding according to equality, and command the sick person to sleep on their back or on their side."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	"But if an ulcer occurs afterwards, then cease the extension and treatment of it until the ulcer is sedated, and apply to it what sedates that according to what has been mentioned before; and also return to the treatment of it, binding it in this way as is customary."
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	"And if this happens in the bone or they are crushed, then you remove them."
Capitol .xi.	Chapter xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the treatment of a fracture of the jawbone.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The jawbone is that which is between the cheek and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then its treatment is in one of two ways, the first of which is that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness of this shape:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	"And there should be tied on both ends two straps, and it should be suspended from an elevated place."
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	"And let the sick person sit on a seat; and then place their broken arm on the wood so that it reaches to the middle of its end where the curvature of the wood is attached."
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	"And then suspend some heavy weight on that, or the minister extends it to both sides; and then the physician examines the fracture with his hands together so that the fracture returns as it should."
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	"And the other way is that the sick person lies on their back and suspends the hand of their neck with a strap; and then commands two ministers, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with both hands; and the other holds its foot from below; and each extends to their own side."
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	"And if you want the extension to be stronger, then bind above the fracture with a strap and another strap over that; and each of the two ministers extends to both sides."
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	"And then if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the strap on its middle and the other below the fracture toward the bone."
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	"And similarly if the fracture is near the bone, then it is necessary to place the strap on that location and also on that bone."
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	"And apply it with ease and without trouble; and then when it is well applied according to what is necessary, then bind it if no cauterization occurs."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	"But if a cauterization occurs, then leave the binding for 7 days, and place over it lint soaked in vinegar and rose oil so that the cauterization may heal; and then bind it."
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	"And the way to bind it is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that jawbone, and place its covered hand on its own muscle."
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	"And then wrap the cloth around it and bind the arm to the jawbone so that the arm is in a straight position, unless some cause prevents it due to the broken bone."
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	"And then apply splints."
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	"It is necessary to press upon the fracture that same stone which has been placed there, and press it strongly compared to other stones; place your thumb between each stone, and let the length of the stones be according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers on either side."
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	"And press strongly upon the stones with the restriction that was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	"Your restriction over the place of the fracture should be tighter."
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	"And when the fracture extends further, the restriction should be lessened."
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	"So once you have arranged the stones and restriction as we have described in the moment when you restore the limb to its proper position, then you should do so."
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if you fear inflammation, then on the seventh day you shall remove the restriction and stones as we have said."
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	"And also consider the bandages in all parts for three days so that there is no pressure or inflammation in the place; and thus correct everything according to what we have said."
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	"But if you are confident that there is no risk of this happening, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more."
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	"And let his bed rest be upon his back, and let his hands be upon his stomach."
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	"And place over the joints a cocena full of lanolin, and observe at all times of night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not dislodged nor dissolved, and that the bandage remains moistened; therefore correct this with your skill."
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	"And feed the sick person according to the order that we have given beforehand, so that at first the food is subtle until he begins to grow stronger; and then you must make the food thicker for him."
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	"For the custom of the bandage and chamber pot is that they should remain in place for forty days, and then it is necessary to remove them, administer baths, and apply ointments which will correct this."
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	"And if the fracture has grown together, then do not remove the bandage and stones until after one day or two months."
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	"On the restoration of fractures of the arm."
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	Bones are composed of two bones called forearms; one is small and holds the wrist, the other is large and lies beneath the small forearm bone.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	It's easy to break the larger or smaller forearm alone, but it's hard for both to be broken at once.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small forearm bone breaks above, its restoration will be easier and its healing faster.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	"When a person's bone breaks, their fracture is bad, and healing is difficult."
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	"And especially bad when two bones are broken at once."
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	"So if the bone that is broken is a small one on top, it's necessary for the doctor to intervene and restore it, making a small opening with ease so that it can be reset."
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	"But if it is a large bone that is broken, then a more extensive opening is necessary."
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	"And if both bones are broken at once, you must make the incision quite wide and strong."
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	"And you must place the figure of your hand in such a way that it allows for restoration and extend the opening over a cushion, with the palm of your hand facing upwards, so that all the fingers are aligned, and the little finger is lower than the others, and the patient is lying on their side propped up on a bolster."
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	"And place a cushion in front of it at its height or opposite to help the patient not slip."
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	"And then the assistant should extend their arm from below with their hand or a cloth, while another assistant does the same above."
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	"And then the doctor will reset the bone in such a way that it reduces it as much as possible according to its proper shape."
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	"But if during the surgery of the bone there are difficulties, then you must push hard with all your strength to reduce it back into its place."
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	"And if during the surgery you find that the bone has separated and there is no hope for its restoration, then you must cut it open according to the manner we described above."
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	"But if the fracture is accompanied by plague, I have already spoken about that chapter in particular, so now let us move on to its treatment."
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	"And if you encounter an abscess at the beginning of your restoration process, then take a cloth mixed with cerote made from rose oil and white wax, and it should be moderate between thickness and fineness. Place this cloth over the abscess with subtle pressure until the abscess yields. Then remove the cerote and apply an emplaster prepared from ground barley flour with egg whites, and afterwards apply plaster; the plaster that is placed on that fracture should be as thin and strong as possible."
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	"And know that the number of splints for the arm is usually seen in the most common dispositions, or that there is a fracture in one joint or two joints at once."
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	"And then apply the splint over the location of the fracture with great strength and force, and when it is more towards the upper part of the fracture or towards its lower parts, apply the splint a bit softer according to what was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough. The thread with which they are tightened should be moderately between fine and thick, as we have recommended."
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	"And observe the limb and its bandage for a few days."
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	"And if you encounter any cause that requires correction, such as swelling of the limb, then you must wrap the limb with cold water until the swelling ceases."
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	"Let the limb rest without being constrained until it has recovered, and then apply the splint again."
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	"And if the splint has softened and the bone has healed and seems to be in good condition, then correct everything with your skill."
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	"And if you see that the nutrition is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess tightening of the splint, then you must soften it a bit and leave it for a few days until the nutrition can reach it again, and then tighten it once more."
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	"But if no cause of those that we have mentioned occurs during the illness, then it is not necessary to remove the splint until around twenty days or thereabouts."
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	"And then hang the arm of the patient with his own strength and agility, and have him sleep on his back."
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	"And know that this fracture is usually restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, but it can be restored even earlier in twenty-eight days, depending on the disposition of complexions and dispositions of strength."
Capitol .xiii.	"Chapter XIII."
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	"Of the restoration of fractures of the thumb and fingers."
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	"Know that the thumb and fingers often fracture, but it rarely happens otherwise."
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	"And when the hand is fractured or injured, then the patient should follow these instructions: lie down and keep his head higher than his feet, and place his arm extended on that side."
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	"And then the minister should extend the broken bones and the doctor should align them so that they fit together with good alignment."
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	"And now it is necessary to apply plaster and bandage, unless a poultice cauterizes; then place a splint above according to the quantity of the area, which you have already wrapped in linen."
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	"If the bandage is on the inner part of the thigh, you should make it resemble a sling of cloth and order the patient to hold it with their hand; then it should be wrapped in a long piece of cloth."
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	"And place the splint made of leather on the cloth on which it can be elevated, so that the flesh is close to the palm; then tighten it as necessary."
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	"But if the fracture is on the outer part of the thigh, then you must place splints above and others from the lower edge of the thigh to the palm, so that the leg is straight and upright; then tighten the bandage as it is wound around like a wheel between those edges."
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	"And if there is a fracture in one of the joints of these parts, then if it is the big toe, elevate it as necessary and tie it with the palm; and if you wish, place a small splint on the outside to elevate the fracture and prevent movement."
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	"But if the fracture is in one of those other joints, such as the middle joint or the one next to it, or the ring finger or the little finger, then elevate it and bind it with its corresponding finger; or all may be bound together continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on it, as we have said for the big toe."
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	"And consider, in your treatment and application, the position of cauterization and opposition — with your operation — according to what is necessary when there occurs any cause for those, as it has been described above."
Capitol .xiv.	"Chapter XIV."
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	"On the restoration of fractures of the bone of the hip."
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	"The bone of the hip is often fractured, and it becomes apparent through the sensation that the part before and above becomes displaced."
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	"And its treatment is done in such a way that the limb is tightened above the fracture and another below it, with the patient lying on his stomach and face down."
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	"And also, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone, extend all the limb to its part according to its quality."
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	"But if it is displaced towards the edge of the hip, then extend the limb towards the back at the part of the buttocks, so that the extension occurs there, and another limb below the fracture."
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	"And similarly, if the fracture is displaced towards the back, then extend the limb towards the back, with extension at the parts below."
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	"And also, the doctor should bind the bone with both hands inwardly until it reduces according to its natural appearance and the bone joins together by good union. Then a plaster and bandage should be applied if there is no inflammation of the limb."
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	"But if inflammation occurs in it, then leave it for several days until the inflamed swelling subsides, and then return to your treatment."
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	"The bandaging of it should be done as follows: wrap a firm bandage over the fracture and fold it two or three times, removing any excess; then wrap the thigh so that it reaches the ankle and hip."
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	"And insert a long linen bandage between the hip and thigh near its lower parts, bringing the ends of the linen up from below both sides, then wrap what is excess of the bandage around the thigh and hip."
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	"And also apply a splint over the hip at the location of that fracture, and apply another splint on top of the thigh bone."
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	"And also fill the spaces between the thigh and hip with soft dressings so that the bandage is held together firmly."
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	"And also begin with a strong binding of the middle part over the location of the fracture with three or four wrappings. And as you gradually extend the limb from that location, your binding should be less and lighter and softer."
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	"And also extend both ends of the linen bandage below until it reaches the heel of the foot, and then tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the limb is not moved from its position."
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	"And also leave the bandage on it until there is no inflammation, swelling or redness, nor any other signs of that nature; and if anything occurs from those causes, then remove it and correct whatever has occurred as soon as possible according to what has been said many times."
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone has died from the bone being broken, then you should bind that part as tightly as possible. And if it is not possible to do so, then cut over it and remove what is dead until it is healed with whatever follows this treatment."
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	"And sometimes this fracture of the hip is strengthened with splints outside those which have already been adjusted to it, as we have said in the case of the thigh and arm."
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	"But nevertheless in the restoration of it in this manner, limping does not occur. And if it is restored alone without the other thigh being applied to it, then it is necessary that it limp constantly."
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	"And know that the hip is strengthened in forty days or a few more or fewer according to the diversity of complexions and other dispositions."
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter XV."
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	"On the restoration of fractures of the knee cap."
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	"Know that fracture of the patella is rare, but often happens at its base."
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	"But if fracture occurs there, it is nothing but a crack or break in its parts, and this is with pain or without pain. And about all of this has been stated by sensation."
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	"And its restoration is as follows: whatever is broken of its parts should be bound with the said bandages until it adheres and joins together according to what is possible by approximation, ease, and formation."
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	"And also apply plaster and apply a round splint if necessary, and strengthen it above with bandages as is convenient."
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	"And also consider all the dispositions which we have recommended for other fractures, such as inflammation and redness and similar things so that it opposes all accidents with whatever is convenient until it is healed."
Capitol .xvi.	"Chapter XVI."
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	"On the restoration of fractures of the thigh."
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	"Know that in the thigh there are two bones of which one is thick and is called by the name of the thighbone; and the other is slender and is called the shinbone."
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	"And it happens with some species of fracture that one occurs in both bones of the thigh just as they occur in the two bones of the arm. And for this reason its restoration is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm by binding, and its operation is one."
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	"And if both bones are broken at once, the thigh becomes disabled in all its parts."
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	"And if only the slender bone is broken, the thigh becomes disabled anteriorly."
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	"And if only the thick bone is broken, it causes lameness on that side due to those causes which are not due to binding."
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	"And also apply extension and approximation and splinting according to that bandaging."
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	"But however, it is necessary that if the fracture of the thigh is large and has many attempts to reduce it, then extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate with your virtue."
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	"And in the thigh there is some cause for operation over the arm, and this is when you bind the splints and complete all your operation. Then you will take pieces of pine wood that are placed on those sides which are placed in usual positions and made similarly from palm branches; lighten them of those which have small thickness, and let there be no thick ones, and let their length be according to the length of the thigh, and from the front towards the back."
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Wrapped around each bone in two layers according to its length, place one at the base of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be as low down as possible on the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Proceed to tie the two straps in three places on both extremities and at the middle point, because with this structure, the leg is prevented from bending at the right and left joints, which is good for posture.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	Now apply a wooden splint according to the length of the leg, and place it on the leg in such a way that it maintains its immobility.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Especially make sure you do this in cases of fracture, when the bone is properly aligned.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Additionally, examine the leg every day and study it carefully to ensure that you guard against inflammation, swelling, or other similar causes. Whenever such a cause occurs, pause treatment until it has healed properly.
Capitol .xvii.	Capítol XVII
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Chapter XVII:
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	"Breakage of the heel does not occur often; however, fractures to some bones in the foot do occur occasionally; and those of the toes rarely experience fracture, but they can suffer attrition during periods of disposition."
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	"And if the bones in the foot are fractured and some of these bones become elevated above each other, then the patient places their foot on the ground prepared thus while walking."
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	"And they pause one foot upon that which is elevated by those bones, and they press it down upon them, crushing and grinding them until they are shattered into pieces."
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	"And they apply plaster and bandages above, and place a small table under the sole of the foot with two wooden plugs on it."
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	"And they stretch that limb with the foot downwards because you have bound that limb with wrappings and other things which cause swelling."
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	"And after three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage because you will find the bones crushed, either ground or dislocated; and the operation on them is as follows:"
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	"But if some are broken, then you should restore them and grind them together just like glue, and remember to do so in the restoration of those of the hand."
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	"And you should pause the broken bone on its length according to the length of the finger, and then add some wood to it on one side; and place your foot on that table which I have recommended to you, stretching the limb downwards."
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	"But if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you should pause upon each finger separately according to its quantity wrapped in lion's skin cloth, and stretch the table downwards under your foot, standing on one of the table's corners near the sole of your foot so that it has good retention."
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	"And remember to note that you should not forget all the causes which are mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents which we have said; and pause on each accident according to what is necessary."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter XVIII."
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	"On the fracture of the hip bone of a woman, of the pubic bone, and of the penis bone of a man."
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	"When the hip bone of a woman is broken, then make her lie on this bed, bent at the buttocks slightly backwards, and hold it there."
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	"And the midwife should press the hip bone inward and it should be made like this: and then the woman should be shaken up and gradually raise her hips so that everything is forgotten until the hip bone comes out like this and the broken bone returns."
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	"And then apply powder on the bone; and when she wants to urinate, gently move the hip bone and let her urinate, and reduce it again according to the manner in which you had previously moved it, and return it to its original position with the first bandage."
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	"And do this for seven days or about those days, because that is restored."
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	"And if you wish to do so, take a sheep's bladder and stretch it over the bone, then insert the entire bladder into the hip bone; and blow air through the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the bone, because the fracture returns."
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	"And then press it inward with cotton and let it rest for some days according to what we have recommended until it is healed."
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	"And when the pubic bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer to its restoration and splinting what we have recommended for the hip bone."
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	"And what is correct is not concealed in these nearby fractures which little effort requires, especially to that one who has some knowledge and understands this my book; because that fracture indicates to you the greatest dispositions towards a right-handed restoration and bandaging of it."
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	"But in the case of a broken penis bone, take a guarguamela (a type of large bowl) of hot water and place the penis inside it; then apply a wrapping of cloth around it, let it rest for three days or about that time, and it will heal."
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter XIX."
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	"On the restoration of fractures of bones when they are out of place."
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	"It is convenient for someone who suffers a fracture out of place, especially if the bone is large like that of the thighbone or forearm, or similar ones which you consider and perform flebotomy on immediately if the conditions for it testify as we have said above."
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	"And if the out-of-place displacement flows freely, then it is necessary for you to hold it back in this way: powderize it over the bone that is broken, unless another cause is present."
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	"And then begin to restore the fracture on that very day, and do not delay if there is no occurrence of an abscess."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If an abscess forms, then leave the treatment of it until the ninth day, during which time the abscess should have softened, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days in total, for you will cause harmful accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone breaks and sticks out above the open wound, then you must carefully reduce it with your hands and push it back in gently using minimal force.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If reduction with your hands and without instruments is not sufficient, then reduce it using this instrument: an iron one, seven or eight digits long according to the size of the bone fragment. It is necessary for the physician to have three or four such instruments on hand at all times for use in various types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And if it is reduced, then apply a small amount of pressure so that it does not bend out again during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	If the bone is of sharp pointed shape with marrow flowing out from its ends, and if it appears thicker at the top than at its base, then it should be split open.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is how you do it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	"It is named in Greek 'labre volentz atelarem', which is a few shovels."
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	"Why does it need to be paused with the end of the hook elevated over the edge of the bone prominence?"
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	"And place him in such a way that he returns to his original position and is secured with some equipment."
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	"And then you should fix the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the broken bone is thin and does not grip well with the instrument, then you must insert the end of that bone into the instrument so that it has power over it."
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	"But if you cannot reduce the bone with what has been mentioned, then cut it with one of the saws that have been discussed, or use any other means available to you."
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	"And then remove the rough edges and small sharp points from the remaining bone."
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	"And when the bone is reduced and the patient experiences intense pain upon reduction, you should know that the bone has not been returned to its natural place. Therefore, do this in order to relieve the patient's great suffering."
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	"When you have completed the setting of the bone, then apply a dressing made from black stypic wine, especially if it is summer, and do not allow any grease or oil to come into contact with it, lest it cause gangrene and corruption afterwards."
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	"And then apply splints at the time of completion of the setting of the bone, and leave the dressing uncovered until you insert it with bandages and use wrappings according to the amount of dressing."
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	"And be very careful that you do not stretch the dressing over the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this and it has caused death or gangrene or some other severe illness in their patients."
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	"And if your bandage is loose, soft, or different from the usual bandage used for fractures."
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	"And if the dressing is large or of poor quality, and you fear that one of those accidents we have mentioned might occur, or if there is pain at the site, then do not wait for those splints, but rather use a wrapping of tough cloth instead of splints and stretch it with those."
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	"And when, after one or two days, the dressing begins to form a crust, then remove from it the cloth that you had placed there with wine, and then apply poultices, as is customary with us for treating dressings, such as treacle and similar things."
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	"And it is fitting for you to remove the bandage and examine the dressing every morning and evening until it has consolidated and healed. And make sure that the member is positioned in such a way that the gangrene can flow easily from it towards its extremities."
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	"If the dressing remains for many days and does not consolidate nor become separated from the crust, then you should know that this is due to some fault in your treatment, and therefore you must examine the dressing carefully."
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	"And of those faults that are separated and removed, remove them and extract them. But if some cannot be removed because they adhere to the limb and cause pain, then persevere until you can remove them."
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	"If you notice that the dressing is fetid or foul-smelling, then this is an indication of corruption or putrefaction, and therefore you should follow one of those remedies which are appropriate for its treatment, as is described in its chapter on the cure."
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	"And in this case, it is better for me to speak and for you to listen: When the bone is crushed, elevate the limb above the bed like the thighbone or the armbone, and similar ones of large limbs. And do not attempt extraction, nor allow anyone else to do so, because many times death has occurred because of this; rather leave it alone until it putsrefies by itself for about twenty or thirty days. Then treat the dressing if you see fit, but if not then leave it."
Capitol .xx.	"Chapter 20."
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	"Of the treatment of swelling that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture."
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	"Swelling often occurs near the site of a fracture during its healing process, especially if it is near joints. This swelling causes the limb to appear deformed and prevents its normal movement."
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	"Then consider if the swelling is recent and apply to it medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, resin, myrrh, and similar things. Take some or all of these and mix them with stiptic wine, egg albumen, or vinegar, then place them on the swelling wrapped in linen and bind them securely."
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	"And leave the dressing in place for several days without removing it. Then remove it and apply another one until the swelling has disappeared. Or use a lead plate descended upon it, because lead has the property of reducing all swellings in the limbs."
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if the swelling has already become hard and rigid and it is necessary to remove it carefully, then cut it along its upper border and excise the excess flesh or scrap it away with forceps until it is removed. Then treat it until it is healed."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter 21."
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	"Of the restoration of fractures when they have been restored, but the limb remains thin and weak, not following its natural course."
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	"When a fracture of the bone has healed, but the limb remains thin and weak, this is not due to any single cause. The causes are many: either too much solution of the bandage and ligature, which was not applied correctly; or excess scarring of the tissues preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or too much rubbing on the part of the patient; or too much movement at an inappropriate time; or lack of blood in the body due to weakness."
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	"The treatment for this is to feed the patient well and strengthen their heart so that blood increases in them. Apply baths, and use rubbing with warmth and joy."
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	"And also apply plaster to the limb, so that the plaster attracts nourishment to it. Or continue rubbing it with warm water until the nourishment returns to its natural course."
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter 22."
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	"Concerning the treatment of broken bones that have healed crookedly, and forbidding their operation from this point forward."
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	"When a limb that has already healed becomes crooked and prominent due to a break or fracture, causing the limb to appear deformed although it is not forbidden from its natural operation, you should not listen to those who claim that the limb was recently broken."
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	"But there are already many foolish doctors and healers who have done this in our land, and this operation is greatly despised and brings great shame upon those who perform it."
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	"But if the limpness and swelling are recent, it is necessary to wrap them with warm water in which these herbs have been cooked: namely, marsh mallows and rosehips, and melilot, and others of like kind. And let a plaster be made with mollifying plaster such as dalliation well made; or let there be taken mucilage of marsh mallow root and let it be kneaded with grease of goose or oil of camomile, and let it be plastered therewith; or let fat figs be taken and cut with pigeon dung, and like those medicines that are called ammers consolidating."
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	"And sometimes it is dissolved with frequent gentle friction with the most humid hands, and movement of the member should be administered at all parts in all hours."
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	"But if the crookedness is already advanced and has become hard and converted into bone, and necessity for cure with iron is required, then it is necessary that it be cut as little above as possible, and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and what is superfluous of swelling of that member with the bone be incised with subtle scissors, and ease in that be administered with diligence and care."
Capitol .xxiii.	"Chapter XXIV."
De sermo en dislocacio.	"Of speech concerning dislocation."
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	"Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of the body whereby movement is hindered, and the figure of the member is altered, causing great pain and injury."
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	"So when dislocation occurs, it is necessary to promptly reduce that which has been displaced and not delay its reduction for if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and hard with what has been done, making the reduction of dislocation difficult."
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	"And therefore it is necessary that it not be moved nor stretched at the time of inflammation for often times it causes spasm and severe pain."
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	"But when this happens, it is necessary that you have recourse to the phlebotomy of the illness and let blood at that time so that inflammation may restrain itself. And then let the member be embrocated with hot water and oil, and let it be reduced gently."
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	"And every joint should be treated with what first comes to mind concerning it."
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	"And now I have arranged the chapters on dislocation following those that were previously mentioned regarding fracture, from the uppermost part of the body down to the lowest."
Capitol .xxiiii.	"Chapter XXV."
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	"Of cure for dislocation of the lower jaw."
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	"So when both mandibles are dislocated but not broken; and dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are removed from their places by slight movement and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, so that they are softened at the joint where saliva collects, preventing him from opening his mouth nor closing it, with his tongue wrapped around his words."
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	"But when dislocation is slight, in most cases it returns to its place by itself without cause."
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	"But if dislocation is complete and entire, then reduction must be administered gently and not delayed in any way."
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"And it is the duty of the attendant to hold the patient's head, and the physician should insert his finger into the depression of the dislocation of the jaw within the patient's mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both his thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, with the other fingers outside holding the cheeks steady. And he commands the patient to close his jaws and draw them back from either side; and the physician engages the lower jaw and pushes it until it returns to its place."
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	"And if reduction is difficult, and especially so if both jaws are dislocated together, then evaporation with hot water and oil should be administered until the reduction of both becomes easy and not delayed in any way, as we have said."
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	"And when they return and are engaged, with the mouth closed and not softened, then let him lay upon those powders of cloth with cerot and make of wax and rose oil. And let it be bound gently with soft bandages."
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	"And let the patient sleep on his back with his head supported between two pillows so that he does not move it to either side; and do not force him to chew anything for any reason. Until pain has subsided and jaws are healed, then let him eat what he wishes."
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	"And this should be done gently, and do not labor over the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, and spitting until the jaw is healed."
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	"And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then often times fever and frequent thirst occur, with great pain in the abdomen and vomiting of pure bile."
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	"And when you see this happen, then know that it is destruction. And many times the person to whom this happens dies in nine days."
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter XXV."
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	"Of reduction of dislocation of the collarbone and of the extremity of the muscle."
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	"The collarbone is not dislocated from its place by the break of bone. And sometimes it is dislocated on the outside, which is evident to the touch."
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	"And its reduction is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms."
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	"And press the place with your palm with strong pressure, for it will return."
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	"And then bind that with plasters and powders and strengthen it."
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	"But the extremity of that which seizes the windpipe and is continuous with it is not dislocated on any day. Therefore, it must be reduced and engaged according to what we have said and according to your ability."
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	"And then bind that with plasters, powders, and bandages. And command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed."
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	"And with this same treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place."
Capitol .xxvi.	"Chapter XXVI."
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	"Of reduction of dislocation of the muscle."
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	"Know that the muscle is dislocated in three ways: one of which is when it is dislocated at the part of the chest on the left side."
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	"The second is when it is dislocated above the muscle itself, which is rarely done. And it is not dislocated at the parts behind by the shoulder blade or at the parts in front by the nerves."
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	"Especially is it dislocated and protruded on the left side beyond the chest, especially in those who have little flesh, it is easily dislocated. But in those who have much flesh, it is protruded with difficulty."
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	"And sometimes it happens to some men that by a blow or fall, the muscle becomes swollen with swelling and is dislocated thereby."
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	"Then it is necessary that you prepare what is needed for the operation on them, and then proceed to operate on them."
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	"And it is known that the dislocation occurs when you are at the fingertips; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because there is a clear difference between them. You will find concavity in the head of the muscle and then you must touch the head of the muscle like this [gesture], and the patient cannot raise their hand to their ear or move it at all."
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	"If it is dislocated, you must press below or above it, and then you will find a clear touch, which cannot be hidden."
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	"And from this dislocation, an easy reduction can be made when it is fresh and the patient is a child."
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	"And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand above their head; and then places his thumbs on both sides of the fingertips of the hand, and lifts the joint with force upwards to its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand, and extends it upwards; and then releases it when it returns gently."
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	"But if it does not return as we have said, and since the beginning when the dislocation occurred, many days have passed, then the patient must be bathed in warm water and administered a plaster that softens and moisturizes like this: if it were coarsely ground aloe, linseed, and mallows in water, and it is applied."
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	"And then the patient is made to sit up on their heels and placed with their hands behind their back, waiting for some sort of bandage between elevation and compression, and then the doctor places his heel on the sphere and lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's hand down so that it does not move from its place, and another minister holds the patient's head so that it does not move from its place, because the muscle will soon return to its proper location."
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	"And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: have present a man who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on the opposite side, and insert his muscle between the fingertips of the patient and lift the fingertips upwards while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand downwards from their belly."
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	"But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that something else be suspended along with him, to weigh him down because the dislocation will soon return."
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And it is reduced in the same way according to another manner: and that is, place on the ground a long pole whose head is round like a pestle, not too thick nor too thin, and then place the patient upon it; then place lion's skin over the top of the pole, and the patient stands along its length, and extends their hand on the other side; and stretches their body on the other side with force because the joint returns to its proper location quickly."
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	"And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: take a pole whose length is two braccia and whose width is four digits, and let its thickness be reduced at the fingertips in this way:"
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	"And then place lion's skin over the round head of the pole so that it does not slip away from the patient."
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	"And then place the fingertips of the patient upon it, and extend their hand or arm along the pole until it reaches its limit, and bind the pole with bandages over the elbow, forearm, and end of the hand."
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	"And then place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its width, and extend the hand to its limit, and suspend the other body on the other side because the joint enters quickly."
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	"And when the entrance of it is completed according to whatever manner you are able to use, then place a wool bandage of equal quantity over the fingertips; and then place a plaster prepared from powdered chalk with saffron and albumen of egg over all the muscle, so that it revolves upwards; and then bind the fingertips tightly with compression; and let the bandage be wrapped around the plaster, and let the patient's hand be attached to their neck, and let them be left thus for seven days without moving their hand."
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	"And the patient's food should be limited so that the member is strengthened because it is easier for it to be healed when it is lighter."
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	"And then let the patient's food be increased gradually over seven or nine days and let them exercise their movement. And if it becomes firm and does not become softened again, then it is healed."
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	"But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that occurs in it or for another cause, then let cautery be administered to it with three tracks, according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery."
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	"And if even this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed but the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and compression are reduced over it several times and still it does not become firm and strong and cannot raise that arm upwards, then know that the nerves of it which are at the head of the muscle are either cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be placed in its proper location."
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	"Regarding the dislocation of that which is done at the elbow and wrist or the backhand, the reduction is done with impulse and extension using the hands until it returns to its place."
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And let the other compression be applied to it, and let that member be cured until it is healed."
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	"And if heaviness occurs in the member and slowness in its movement after healing, then let the patient use baths many times until that heaviness is alleviated and until it returns to its former nature."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter 27."
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	"On the treatment of dislocation of the hip."
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	"Know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and that which is dislocated in all positions, especially more so in front-to-back positions, and the dislocation of it is not hidden to you when it is centered before or behind according to whatever figure may be dislocated. And when you reduce the dislocated hip into its socket, that is clearly declared to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the leg nor touch with that its muscle."
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	"And when you reduce it [the dislocation], do so before the cautery aposteme comes, for if it comes to the cautery aposteme, reduction is difficult and much harm cannot be avoided; especially in back-to-back positions, for such is worse than all other types of dislocation and causes greater pain, often leading to death."
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	"And the restoration of it [the hip], when it is that which can be reduced, is as follows: let his hand be extended with two hands and his arm expanded; let the physician's hands be upon the joint and outside it; and let him push the joint into place with the ulnar edges of his hands together, or with the side of his palm turned inwards until it returns to its proper place."
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	"But if the dislocation is in front-to-back positions, then let it return thus by bending the hand upon his hand until it strikes the joint with the side of his palm."
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	"And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer violent extension and much force."
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	"And let two assistants extend his arm, and let them hold him firmly in that position so that he is not moved during the extension."
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	"And moreover, let the arm be turned around on all sides, for it is wrapped up in a doubled cloth or bandage over his hand."
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	"And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil so that these causes may help in the lubricity of the joint with facility. And then forcefully push the joint back into place until it returns."
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	"And furthermore, the reduction of it [the dislocation] must be supported upon that compress in which there is astringency and excitation with alum water, and let it be extended with descending suspension, and his arm suspended from his neck; and let him lie quietly for some days."
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	"And furthermore, let it be relaxed. And then if the joint is formed in its proper place, then remove the bandage from him and leave him."
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	"And if the joint seems weak, then repeat the compress and bandage, and leave him for some days until it is strengthened. And then remove that."
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	"But if it happens that there is swelling about the reduction of the joint and its position is in movement, then administer moistening baths and gentle friction, compresses until it is alleviated; or let him lie upon the joint elevated on pillows; so that it may be a greasy motion. And then let it be bandaged, and leave it there day and night."
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	"And then remove that [the bandage], and put him in a warm bath. And when he is warmed up, then rub the joint with gentle friction, and then let him lie upon it elevated for three times consecutively."
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	"during which time he is to remain until it is healed."
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	"And if you wish, place him upon that hollow of cow's hide which has been moistened and scraped with the edge and stretched over it. And do this several times, for that is moist and reduces its swelling."
Capitol .xxviii.	**Chapter XXVIII.**
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	**Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder-blade, which is the joint that is between the arm and the hand.**
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The hand has sometimes been dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy, unlike other joints, but it is necessary to act quickly in reducing it when it happens, before the place becomes inflamed or an inflammation occurs.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation consists in placing the joint of the patient's hand on a table and having the attendant extend the patient's hand. The doctor then places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint and pushes it until it returns to its normal position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is necessary to consider whether the palm is already facing the stomach of the hand. In this case, during extension and reduction, the patient should place the back of their hand on a table instead; if the dislocation occurred beforehand on the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be placed internally on the table so that the doctor's hand can better cover the prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, then that's good. But if not, then continue pressing the hand until swelling subsides and leave him be; don't insist too much because after some days he won't suffer anymore nor will you be able to do anything about reducing the dislocation.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But if the joint remains dislocated despite your efforts, then do not tell the patient any cause for this, but simply say that his hand is relaxed and he cannot feel anything. You should know however that the nerves are pinched or cut, so don't try to reduce it further unless you cauterize around its mouth and explain why this needs to be done.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore if the reduction is successful, then keep the patient's hand pressed with the splint we've recommended for about 4 days. Then remove it and let the hand rest; afterwards, exercise the hand gradually to regain its mobility.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if there's still some stiffness in the movement of the hand and it occurs occasionally, then apply cold water compresses with gentle friction a few times until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of these (the joints).
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes, these joints are completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of these fingers is dislocated on the back or palm side, then press the finger and push the dislocation back into place using your thumbs until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And afterward, hold the top of the finger, suspend that end on the side where it was dislocated, and leave it alone for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it again and extend it until it is completely aligned in its proper place by that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	"And when night comes, tie that according to the above narration, and do not cease untying it during the day and exercising with motion, and tie it at night; do this for several days until it is tight."
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	"And do likewise if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and tie it at that joint and make this your first operation until it is healed."
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	"And similarly do this when other joints are dislocated."
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	"On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back."
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	"When some of the vertebrae of the back or neck suffer complete dislocation, and some of those vertebrae are removed from their places, then there is no cure for that, because death soon overtakes the patient."
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	"And this is indicated by the fact that the evacuation of the patient's bowels occurs unwillingly and without control; many times some members are softened on one side or the other, or both arms or legs, or one of those, or a vertebra is removed from its place, because many times it is removed and many times the movement of those is made in four directions."
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	"Therefore that is already dislocated towards the back parts and is called gibbosity (kyphosis)."
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	"But the treatment of it is that immediately you should consider whether the gibbosity occurred in infancy, because then there is neither cure nor hope of recovery for that."
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	"But as to those cases which occur from falling or from percussion or similar ones, the Ancients have already described the methods of treatment at length in many ways, and that is what I will abbreviate here because of my closeness to the intention of this work, with which I have briefly dealt using various instruments, by means of which I will show those things and explain them."
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	"I say that in gibbosity which occurs on the front part of the chest there is neither help nor recovery for it; and similarly in those that are made towards both sides."
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	"And among those, only those that occur properly on the back can be cured with what I have recounted here."
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	"And it is that the patient should lie on their face with their chest close to a wall, and they should be extended downwards from there using soft instruments so that the chest does not get hurt."
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	"And prop a straight staff should be placed upright on the ground at the end of the chest near the patient's head, and another staff should be placed under their feet at the other end of the bed."
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	"And the assistant should hold one staff firmly so that it does not move from its place; and another assistant should hold the other one according to this form."
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And wrap a cloth over the patient's head and tie it firmly; and extend one end of the bandage to the staff which is above the patient's head, and fasten it there; and similarly extend the other bandage over the patient's hips downwards on both sides, and fasten it below their buttocks; and adjust all the bandages and fasten them to the other staff which is above their feet."
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	"And then each assistant should extend the bandage to its respective staff, but do not move the two staffs and their bandages from their places, although they are not fastened as we have said."
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	"And the doctor should place his palms on the patient's shoulder blades with strength and press down firmly so that they return to their natural position, or he may use a table for this purpose and adjust himself onto the table with his feet."
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	"But if it does not return with this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three braccia and hollow out its edge on the side that we have said is near the patient so that one end of the table can fit into it."
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	"And then place the middle of the table on the patient's shoulder blades, and the doctor should place his feet on the other end, and press down strongly until the shoulder blades are brought together and return to their proper position."
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	"And if you wish, turn the one that is twisted with your hand; and it is that you should lie on the ground in front of the patient's head near the end of the chest between two staffs whose length is a braccio each, and similarly at the foot of the bed there are two other staffs whose length between them is a palm, and already made in each staff is a hole through which the cord passes, and each one should be firmly fixed to the ground so that they do not move."
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	"And there should also be one round staff on which is the cord, and it should be inserted into both holes of the two staffs."
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	"And at one end there is a hole in which the staff is fitted, whose length is a palm and which has been twisted; and similarly the other two staffs have holes like this."
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And then tighten the bandages that you have stretched over the patient's chest with the cord which is above their head, and those that you have stretched over their thighs with the cord that is below their feet."
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	"And then place an assistant at each cord to twist it with his hand, and the doctor should press down on the shoulder blades as we have said."
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	"And this is the form of the twisting:"
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	"Now that the spine has returned and the area is covered, it is necessary to place an absorbent cloth moistened with egg albumen on the affected part, and then apply gauze; next, place a board of such width or approximately equal to three fingers' breadth, and length equivalent to the quantity that takes up the area of the swelling, on top of the spine, at its division."
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	"And then let it be wrapped with linen bandages as we have said, and use soft food until it is healed."
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	"And if there is any remaining inflammation in the area at the end of the healing process, then medicines that soften and cleanse should be applied using the method of the table for an extended period, which we have recommended; and a lead plate has already been applied to that location."
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	"And sometimes inflammation occurs at the end of the spine in the back due to this dislocation, and this bone is already weakened by it; therefore, no pressure should be applied to it with this medication, for strong pressure could cause death."
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXI
De curacio de anca dislocada.	"On the treatment of a dislocated hip."
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	"You should know that the joint of the thigh and the joint of the muscle do not undergo dislocation except in cases of displacement, whereas other joints with slight movement and concavity do occur."
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	"The joint of the thigh is displaced in four ways: it can be displaced inward or outward, forward or backward."
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	"And it is most commonly displaced inwardly, and less so anteriorly or posteriorly."
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	"And the sign of an inward displacement of the thigh is that when you bring together the healthy leg with the affected one, it appears elongated and its buttock seems more prominent than usual; the patient cannot flex their hip joint due to pain, which indicates a collection of fluid and blood in the space where it has entered."
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	"The sign of an outward displacement is that its symptoms are opposite to those of this condition."
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	"And the sign of an anterior displacement is that when you extend your leg, it appears complete, but still cannot bend without pain in the thigh region. If you try to walk forward, you cannot do so without limping on the affected side; urine retention and blood stasis are also present, with the patient walking on tiptoe."
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	"And the sign of a posterior displacement is that the buttock cannot be extended, nor can it flex the hip joint without pain in the thigh region. The affected leg appears shorter than the other, with relaxation of the thigh muscles and swelling in the area."
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	"However, the treatment of these displacements is as follows: if the displacement is old and chronic, you should wait for a suitable opportunity, such as when the patient has fallen asleep or is distracted, to apply gentle traction and reduce it according to its position. However, this alone will not suffice; additional procedures may be necessary."
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	"However, if the displacement is recent and belongs to one of the four types mentioned earlier, you should attempt to reduce it by first flexing the hip joint and then extending it both anteriorly and posteriorly. Then move the limb to the right and left repeatedly until it returns to its proper position; no further treatment is necessary."
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	"However, if it does not return to its proper position in this manner, you should then apply traction force by extending the affected leg from the hip joint or using slings or a bandage tied around the thigh above the knee. Another assistant should extend their hand over the patient's hip in such a way that they place their fingers on either side of the trochanteric region; and another assistant should press firmly with a bandage placed on the affected area while holding onto its extremity."
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	"And this traction should be continued until the hip joint extends to the level of the great trochanter or the posterior surface of the femur reaches the acetabulum."
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	"And this traction should be performed in a single attempt while the patient is lying on their back on the ground, with their buttocks hanging over the edge of the bed."
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	"This method of traction is applicable to all four types of hip displacement."
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	"Therefore, if the displacement returns using the method described above, that is good. However, if it does not return, then specific treatment for each type of hip dislocation is necessary."
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	"In reducing this type of hip dislocation, the patient should be placed in a supine position on their unaffected side. Then apply gentle pressure with bandages over the affected area between the head of the femur and the trochanteric region; finally, extend the leg from the hip joint to the level of the great trochanter."
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	"And another assistant should firmly grasp the leg and press the greater trochanter inwards while forcefully extending it externally until it returns to its proper position."
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	"This type of hip dislocation is easier to treat than the others, as it is more readily reduced using this method."
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	"However, if the limb does not readily reduce using this method, then it is necessary to flex both hips and knees with strong traction applied simultaneously to both thighs and calves."
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	"And the length of traction on each limb should be approximately four fingerbreadths, with the affected leg being extended two fingerbreadths more than the unaffected one."
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	"And then suspend the patient by their hips over the head of the bed so that they are in a supine position with both knees extended. The length from the ground to the sole of the foot should be approximately two cubits."
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And then command a strong youth to push the head of the femur upwards while another youth supports the patient. The youth pushing the femur should do so with great force and speed, causing the hip joint to return to its proper position."
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	"However, in reducing this type of hip dislocation (dislocation of the femur from the acetabulum), the patient should lie prone as recommended earlier. Then apply firm pressure with a bandage over the affected thigh and foot."
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	"And then two poles should be placed on either side of the patient's leg, one at the foot and one at the hip. A third pole should be placed in the middle and covered with wet cloths to prevent discomfort when the leg is extended externally."
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	"And then each assistant should extend their side of the leg, while the physician guides the reduction according to the art."
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	"Therefore, if the limb reduces spontaneously, that is good. However, if it does not, apply pressure diligently as described in detail earlier for guidance on reduction."
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	"However, the patient should then lie quietly on their unaffected side."
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	"However, if the dislocation is anterior (at the front of the acetabulum), then the limb should be extended gently and this is done by placing the patient on their back as described earlier. The physician should place the palm of their right hand over the affected thigh and use their left hand to shorten it by pressing on the femur while extending it externally at the knee joint."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	"If the dislocation is posterior (at the back of the acetabulum), then it is not necessary to extend the limb externally. Instead, elevate it above the ground and place it on a hard surface such as a table or bench, with the patient lying face down and the limbs extended according to what has been described previously."
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	"And pressure should be applied using a board over the location where the joint is dislocated."
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	"So once the reduction is complete, as indicated by the fact that you can extend both thighs simultaneously without causing pain or discomfort to the patient, then you should apply two splints and immobilize the limb with bandages for three or four days."
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	"And then remove the bandages and splints after three or four days and compare the lengths of both legs to ensure that they are equal."
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	"Then if you feel no discomfort when moving your leg, you will know that the dislocation has healed and you may then allow the patient to walk."
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	"But if you feel any weakness or instability when moving your leg, then return and apply splints again for three days to ensure stability."
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	"And after removing the splint, allow the patient to gradually increase their walking distance over several days until they are comfortable and fully recovered."
Capitol .xxxii.	Capital XXXII
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Shoulder
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and backward; however, it does not dislocate forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of shoulder dislocation is when the patient applies their leg to the affected area, then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the reduction of all three ways is to make the patient lie on their right side so that they can extend their leg if possible; attach your left hand to the front of the shoulder and place your foot between the patient's feet; then firmly grasp the shoulder with both palms, press it back into its original position using your strength, while another assistant extends the patient's leg until the shoulder returns to its normal location.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of successful reduction of the shoulder is that the leg adheres to the affected area without labor or difficulty.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then splint that in place and secure the leg to the affected area. Then bind it tightly with a bandage for three or four days, then remove the bandage.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not allow the patient to move around for several days until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if reduction of the shoulder by you is unsuccessful, then proceed with strong extension using traction as described in the previous section on the treatment of hip dislocation.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of ankle dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle sometimes gets dislocated by minor injuries and sometimes by major ones. It can be dislocated either medially or laterally.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of ankle dislocation is that the area around the affected joint becomes swollen and inflamed.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	"The cure for its removal is easy recovery. It should be stretched out gently with the hands and wrapped up until it returns."
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	"However, in the treatment of its dislocation according to the full procedure, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their right side, and hold them firmly with a strong and able servant standing behind them in the middle of their back."
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	"Then place your right hand above the shoulder and your left hand below it near the elbow."
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	"Then pull the arm towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, stretch it out with your left hand; and press gently on the bone of the elbow upwards without forcing."
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	"And do this twice as we have said."
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	"Then press the bone of the elbow upwards again on the third occasion; you are at the elbow joint."
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	"If this manner is repeated once or twice more, and if the foot swells, that is good. Otherwise, repeat the operation, for that returns."
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	"If reduction is prohibited with what we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground. Place a stone under them that prevents them from slipping out of your grasp."
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	"And the minister holds the patient's parts. Another minister extends the leg with their hands or with a cloth placed on the knee of the leg. And each minister extends against the extension of his part, and the stone remains between the patient's thighs retaining them so that the body does not lean towards its sides during the extension."
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	"And the doctor reduces the dislocation with his hands. Another minister holds the healthy part at its sides, for the reduction returns easily."
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	"And when the dislocation returns and it is declared that the reduction is good, then apply an plaster and bind the leg strongly with bandages. And tie the foot with bandages at the bed."
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	"And be careful or guard yourself from the nerves which are behind the heel bone, for the bandage should not be too tight and not press strongly upon them."
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	"And leave him thus for two days or three. And if the bandage becomes softened, remove it."
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	"And on the third day or fourth day untie him, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days."
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	"But if it is necessary for him to go before that period, there is danger that the dislocation will be dissolved and corrupted during his movement, and thus he may not receive proper care."
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	"And if an abscess occurs as a result of the burn, then you should administer in the incision of it what was mentioned earlier in our narrative about another place for cure and embrocation until it is healed."
Capitol .xxxiiii.	"Chapter XXXIV."
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	"About the treatment of dislocation of the said toes."
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	"It is necessary that he who has dislocated his toe be reduced with a small extension without force. And what is not difficult can easily be accomplished."
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	"But if the dislocation is in certain bones of the foot, then place the patient's foot on a level with the ground or on a table while he is standing as if walking."
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	"And you stand on your feet and place the patient's foot on what protrudes from the joints. And press it down with your foot with force until it returns to its proper position, and make sure that it is reduced and does not appear in the protruding area."
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	"And then place the sole of the foot on a table that covers the whole foot. And press it down with a firm bandage for three days. Then untie him and allow him to rest from walking for more days until he is healed."
Capitol .xxxv.	"Chapter XXXV."
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	"Of joint dislocations that occur with sprain or fracture or otherwise."
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	"When such an accident occurs and you attempt to treat it and restore it, many times death ensues."
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	"But it is not necessary for one to presume about its treatment, but rather that who is wise in the art, with long experience, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not rash or presumptuous; and who uses remedies at the beginning that only cauterize sores, leaving the patient to divine judgment, not expecting health from destruction, but relief from illness, and where there appears some hope."
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	"And then make haste to reduce it at the beginning of the cause before an ulcerous sore forms."
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	"And then if the limb returns as desired, administer regimen which prevents ulceration and cures the sprain with what is suitable for it of drying remedies."
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	"And if dislocation occurs with a fracture and the ends of the bone are separated, then you perform the setting of them, doing in this what we have said previously in the simple cases concerning that which is prior in such places."
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	"And guard and avoid according to your ability those things within the paths of fear that have been preceded by my teaching; for this is better for you to owe to your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and more beneficial for your true body in your time."
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	"Thus end the words of Albucasis perfectly, from which God may be blessed."
Amen.	"Amen."
